 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF BUSINESS AND HUMAN RESOURCES COURSE CODE:BHM 736 COURSE TITLE:INTRODUCTORY ACCOUNTING BHM 736 INTRODUCTORY ACCOUNTING COURSE GUIDE COURSE WRITER: Rauta Bitrus Jat Department of Accounting, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Jos, Jos – Nigeria.
Course Editor: Dr. Seddi S. Maim ako Departm ent of Management Sciences, University of Jos Program me Leader: Dr. Dim is I. Mai-Lafia School of Business & Hum an Resources Management National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator: Mrs. Caroline Aturu – Aghedo School of Business & Hum an Resources Management National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE 2 INTRODUCTION ---------------------------------------- 03 WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE --- 03 COURSE AIMS ----------------------------------------- 04 COURSE OBJECTIVES ----------------------------------- 04 WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE ---------------- 05 COURSE MATERIALS ----------------------------------- 05 STUDY UNITS ----------------------------------------- 06 BOOKS ------------------------------------------------------ 07 ASSIGNMENT FILE ----------------------------------- 07 COURSE ASSESSMENT ----------------------------- 07 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT ---------------- 08 FINAL WRITTEN EXAMINATION ---------------- 08 CONCLUSION ----------------------------------------- 08 1.0 INTRODUCTION Introductor y Accounting ( BHM 736 ) is a core course in Post Graduate Diploma in Financial Management.
It is a two (2) Credit Unit Course run in the school of Business and Human Resources management of the Institution.
These materials have been specifically prepared for you and made available to all students of the PGD Financial Management Programme.
You will no doubt find these materials very useful in your search for knowledge both in theory and practice as a Professional Financial Manager, Consultant and Adviser.
3 2.0 WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE This course is made up of sixteen ( 16 ) study units, covering core topics in Accounting such as the Historical Development of Accounting, Definition of Accounting, Users of Accounting Information, Accounting Principles and Conventions, The Accounting Equation, some common Commercial Terms, Double Entry Book Keeping, Books of Prime Entry, the Cash Book, Classification of Accounts, Ledger Accounting, the Trial Balance, Correction of Errors, Suspense Account, Banking systems and Bank Reconciliation Statements.
The Course Guide is meant to provide you with the necessar y Information about the Course, the nature of the materials you will be using and how to make the best use of the materials towards ensuring a very good success in your programme as well as acquainting yourself with the basic principles of Accounting.
Also included in this Course Guide are Information on how to make use of your time and also Information on how to tackle the Tutor- Marked Assignment ( TMA ) Questions.
There will be tutorial sessions during which your Instructional Facilitator will take you through your difficult areas.
Further, you will have meaningful Interactions with your fellow students and this will accelerate your rate of assimilation of the Course.
3.0 COURSE AIMS The main aim of Introductory Accounting is to take you through the rudiments of Accounting and equip you with the basic techniques of Book Keeping.
Other aims of the Course are: • Familiarizing you with the Historical Background of Accounting; • Explaining the major users of Accounting Information; • Discussing the Accounting Principles and Conventions; • Explaining the Double Entry Principle and how entries are made in the Books of Accounts; • Describing how Transactions are recorded in the Cash Book; • Discussing Ledger Accounting and explaining how accounts are classified; • Illustrating how transactions are recorded in the respective ledger Accounts; • Explaining the Concept of the Trial Balance and how it is prepared; • Correcting Accounting Errors and creation of the suspense Account; • Discussing Banking matters and • Preparing Bank Reconciliation Statements; 4.0 COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims of the Course, Learning Objectives are very necessary.
Hence, the overall objectives of the Course have been clearly defined.
In addition, each study unit has specific objectives that have been included at the beginning of each of the units.
You are strongly advised to make reference to them as you study each unit both at the beginning and also at the end to ensure that you check your level of assimilation and to ensure that you attend to all your Self- Assessment Questions.. Below are the broad objectives of the Course.
Meeting these objectives means achieving the aims of the Course in its entirety.
On successful completion of this Course therefore, you should be able to: • Trace the History of Accounting; • Define Accounting; • Explain the Uses and Users of Accounting Information; 4 • State Accounting Principles and Conventions; • Demonstrate the Double Entr y Principle; • Record Transactions in Books of Prime Entry; • Record Transactions in the Ledger; • Prepare a Trial Balance; • Trace errors in Accounting Records and correct them; • Prepare a suspense Account; • Prepare Bank Reconciliation Statements; 5.0 WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this Course, you are expected to read the Study Units and the recommended text books and endeavour to explore more current materials on the Internet.
In this Course, each Unit has Self Assessment Exercises to test your understanding from time to time.
At certain points during your Course, you will be required to submit Assignments for assessment.
There will also be a final examination at the end of the Course.
Find below all the components of the Course, what you are expected to do and how you should allocate time to each Unit in order to complete your Course successfully and also on time too.
6.0 COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the Course are: i.
Course Guide ii.
Study Units iii.
Text Books iv.
Assignment Guide.
Everything is contained in each Unit, except the Text Books which you may have to buy.
You are advised to source current materials on the Internet and avail yourself with other relevant Publications on accounting to supplement these materials.
You may contact your facilitator whenever you run into problems about the recommended Text Books.
7.0 STUDY UNITS There are sixteen (16) Units in this Course, which you should study diligently.
The Units are as follows: Module One: UNIT 1: Historical Development of Accounting UNIT 2: Definition of Accounting 5 UNIT 3: Users of Accounting Information UNIT 4: Accounting Principles and Conventions UNIT 5: The Accounting Equation UNIT 6: Some common Commercial Terms Module Two: UNIT 1: Double Entry Book Keeping UNIT 2: Books of Prime Entry UNIT 3: Cash Book UNIT 4: Classification of Accounts UNIT 5: Ledger Accounting Module Three: UNIT 1: The Trial Balance UNIT 2: Correction of Errors UNIT 3: Suspense Account UNIT 4: Banking Systems UNIT 5: Bank Reconciliation Statements.
The first Unit gives the Historical Background of Accounting.
The Second Unit gives a formal definition of Accounting as given by various Authorities in the Accounting profession.
Unit three discusses the Users and Uses of Accounting Information.
The next Unit discusses the General Accounting Principles and Conventions.
Unit five treats the Fundamental Accounting Equation.
The next Unit explains some Important and Common Commercial Terms that you need to know.
Unit seven describes the Double Entry Principle and the next Unit looks at the Books of Original or Prime Entry.
Unit nine explains the Use of the Cash Book in Accounting and the next Unit deals with the Classification of Accounts.
Unit eleven discusses Ledger Accounting and the next Unit describes the Trial Balance.
Unit thirteen treats the Correction of Errors and the next Unit explains the Use of Suspense Accounts in Correcting Errors in Accounting Records.
Unit fif teen discusses Banking Systems and the final Unit, sixteen treats Bank Reconciliation Statements.
Each study Unit will take a minimum of two hours, and it includes the Introduction, Objectives, Main Content, Self- Assessment Exercises, Conclusion, Summary and Tutor- Marked Assignment Questions as well as References or Further Readings.
Some of the Self- Assessment Exercises will necessitate contacting your facilitator or your visiting the Internet.
There are also textbooks under the references and other materials for further study.
They are all meant to give you additional Information if only you can lay your hands on them.
You are strongly advised to practice the Self- Assessment Exercises and the Tutor- Marked Assignment Questions for greater understanding of the Course.
When attempting the Self- Assessment Exercises, you should not consult the answers until you have answered all the Questions.
You may sometimes observe that the answers provided give you more insight than may have been originally conveyed.
8.0 BOOKS There is no compulsory Text Book for this Course.
However, as you go through the Course, you will observe that some Text Books are recommended often.
This emphasizes the importance of such reference materials to those Units.
Please endeavour to consult these books.
Please note that each Unit has its own assigned Text Books.
You should ensure that you buy these Text Books including Text Books recommended for further readings.
9.0 ASSIGNMENT FILE 6 There are many assignments that have been given in this Course.
You are expected to do all of them by following the schedule prescribed for them in terms of when to attempt them and submit same for grading by your Facilitator.
Breakdown of Activities Unit Title of Work Weekly/Daily Assessment Activity Module One: 1 Historical Development of Accounting 2 Days 2 Definition of Accounting 1 Days 3 Users of Accounting 3 Days Information 4 Accounting Principles and 1 Day Conventions 5 The Accounting Equation 2 Day 6 Some common Commercial 1 Days Terms Module Two: 1 Double Entry Book Keeping 4 Days 2 Books of Prime Entr y 2 Week 3 Cash Book 1 Week 4 Classification of Accounts 3 Days 5 Ledger Accounting 1 Week Module Three:1 The Trial Balance 3 Days 2 Correction of Errors 4 Days 3 Suspense Account 4 Days 4 Banking Systems 2 Days 5 Bank Reconciliation Statements 1 Week 10.0 COURSE ASSESSMENT Your assessment for this Course is made up of two components.
They are: • Tutor- Marked Assignments • Final Examination.
The Self- Assessment Exercises are not part of your formal assessments, but it is very important that you complete all of them.
If you do the Self- Assessment Exercises, they will facilitate your quick understanding of the subject matter or unit and your Tutor- Marked Assignments made much easier to answer.
11.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMA) Each Unit in this Course has two TMAS attached to it.
In doing the Tutor- Marked Assignments, you are to apply your transferred knowledge and what you have learnt in the contents of the study units.
7 These assignments which are many in number are expected to be turned in to your Facilitator for grading.
These assignments constitute 30% of the total score for the Course.
12.0 FINAL WRITTEN EXAMINATION At the end of the Course, you will write the Final Examination.
This Final Examination will attract the remaining 70% and this makes the total final score to be 100%.
13.0 CONCLUSION Introductor y Accounting is an interesting Course as it addresses the fundamentals of Accounting which is the bedrock of the Accounting Discipline.
On successful completion of this Course, you would have acquainted yourself with the basic principles of Accounting and you will be able to prepare simple Financial Statements.
Your level of commitment to Introductory Accounting has a direct relationship with your performance in subsequent Course you will take in Accounting as this is the “Foundation of Accounting and Finance” Globally.
8 BHM 736 INTRODUCTORY ACCOUNTING Course Writer: Rauta Bitrus Jat Department of Accounting, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Jos, Jos – Nigeria Course Editor: Dr. Seddi S. Maim ako Departm ent of Management Sciences, University of Jos Program me Leader: Dr. Dim is I. Mai-Lafia School of Business & Hum an Resources Management National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos Course Coordinator: Mrs. Caroline Aturu – Aghedo School of Business & Hum an Resources Management National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
9 COURSE AIMS The aim of this course is to take you through the rudiments of Accounting and equip you with the basic techniques of Book Keeping.
COURSE OBJECTIVES At the end of this course, you should be able to: • Trace the History of Accounting • Define Accounting • Explain the uses of Accounting • State Accounting Principles and Conventions • Demonstrate the Double Entr y • Book Keeping • Record transactions in books of Prime Entry • Record transactions in the Ledger • Prepare Bank Reconciliation Statements • Record Transactions in the Ledger • Prepare a Trial Balance CONTENTS MODULE ONE Unit 1: Historical Development of Accounting UUUnnniiittt 122::: DHD eiesffitinonirittiiicooannl oDoff e AAvcecclcooopuumnntteiinnngtg o f Accounting UUnniitt 33:: UUsseerrss ooff AAccccoouunnttiinngg IInnffoorrmmaattiioonn UUnniitt 44:: AAccccoouunnttiinngg PPrriinncciipplleess aanndd CCoonnvveennttiioonnss UUnniitt 55:: TThhee AAccccoouunnttiinngg EEqquuaattiioonn UUnniitt 66:: SSoommee CCoommmmoonn CCoommmmeerrcciiaall TTeerrmmss MODULE ONE UUnniitt 11:: DDoouubbllee EEnnttrryy BBooookk--KKeeeeppiinngg UUnniitt 22:: BBooookkss ooff PPrriimmee EEnnttrryy UUnniitt 33:: CCaasshh BBooookk UUnniitt 44:: CCllaassssiiffiiccaattiioonn ooff AAccccoouunnttss UUnniitt 55:: LLeeddggeerr AAccccoouunnttiinngg MODULE ONE UUnn Tiitth 11e:: TTrhiae lT Braialal nBcael ance UUnn Ciitt o22r::r eCcotirornec otifo Enr orof rEsr rors UUnn Siittu 33s::p eSnussep eAncsceo Aunctc ount UUnniitt 44:: BBaannkkiinngg MMaatttteerrss UUnniitt 55:: BBaannkk RReeccoonncciilliiaattiioonn SSttaatteemmeennttss 10 MODULE ONE UUnniitt 11:: HHiissttoorriiccaall DDeevveellooppmmeenntt ooff AAccccoouunnttiinngg UUnniitt 22:: DD eeffiinniittiioonn ooff AAccccoouunnttiinngg UUnniitt 33:: UUsseerrss ooff AAccccoouunnttiinngg IInnffoorrmmaattiioonn UUnniitt 44:: AAccccoouunnttiinngg PPrriinncciipplleess aanndd CCoonnvveennttiioonnss UUnniitt 55:: TThhee AAccccoouunnttiinngg EEqquuaattiioonn UUnniitt 66:: SSoommee CCoommmmoonn CCoommmmeerrcciiaall TTeerrmmss UNIT 1 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ACCOUNTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Evolution of Accounting 3.2 Old Methods and Machines used in Accounting 3.3 Use of Computers in Accounting 3.3.1 Spreadsheets 3.3.2 General Ledger 3.3.3 Accounts Receivable 3.3.4 Accounts Payable 3.3.5 Inventory Control 3.3.6 Payroll Controls 3.3.7 Point of Sale 3.3.8 Purchasing and Receiving 3.3.9 Time and Billing Module 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In any human system, history plays a key role as it precisely documents where such a system is coming from, its present state and where it is going.
So it is with the Accounting Discipline.
This Study Unit traces the origin of Accounting with a view to building a theoretical framework in which the entire discussion in this Course rests.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should: o Trace the origin of Accounting o Explain the old methods and machines used in Accounting 11 3.0 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ACCOUNTING 3.1 Evolution of Accounting Accounting is one of the oldest professions that is constantly evolving.
Its origin could be traced back to the Babylonian Empire in 4500 BC when tax collectors accounted to the Emperor all taxes and levies collected from the citizens.
By 2300BC, the use of clay tablets began to serve as records of receipts and disbursements.
An improved method of record keeping was developed in Egypt by 400BC with the discovery of papyrus (paper) and calamus (pen).
A major step forward in numeration occurred in 850AD with the development of the decimal system by the Arabs.
The earliest known use of a complete double- entry book-keeping system was in Genoa in 1340 AD.
Modern Accounting system has its beginning in Italy in the early part of the 15th centur y.
As early as 1431 the Medici family used a complex set of books consisting of a cash book, a stock book, a wage book and a book of income and outgo.
To further improve the Accounting system, Venetian Monk, Lucas Pacioli published the 1st Accounting work in 1494.
Although it disseminated rather than created knowledge about double-entry bookkeeping, Pacioli’s work summarised the principles that have remained essentially unchanged.
The Industrial Revolution and the resulting complexities of business and finance gave impetus to accounting in the British Isles as well as other parts of Europe.
From the 18th to the 19th centuries, different professional bodies in accounting began to emerge in Italy, England and down to the U.S.A. Accounting has developed into two big categories: Financial Accounting and Management Accounting; the former is meant for both internal and external consumptions, whilst the latter is for internal consumption only.
This is necessary so as to take care of the diverse interest groups and to cover all fields of activities performed in profits and non-profit oorrigeanntiezda t ions.
Now, the use of computers, which emanated from the use of accounting machines further, broadened the scope of book-keeping, and the term data processing now fernecqoumenptalyss e s bookkeeping.
The spread of the system was accelerated with the publication in 1494, of the first known text on Double- Entry system of Book- Keeping by a Luca Pacioli who was an erudite scholar in his time.
The title of the book is in Italian language but translated into English as “Everything about Arithmetic, Geometry and Proportion”.
Only one Chapter of the book dealt with Double- Entry bookkeeping.
This chapter was so popular among students that ten years later, in 1504, Luca published it as a separate book, whose title, translated into English means “The Perfect School of Merchants (ICAN STUDY PACK 2006: 06).
Irrespective of the manner in which business organizers have evolved over the ages, one factor has remained constant- the need for Book- Keeping (that is, recording of business transactions in an orderly manner).
In order to, among others, measure the value of resources employed and the profitability (or otherwise) of the business venture.
Various forms of recording existed ranging from situations in which virtually no records were kept to Single- Entry systems and Double- Entry systems.
In Nigeria, record keeping has antecedents in the ancient Kingdoms and Empire and prominent then was the periodic contributions, which were recorded on the wall.
But the granting of royal character to Royal Niger Company was the turning point in record keeping.
The Government Accounting Principles in Nigeria was almost the same as the one in Britain.
3.2 Old Methods and Machines Used in Accounting The most common method of keeping the financial records of a company was manual.
A bookkeeper kept the journals, the accounts receivable, the accounts payable and the ledgers in his best possible penmanship.
In later years, an accounting machine, which was capable of 12 performing normal bookkeeping functions, such as tabulating in vertical columns, performing arithmetic functions, and typing horizontal rows, was introduced.
The billing machine, which was designed to typewrite names, addresses, and descriptions, to multiply and extend, to compute discounts, and to add net totals, posting the requisite data to the proper accounts, and prepare a customer’s bill automatically once the operator has entered the necessary information, was used.
Early accounting machines were marvels of mechanical complexity, often combining a typewriter and various kinds of calculator elements.
The refinements in speed and capacity were made possible by advances in electronics and operating complexities of these machines.
Many of the newer “generations” of accounting machines are operated by a computer, to which they are permanently connected.
3.3 Use of Computers in Accounting The minute- by- minute changes in finances and the need for accurate record keeping in modern accounting practice, calls for computerization of the entire accounting process.
Computerizing a business’s general ledger, payroll, and other accounting tasks increase office efficiency.
With a computer, you can request and receive an in house balance sheet, an income statement, or other accounting reports at a moment’s notice.
While keeping your cheque book on a computer may not be practical, computers are great for handling complex home financial records.
You can get statements on net worth and year’s tax-deductible expenses within minutes.
3.3.1 Spreadsheet Electronic spreadsheets allow you to do anything that you would normally do with a calculator, pencil and columnar scratch pad.
Spreadsheets were primarily designed for managers who in the process of planning must do “what if” calculations.
Due to their flexibility, electronic spreadsheets have found their way into small businesses and, to a lesser extent to homes.
A typical integrated double entry accounting system will contain some or all of the following components: accounts receivable, accounts payable, general ledger, inventory, order entry, payroll, time, and billing.
It takes its name from the accountant’s spreadsheet—a sheet of paper with rules for rows and columns—on which such work was usually done.
Spreadsheet programs are much faster, more accurate, and easier to use than traditional accounting techniques.
The programs are widely used on personal computers for keeping sales, expense and inventory records, and for budgeting and forecasting future sales and expenses.
As a result of these and many other applications, computer spreadsheets have become the most important of all software tools for modern businesses.
Early programs such as VisiCalc provided 254 rows and 63 columns for entering data and formulae for calculations.
Some modern programs for computers with large memories provide thousands of rows and hundreds of columns.
VisiCalc was introduced by Robert Frankston, a young computer programmer, and Dan Bricklin, a Harvard Business School student who was looking for a way to use the power of a computer to simplify complex time-consuming financial analyses.
VisiCalc proved so useful in such applications that it provided an entry for personal computers into the business world.
In 1980, the Sorcim Corporation introduced SuperC alc, a similar spreadsheet program for personal computers using the CPM operating system.
A new generation of computer software for business began with integrated spreadsheet programs, which can be used to prepare spreadsheets, create graphs, and manage data.
In such programs, for example, it is easy to display spreadsheet data in the form of a graph or to transfer data from a database to a spreadsheet.
One of the first such programs was Lotus 1-2-3, an immediate success following its introduction in 1983.
13 In the third generation of integrated business software, spreadsheets, graphics, and data management capabilities were supplemented by word processing and communication capabilities.
With such comprehensive programs, it became possible to create multiple windows on the computer display.
Each window could contain a different application—a graph in one, a spreadsheet in another, and word processing in a third.
The window capabilities of integrated programs such as Symphony and Framework makes it easy, for example, to transfer a spreadsheet or a database report to word processing for styling and formatting before printing.
3.3.2 General Ledger General Ledger is a labour saving device for the preparation of financial statements and for establishing multiple income and cost entries.
3.3.3 Accounts Receivable Accounts receivable, when computerized, can get your bills out the same day you have performed a service.
An accounts receivable module prepares invoices and customer accounts, adds credit charges where appropriate, handles incoming payments, flags your attention to customers that are delinquent, and produces stunning notices.
It allows you to have daily cash control.
You get out the bills on time, yet you avoid errors such as billing a customer twice for the same item.
A further advantage is that debits and credits are posted automatically to the general ledger, order entry, and in some instances inventory, once they are entered in accounts receivable.
3.3.4 Accounts Payable Accounts payable, when computerized, will provide for purchase order control, invoice processing, payment selection and handling, cheque writing and control, cash-requirements, forecasting, etc.
It will also double-check the accuracy of the vendor’s invoice, and some software systems will crosscheck it against the purchase order and the inventory module.
3.3.5 Inventory Control Inventory Control module has multiple functions, including tracking inventory for both costing and tax purposes, controlling purchasing (and the overall level of expenditure) and minimizing the investment in inventory (and subsequent loss of cash flow).
3.3.6 Payroll Controls The payroll module prepares and prints payroll checks, including all itemized deductions.
It is integrated with the general ledger so that you can automatically set aside the correct amount for PAYE and other withholdings.
3.3.7 Point of sale Point of sale module captures all sales information at (or in place of) the cash register, including salesperson, date, customer, credit information, items, and quantity sold.
It can produce sales slips or sales invoices, plus it reports on items, customer, and salesperson activity.
3.3.8 Purchasing and Receiving Purchasing and receiving module can represent an invaluable addition.
It can generate purchase orders and track their fulfillment.
You can find out which vendors are delivering on time and saving you the expense of having to follow up on partial and incomplete orders.
3.3.9 Time and Billing Module Time and billing module reduces manual and clerical work, simplifies the billing process, prompts you and your partners to bill on time, reduces unbilled work-in progress, minimizes unreported time, reduces unbilled time, measures and analyzes non-chargeable time and provides criteria to analyze staff performance.
Because a computerized accounting system is basically a computerized data management system, the disposition of labor is almost the same.
14 One staff member must serve as a database manager and be in charge of setting up the chart of accounts, establishing the interrelationships among the files and establishing and maintaining an audit trail.
4.0 CONCLUSION The History or Foundation of Accounting is of immense importance to the Accounting profession as it traces the starting point of record keeping to the highly primitive era.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has traced the History of Accounting.
It has shown that the starting point of Accounting can be linked to the merchants in the Babylonian and Assyrian civilization about 4000 years B.C.
Reverend Father Luca Paciolo is the Father of Double- Entry Book- Keeping.
SELF-ASSESMENT EXERCISE 1.
“The History of Accounting is not complete without mentioning the name of the Italian monk and Mathematician LUCCA PACIOLO” Discuss.
2.
Identif y at least three accounting packages that can be used in a computerized business environment.
3.
What is the relationship of Accounts receivable and Debtors?
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Trace the History of Accounting 2.
Mention and Discuss old methods and Machines used in Accounting.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Lagos: Study Pack: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting Tamaza Publishing Company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary and Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited ICAN Study Pack (2006).
Foundation Fundamentals of Financial Accounting: VI Publishing Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Mayo Associates Ltd (1988).
Accounting, Lagos: Paper I Mayo Associates Limited and BPP Publishing Ltd 15 UNIT 2 DEFINITION OF ACCOUNTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions of Accounting 3.2 Working Definition 3.3 Divisions of Accounting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A clear and concise definition of Accounting is very needful in order to ensure the attainment of the objectives of this unit.
Definitions give a clear focus of the direction of the unit and facilitate understanding especially for beginners like you.
The definitions have been simplified to facilitate quick understanding by you.
2.0 Learning Objectives At the end of this unit, you should: Define Accounting as given by different professionals Explain the Divisions of Accounting Define and explain Book- Keeping 3.0 WHAT IS ACCOUNTING?
We can start by saying that “accounting is a service activity”.
Its function is to provide quantitative information about economic entities.
The information primarily is financial in nature and is intended to be useful in judging the business and making economic decisions.
Aincfocormunattiinogn i s used in describing the activities and financial position of many different kinds of economic entities.
They include profit-oriented organizations such as commercial banks, trading companies, conglomerate companies, and non profit-oriented organizations such as government hospitals, schools, governmental agencies, etc.
In judging and making decisions about aenco nomic entity, individuals generally must begin by asking questions about the entity.
Tanhsew ers to many of such questions are found in accounting reports.
If, for example, the entities were business concerns, the management of the businesses would look to accounting for answers to questions such as: What are the resources of the business?
What debts does it owe?
Does it have earnings?
Are expenses too large in relation to sales?
Are too little or too much merchandise being kept?
Are amounts owed by customers being collected rapidly?
Will the business be able to pay its debts as they mature?
Should the plant be expanded?
Should a new product be introduced?
Should selling prices be increased?
In addition, providers of finance including suppliers macacyo u n tuinseg information in answering such questions as: Are the customer’s earning prospects good?
What is its debt paying ability?
Has it paid its debts promptly in the past?
Should it be granted additional credit?
In a similar manner, governmental units use accounting information in regulating businesses and assessing businesses to tax.
These will be discussed in details under the users of accounting information.
16 3.1 DEFINITIONS OF ACCOUNTING According to Okwoli (1993:3), accounting is ‘the process of identifying, measuring, and communicating economic and financial information to permit informed judgement and decision by the users of the information’.
Wood and Sangster defined accounting as ‘the process of identifying, measuring, and communicating economic information to permit informed judgements and decisions by users of the information’.
The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA, 1961) has def ined accounting as “the art of recording, classifying and summarizing in a significant manner and in terms of money, transactions and events which are, in part at least, of a financial character, and interpreting the result thereof”.
In a nutshell, accounting can be def ined as “the process of identif ying, analyzing and recording, classifying and summarizing, and communicating and interpreting economic information to users of the information in order to permit informed judgments and decisions”.
Key words from the above definition are as follows: i) Identifying financial transactions and other economic events from source documents; ii) Analyzing and recording identified transactions into prime books such as journals and cash book; iii) Classifying and summarizing analyzed and recorded transactions from the prime books by posting them to the ledger accounts and subsequently balancing them; iv) Communicating and interpreting the summarized items and accounts to all interested users of accounting information so that they can judge the performance and position of the business and make necessary decisions.
The process of accounting can best be illustrated diagrammatically in terms of an information processing system: Analyzing Users of Identified economic events Communicating & accounting 1. Business Transactions information economic events Analysing & 2.
Other events (internal events Recording Classifying & interpreting economic & recordinsgu cthh eaisr d epreciation and Economic & Summarising provision for Bad debt other events Recorded information in terms of events effects reports.
Input Unit Processing Unit Output Unit 3.2 Working Definition For this course, the Definition of Accounting as given by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants is comprehensive enough and has been adopted.
The bdoefdiyn e s Accounting as “the art of recording, classifying and summarizing in a significant manner and in terms of money, transactions and events which are, in part at least of a financial character and interpreting the results thereof.
The above definition can, for the purpose of simplicity, be divided into two parts, viz: (i) the part that deals with recording, classifying and summarizing transactions, and (ii) the part that deals with interpreting the results of the first part The first part is what we call “book- keeping”.
Accounting, or Accountancy, includes book- keeping.
In this course, we will be dealing with book- keeping only.
Book- keeping has been defined by Baston (1979:3) as the art of recording the financial transactions of a business, oinrd iv aidnu a l, in terms of money, in a set of books in order to obtain necessary information when required.
17 The definition has four distinctive parts: (i) Book- keeping is an art, not a science (ii) It is concerned with recording financial, and not any other type of transactions (iii) The transactions must be recorded in terms of money and not in terms of quantity (iv) The object of book- keeping is to provide information about the conduct and status of the business.
3.3 WHY STUDY ACCOUNTING?
Considering the wide range of questions that are answered by referring to accounting information, perhaps every educated person in the society should be regarded as a user of accounting information.
If you are to use accounting infor mation effectively, you must have some uderstanding of how data are gathered and the figures that are put together.
This is the main reason why all and sundry need to study accounting because it enables you to appreciate the limitations of the data and the extent to which some portion are based on estimates rather than on precise measurements.
And, you must understand some accounting terms acnodn c epts.
Needless to say, this knowledge is only gained by a study of accounting .
Another reason to study accounting is to make it one’s lifework.
A career in accounting can be very interesting and highly rewarding.
3.4 DIVISIONS OF ACCOUNTING Accounting could be divided into four major branches as follows: (i) Financial Accounting This deals with recording and communicating information to enable the users to assess the performance of the enterprise.
(ii) Management Accounting The Management Accountant prepares futuristic accounting information (estimates and projects) such as budgets to assist Management in decision making.
(iii) Auditing Auditing is that branch of Accounting that examines the statements anfdin uanndciearll y ing records of an organization and reports thereon to the stakeholders or to the management if he is an Internal Auditor.
(iv) Taxation Taxation is that branch of Accounting that deals with the levying and collection of compulsory contributions on the citizens of a country in order to defray expenses incurred by Government.
4.0 CONCLUSION Defining Accounting and differentiating it from book- keeping is very essential as the latter is a sub- set of the former.
Accounting as a management science has a very wide area of coverage (Financial, Management, Auditing and Taxation).
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: o Defined Accounting o Defined Book- keeping o Outlined the Divisions of Accounting SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISES (i) What is the main object of book- keeping?
(ii) Is book- keeping essential for a business?
Give reasons to support your answer 18 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define Accounting 2.
Is it true to say that book- keeping is a part of Accounting?
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited ICAN Study Pack (2006).
Foundation Fundamentals of Financial Accounting, Lagos: VI Publishing Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theor y and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior S econdary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Mayo Associates Ltd (1988).
Accounting, Paper I, Lagos: Mayo Associates Limited and BPP Publishing Ltd 19 STUDY UNIT 3 USERS OF ACCOUNTING INFORMATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Accounting 3.2 Users of Accounting Information 3.2.1 User Groups of Accounting Information 3.3 Characteristics of Useful Accounting Information 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION An important feature of Accounting is the provision of information to a variety of users.
This is absolutely necessary because they need to judge the economic performance and progress of the entity and then take informed decisions of varying nature.
It is therefore, needful taoc q uaint yourself with some of the user Group of Accounting Information.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should: o Enumerate user groups of accounting information o Explain the uses of Accounts o Outline the qualities of good accounting information 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Accounting Accounting is very important in view of the following uses: (i) Accounting Information can be used for decision making; (ii) It provides permanent records for all transactions; (iii) It helps to determine the profitability of a business concern; (iv) Accounting records are used for tax assessment; (v) Helps to prevent fraudulent practices; (vi) The records provide a means by which the finances of a business are controlled; (vii) The records show the Income and expenditure; (viii) The assets and liabilities are shown by the Accounting records; (ix) Accounting records aid planning; (x) Accounting records provide a proof of the financial position of an Enterprise.
3.2 Users of Accounting Information One of the features of accounting definition is the provision of accounting information to all users.
This is necessary because they need to judge the economic performance and progress of an entity and then take decisions.
20 Accounting information is usually in the form of reports and statements, and for any report or statement to be regarded as information generally, it must possess the qualities of useful or valuable information, otherwise it ceases to be information.
3.2.1 User Groups of Accounting Information (i) Owner/shareholders of the economic entity or business: Why do the owners need accounting information?
The owners of the business need accounting information to enable them know whether the business is doing well or not.
They use it to measure management performance and determine what returns are coming to them.
(ii) Managers/Managem ent This group of people is saddled with the responsibility of running the business on behalf of the owners or shareholders.
They need accounting information in order to know whether they are managing it well or not.
They use accounting information for the daily running of the business; and to measure their performance.
(iii) Lenders/Providers of finance These are long/short term creditors.
They may be in form of friends or relatives, commercial or development banks.
They are interested in accounting information so as to macotinviittoier s o fth teh e business, its credit worthiness, its viability and its liquidity position.
(iv) Government Government refers to all the three tiers of government (Federal, State and Local Governments) of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
It is interested in accounting information for taxation purposes and the regulation of the businesses.
(v) Suppliers These are people who provide goods and services to the business.
They are interested in proving the viability and liquidity of the business and then decide on whether or not to allow any short-term credit.
(vi) Customers This group of users buy the products of the entity.
They need the accounting information in order to ensure the availability of goods and services at all times and may decide to even deposit money for goods in advance.
This is going to be an advantage to such a business enterprise as it serves as a source of short-time finance.
(vii) Employees This group of people consists of workers of the business with their unions.
They are also interested in accounting information because it enables them know the continuity of their monthly salaries and the security of their jobs.
Financial information helps union leaders, who are employee representatives, have bargaining power for pay increase and employees benefits.
(viii) Competitors These are organisations or individuals running or operating similar and related businesses.
They are interested in information about their competitors so as to plan strategies to outwit or at least to compete favourably in the industr y.
(ix) Financial Analysts/Advisers These include journalists, authors and students.
They need accounting information of business entities so as to analyze and compare it with other similar businesses and make comments thereof.
3.3 Characteristics of Useful Accounting Inform ation No information is useless but its degree of usefulness varies.
Financial statements and reports could be said to contain valuable/useful information if, and only if, they possess the following characteristics: 21 i) Relevance.
The information provided should be that which is required to satisfy the needs of information users.
In the case of company accounts, clearly a wide range of information will be needed to satisfy the numerous interest groups.
ii) Comprehensibility.
Information may be difficult to understand because it is skimpy or incomplete, but too much detail is also a defect, which can cause duinfdfiecruslttaineds in go.
f Useful information should be relatively easy to understand and comprehend.
iii) Reliability.
This will be enhanced if information is independently verified.
The lawr e quires that an auditor, who must be a person independent of the company and the holder of an approved qualification, should verify the accounts published by limited companies.
iv) Completeness.
A company’s accounts should present a rounded picture or contained a snapshot of its entire economic activities.
v) Objectivity.
The usefulness of information will be enhanced if it contains a minimum of subjective judgment.
This is particularly the case where conflicting interests operate and an unbiased presentation of information is needed.
In the context of preparing accounts, where many decisions must be based on judgment rather than objective facts, this problem often arises.
Management is often inclined to paint a rosy picture of a cporomfiptaanbiyl’isty t o make their own performance look impressive; while the auditor responsible for verifying the accounts is inclined to take a more prudent view so that he will not be held liable by, say a supplier who is misled into granting credit to a shaky company.
vi) Timeliness.
The usefulness of information is reduced when it does not appear until long after the period to which it relates, or if it is produced at unreasonably long intervals.
What constitutes a long interval depends on the circumstances: management of a company may need very frequent (perhaps daily) information on cash flows to run the befufsiicnieensstl y ; but shareholders are normally content to see accounts produced annually.
vii) Comparability.
Information should be produced on a consistent basis so that valicdo m parisons can be made with information from previous periods and with information produced by other organisations (e.g.
the accounts of similar companies operating in the same line of business).
viii) Accurate.
Accurate financial information is error free.
In some cases, inacincfuorramtea ti on is generated because inaccurate data was fed into the transformation process.
ix) Economical.
Economic information should be relatively economical to promduacnea;g e ment must balance the value of every accounting report with the cost of producing it.
x) Sim plicity.
Accounting information should be simple and not complex.
Sophisticated and Technical Information may be unnecessary and uncommunicative.
xi) Verifiable.
Accounting information has to be verifiable.
This means that userasc c o uonft i ng information may wish to confirm/check it to make sure it is correct.
xii) Accessible.
Information should be easily accessible to authorized users.
It must be obtained in the right format, in the right time and in the right place to meet their needs.
xiii) Flexibility.
Financial information is expected to be flexible so as to meet the diverse needs of users.
It should serve a variety of purposes.. Again, methods of presenting information should be free from too much rigidity and follow the “times”.
xiv)Security.
It is not every account or report that is meant for public consumption, somree p orts are prepared for specific users.
Hence, accounting information should be secured from unauthorized users.
4.0 CONCLUSION No matter what form a business takes, the one thing that it has in common with all other businesses is the need to keep financial records.
These will be required for a variety of reasons.
5.0 SUMMARY 22 This study has discussed: o The importance of Accounting o The users of Accounting Information o Characteristics of useful Accounting Information SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE 1.
Mention the main characteristics which good Accounting Information must possess 2.
List the users of accounting in order of priority.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss fully the users of Accounting Information 2.
What is the importance of Accounting Information?
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited IC AN Study Pack (2006).
Foundation Fundamentals of Financial Accounting, Lagos: VI Publishing Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Mayo Associates Ltd (1988).
Accounting, Paper I, Lagos: Mayo Associates Limited and BPP Publishing Ltd 23 STUDY UNIT 4 ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES AND CONVENTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Accounting Principles and Conventions 3.1 Definition 3.2 Accounting Concepts and Conventions 3.3 What is Accounting Cycle?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor -Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Practical details of accounting usually differ greatly from one organization to another.
Hence, there are usually rules and conventions, which have been adopted as a general guide to action by the Accountancy Profession.
This Study Unit discusses some of the main accounting Concepts and Conventions.
This knowledge is very needful as it lays a solid foundation for subsequent studies in this Course.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should: o Define Accounting Principles and Conventions o Explain Accounting Principles and Conventions o Describe Accounting cycle 3.0 Accounting Principles and Conventions 3.1 Definition Accounting concepts are those bases, rules, principles, conventions and procedures adopted in preparing and presenting financial statements.
A substantial number of alternative postulates, assumptions, principles and methods adopted by a reporting entity in tphree p a ration of its accounts can significantly affect its results of operations, financial position and changes thereof.
It is therefore, essential to the understanding; interpretation and use of financial statements, whenever there are several acceptable accounting methods, which may be followed, that those who prepare them disclose the main assumptions on which they are based.
To secure acceptance, an accounting principle must be useful in coping with a practical recording problem, it must be reasonably objective, that is, provide a similar answer in the hands of qualified practitioners and finally, it must be feasible.
That is, it should not be expensive to apply (Garbutt, 1982: 101) 3.2 Accounting Concepts and conventions The fundamental accounting concepts that guide the financial reporting of enterpriaslel s are described below: i) Entity Concept This states that the business has an identity and existence distinct from its owners and those business transactions should be separated from private/personal transactions.
This differs from 24 the legal position.
From the legal point of view, only a limited company and its owners are separate legal entities, able to contract with each other, sue each other, etc.
With a sole trader, however, the legal position is different.
The sole trader and his or her business are legally the same thing.
The rights, possessions, privileges and risks of one are also the rights, possessions, privileges and risks of the other.
But, the accountant takes a different view.
To the accountant, whatever the legal position, the business and the owner(s) are considered completely separate.
Thus, the accountant can always speak of the business as owing the owner money, borrowing money from the owner, owing profits to the owner, and so on.
Therefore, records of the business transactions must be kept separate from the private transactions of the owner.
ii) Going Concern Concept /Continuity Concept This concept states that in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it is assumed that the business will continue perpetually.
This concept has a major influence on the assumptions made when evaluating particular items, such as stock and depreciation in the balance sheet.
It is worth noting that the going concern assumption does not say that the business is going to keep being profitable into the unforeseen future.
It merely assumes that the business will manage not to collapse altogether.
iii) Periodicity Concept or Accounting Period Concept This very simple concept recognizes that profit occurs over time, and we cannot usefully speak of the profit “for a period “until we define the length of the period.
The maximum length in which: a) it is capable of objective measurement, and b) the asset value receivable in exchange is reasonably certain.
For instance, if an asset such as stock is disposed off, either on cash or credit basis, the proceeds should be recognized as revenue realized for that period.
iv) The Matching Concept This concept covers the process of profit calculation- where revenue and expenses come into relationship.
It states that profit (or income) determination is a process of matching against revenue the expenses incurred in earning that revenue.
The concept also allows us to carry forward assets into future periods because they will be used profitably later.
v) Consistency Concept This concept states that the same accounting rules, methods and procedures should be applied in preparing and reporting accounting information.
It emphasizes the following: a.
The avoidance of short ter m manipulation of reported results; b.
The adoption of a reporting method that will facilitate comparison within the firm over different accounting periods (intra-firm comparisons); and c. The use of the method that facilitates comparison between different entities (inter-firm comparisons).
For example, depreciation methods for similar assets should be maintained for a relatively longer period.
vi) Historical Cost Concept This concept states simply that resources (Assets) acquired by the business should be recorded at their original purchased prices.
It follows on from the monetary measurement concept discussed further and tells us how the item can actually be measured.
This is a well-known concept that has gained a worldwide support in the past; however it no longer receives such support.
vii) Realisation 25 This concept, which is most similar to the matching concept, mentioned above, states that revenue and expenses earned and incurred for a particular period must be considered when preparing the accounting report for that period.
It must be irrespective of whether it has been collected or not, whether settled or not.
For example, credit sales and accrued viii) Dual Concept or Duality This may be regarded as a formalization of the basis of double entry.
It states that in relation to one economic event (transaction), two aspects are recorded in the accounts, “Debit and Credit sides”.
ix) Accrual Concept The concept states that all expenses in which the services have been enjoyed but payment for such services have not been effected must be captured in preparing the financial statements of such Entities.
For instance, electricity bills for a given period must be considered in drawing up the accounts for the period whether or not payment for consumption has been made.
.
x) Objectivity Concept This concept calls on accountants to be certain and precise.
They should be free from personal opinions and biases, fair and objective in recording transactions and making report, because verifiability of economic events is a desirable element in accounting.
xi) Monetary Measurement Concept Accountants regard their job as dealing with financial information.
This concept states that the accountant only records those facts that are expressed in money terms.
The accountant ignores any other facts, no matter how relevant they may be to the user of the information, if they cannot conveniently be expressed in money terms.
xii) Materiality Concept This is a statistical concept that in its application to accounting implies that insignificant items should not be given the same emphasis as significant items.
The insignificant items are by definition unlikely to influence decisions or provide useful information to decision makers, but they may as well cause complications and confusion to the user of accounts.
Their detailed treatment may also involve a great deal of time and effort – and therefore of money for no useful purpose.
xiii) Conservatism (Prudence) concept This concept refers to the accounting practice of recognizing all possible losses, but nanotti c ipating possible gains.
This will tend to lead to an understatement of profits and to an understatement of asset values with no corresponding understatement of liability.
This concept seems to contradict the Going Concern, Materiality, Historical Cost and Objectivity concepts (SAS 1- Disclosure of Accounting Policies).
3.3 Accounting cycle This is the process by which the capital invested in a business “circulates” throughout the enterprise in a manner that adds net positive (profits) or negative (losses) value to the business.
4.0 Conclusion Accounting Concepts or Principles have evolve as a result of operational differences that abound in business environments due to size, location, nature of business, e. t. c. 5.0 SUMMARY The Unit has elaborately: o Defined Accounting Concepts and Conventions 26 o Outlined the Accounting concepts and Conventions o Discussed the Accounting cycle SELF ASSESSMENT EXE RCISES 1.
Differentiate between Accounting concepts and Accounting conventions 2.
Identif y accounting concepts that are in conflict with each other.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (i) What is an Accounting Principle?
(ii) List and explain ten (10) Accounting Concepts and Conventions 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementar y ad Intermediate StudentSst,a ge London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Mayo Associates Ltd (1988).
Accounting, Paper I, Lagos: Mayo Associates Limited and BPP Publishing Ltd Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing Company Limited 27 STUDY UNIT 5 THE ACCOUNTING EQUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Accounting Equation 3.2 Assets and Liabilities 3.3 The Business Cycle 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The totality of Financial Accounting is based on the Accounting equation.
The Double- Entry Principle evolved from this equation.
This study unit analyses the various components of this fundamental equation.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this study unit, you should: o State the Accounting equation o Define Capital o Define Assets o Explain what are liabilities 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE ACCOUNTING EQUATION Financial accounting is completely based on the accounting equation.
For a Business to commence operation, it must have resources and these resources must be provided by somebody.
The resources possessed by the business are referred to as assets, while the one who supplied them refers to the same resources as capital.
CAPITAL = ASSETS On the other hand, someone other than the owner will normally have provided some of the resources.
In this case, the business will be indebted to that person and such indebtedness is called liability.
The equation can now be expressed as: CAPITAL + LIABILITIES = ASSETS It can be seen that the two sides of the equation, will have the same totals.
This is because we are dealing with the same thing from two different points of view.
It is Resources.
It is a fact that the totals of each side will always equal one another, and this will always be true no matter how many transactions are entered into.
The actual assets, capital and liabilities may change, but the equality of assets with that of the total of capital and liabilities will always hold true.
3.2 ASSET S AND LIABILITIES 28 3.2.1 Assets- consist of property of all kinds, such as business buildings, mfuarncihtuinree rayn,d fixtures, motor vehicles, stocks of goods and also, benefits such as debts owed by customers and the amount of money in the bank account and cash in hand, etcetera.
The last four items are called current assets because they can be used within 12months, while the others are called fixed assets because they can be used for more than a year.
3.2.2 Liabilities- consist of money owed for goods supplied in the firm or expenses in form of loans made to the firm, goods supplied by suppliers, including unpaid expenses.
Liabilities can be divided into long-term and current liabilities.
The long-term liabilities are trheopsaey a ble beyond one year while the current liabilities are those repayable within twelve months.
3.2.3.
Capital- is often called the owner’s equity or net worth.
Liabilities consist of money owed or collected from outsiders, CAPITAL (OWNER) RESOURCES =ASSETS = + LIABILITIES (CREDTIThOusR, Sth)e a c c o u n t in g equation, if both the owner and the creditor provide resources, will appear as follows: 29 ASSETS = CAPITAL + LIABILITIES N182, 000 = 100,000 + 82,000 It can be seen that the two sides of the equation will have the same totals.
This is because we are dealing with one and the same thing from two different points of view.
Again, we can represent what is stated above in another way: Resource: Who supplies the resources?
- Owner (Capital) and others (liabilities) What are these resources?
- Assets It is true that the total of each side of the equation will always be true no matter how many transactions are entered into.
The actual assets, capital and liabilities will always hold true.
The accounting equation is the simplest way to determine the financial position oenf te arpnr i se.
3.3 THE BUSINESS CYCLE 3.2.1 Business Defined A business is an organisation established deliberately by an entrepreneur(s) for the purpose of satisfying consumers’ wants and consequently making a profit therefrom.
It is upon this fact that all businesses really depend on profit, 3.2.2 Why Businesses Exist Businesses exist to provide goods/services and in the process, earn income for the owners.
An increase in capital is more usually expressed as ‘making a profit’.
The business cycle might be described as follows: A trader begins a trading period with certain assets and liabilities, the excess of assets over the liabilities being his capital.
Some of these assets are exchanged for others of a greater value; for example, he sells them more than he paid for them, and thus makes a profit.
This increases the capital.
Other assets he buys to keep and use.
As time goes on the value of these assets falls because: (a) They wear out or are used up.
(b) Things, like leases, expire.
This loss reduces capital.
Again he incurs certain expenses, which also result in reduction of his capital.
If the increase in capital is greater than the loss, then, he has made a profit.
Obviously, the only way to find out whether or not a profit has been made is to keep a track of values of assets and liabilities, and that is why he keeps books.
One other small point should be noticed.
An unsuccessful businessman might find that his liabilities exceed his assets.
In that case he would have no capital, and the difference between assets and liabilities would then be called a deficiency.
The book- keeping equation would need to be re-written as: L= A + D (D = deficiency) or D = L – A.
A person or business whose liabilities exceed the assets is said to be insolvent.
30  STAGE 1 A business commences with certain assets and liabilities.
The difference is its capital.
L + C = A N300 + N400 = N700 Liabilities Cash N200 N300 Other assets Capital N500 N400 STAGE II Additional assets costing N200 are acquired, but liabilities are increased by the same amount (i.e., goods are bought but not paid for immediately).
L + C = A N500 + N400 = N900 Cash N 2 L00ia bilities N500 other assets Capital N700 N400 STAGE III Some liabilities are extinguished by the sacrifice of assets of equal value (e.g debts of N100 are paid in cash).
L + C = A N400 + N400 = N800 Cash N 1 0L0 ia b il i ti es N400 Other assets N700 Capital N400 STAGE IV Some assets are exchanged for other greater value (i.e, goods costing N300 are sold for N500).
This increases capital by the amount of the profit, N200.
31  L + C = A N400 + N600 = N1,000 Liabilities N400 Cash N 6 C00a p ital Other assets N600 N400 N500 + N400 = N900 STAGE V Assets diminish in value through being used up to the extent of N100 (for example, a car is worth less after a year’s use).
This reduces capital.
L + C = A N400 + N500 = N900 Liabilities N400 Cash N 6 C00a pital Other assets N500 N300 The difference between the capital at the end (N500) and the capital at the beginning is the final ( N400) Profit.
( N 1T0h0e) p r o c e s s is then repeated from stage II.
4.0 CONCLUSION For a business to commence operation it must have resources and these resources must be provided by somebody.
Resources (Assets) provided by owners or proprietor are referred to alisa b ilities.
Hence every business transaction has two aspects.
This means that Liabilities + Capital = Assets 5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: o Stated the Accounting Equation o Defined Capital o Defined Assets o Explained what are liabilities o SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES o Complete the gap in the following table 32  S/ N Assets N Liabilities N Capital N A 150,000 ?
95,000 B ?
70,000 35,000 C ?
9,000 7,000 D 65,000 ?
45,000 E 130,000 ?
25,000 F 2,500,000 1,000,000 ?
G 7,826.50 2,266 ?
H 2,000 500 ?
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT (i) Distinguish from the following list, the items that are liabilities from those that are assets: (a) Office machinery (b) Loan from C Kofo (c) Fixtures and Fittings (d) Motor Vehicles (e) Bank Balance (f) Cash (g) Salaries (h) Insurance prepaid ii) .Concisely describe the following terms (a) Assets (b) Liabilities (c) Capital 33  7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing Company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Mayo Associates Ltd (1988).
Accounting, Paper I, Lagos: Mayo Associates Limited and BPP Publishing Ltd 34  STUDY UNIT 6 SOME COMMON COMMERCIAL TERMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Common Commercial Terms 3.1 Debtor 3.2 Creditor 3.3 Transaction 3.4 Invoice 3.5 MoneyValue 3.6 Goods 3.7 Trader 3.8 Source Document 3.9 Accounting Cycle 3.10 Accounts 3.11 Book-Keeping 3.12 Capital Expenditure 3.13 Crossed Cheque 3.14 Marked Cheque 3.15 Wear and Tear 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Before proceeding to the core of this course, it is important that you familiarize yourself with certain common terms which are commonly used in Accounting 2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES On concluding of unit 6, you should Explain key terms used in Accounting Apply them in subsequent units 3.0 COMMON COMMERCIAL TERMS 3.1 Debtor: is a person or an organization who owes money.
For example, if Dupe sells goods on credit to Adamu, Adamu is a debtor.
3.2 Creditor: is a person or organization to whom money is owed.
In the example in 3.1, Dupe is a creditor to Adamu.
3.3 Transaction: Any dealing between two or more persons involving an exchange of goods or services for a consideration, usually in money is a 35  transaction.
Thus, a sale of goods, a receipt of cash, and payment of wages are all transactions.
3.4 Invoice: This is document narrating the details of goods sold on credit and informing the buyer of the cost of the goods, trade discount and net amount owing.
3.5 Monetary Value or Money’s Worth The value of anything expressed in terms of money is its monetary value, the monetary value of a car may be N650,000.
Accounts are kept in monetary values.
3.6 Goods: These are the things which are bought for the purpose of resale at a profit.
A trader trades in goods, e. g clothe is the goods of a cloth merchant, books of a bookseller, e. t. c. goods are also called merchandise.
3.7 Trader: Is a person, or an organization, who buys and sells goods with the intention of making profit.
3.8 Source Document: All Accounting entries must be supported by some documents, e. g, the recording of a credit sale must be supported by the duplicate copy of the invoice issued to the buyer.
Any document on which an accounting entry is based is called a source document.
These documents may include Invoice, credit note, debit note, petty cash voucher, statement of account, receipts, e. t. c. 3.9 Accounting Cycle: This is the process by which the capital invested in a business “circulates” throughout the enterprise in a manner that adds net positive (profits) or negative (losses) value to the business.
3.10 Accounts: This is the procedure by which control is exercised in an enterprise through the adroit use of the financial statistics or data that have been drawn from accurate book-keeping of the same enterprise.
Usually, book-keeping and accounts always go together since both are complimentary.
3.11 Book-Keeping This is the art of accurate record keeping of data relating to financial transactions in any organization.
3.12 Capital Expenditure This is an expenditure on goods or assets whose benefits spread over years and not on the current accounting period only.
Such expenditure is usually written off over a period in form of depreciation.
3.13 Crossed Cheque This is a cheque that can only be cashed by depositing it in a bank account.
It usually has two transverse lines across its face.
Crossing can be general or special with the latter stating the payee’s bank, branch or account number.
A special crossed cheque is therefore, much safer 36  3.14 Marked Cheque This cheque is guaranteed by the bank on which it is drawn.
It is not usually dishonoured.
3.15 Wear and Tear of an Asset This is due to the normal use of an asset.
It is otherwise referred to as depreciation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Technical terms commonly used in Accounting have been clearly defined to ensure a vivid understanding of this course.
Other terms not captured in this unit will be explained as we proceed in this discourse.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has: Explained some key terms commonly used in Accounting SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
Why it is necessary to record transactions in money’s worth?
2.
‘A debtor is a receiver,” Discuss 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Give five examples of transactions b.
What is meant by a source document?
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Mayo Associates Ltd (1988).
Accounting, Paper I, Lagos: Mayo Associates Limited and BPP Publishing Ltd 37  UNIT 7 DOUBLE ENTRY BOOK- KEEPING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Summary of the Principle 3.3 Double Entry Procedure 3.4 Cash and Credit Transactions 3.5 Graphical Representation 3.6 Illustration of the Principle of Double Entry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Double Entry Book keeping is the central core of modern accountancy.
All business events are regarded as having a dual aspect.
Since this is the foundation and the oldest known indisputable principle of accounting, it is Imperative that you have an in depth knowledge of this concept 2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to: o Define Double Entry Principle o State the Double Entry Book- Keeping Procedure o Record business transactions using the Double- Entry principle.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition According to Okwoli (1993:7), Double- Entry principle states that for every debit entry, there must be a corresponding credit entry, which in everyday English means that for every receiver, there must be a giver.
The receiver is always regarded as the debtor, while the giver is regarded as the creditor under this principle.
As far as Double- Entry principle is concerned, there must always be two parties to a transaction.
So when a transaction is to be recorded, they must appear both at the debit and credit sides- one entry at the debit side for the debtor or receiver and the other entry at the credit side for the creditor or giver.
Put in another way, the “Golden Principle” of Book- keeping states that “Every transaction has at least two parties and these parties can either be “persons” or “accounts”.
38  Example of transaction is “sold goods to Sule”.
The parties here are sales, which is representing goods sold, and Sule (Debtor).
One of the parties is a giver and the other a receiver.
The giver is referred to, as a “creditor”, while the receiver is a “Debtor”.
Therefore, the Double- Entry principle says that “for every debit, there must be a corresponding credit entry”.
Thus, the receiver’s account is credited.
3.2.
SUMMARY OF THE PRINCIPLE Dr: Receiver (receiving account) Cr: Giver (giving account) 3.3 DOUBLE ENTRY PROCEDURE The procedures are: (a) The keeping of books of accounts (b) The division of each book into separate accounts (c) Each account is divided into two halves, left hand side, debit (Dr) and right hand side, credit (Cr) (d) All transactions must be recorded into two accounts: one account is debited and another account credited (e) The giver (giving account) is credited with the value of whatever it receives and the receiver (receiving account) is debited with the same amount.
3.4 CASH AND CREDIT TRANSACTIONS Financial transactions may be classified into cash and credit transactions.
Cash transactions: The buyers pay immediately for goods bought.
Here, no account will be opened in respect of a supplier or customer.
Steps in recording cash transactions are as follows: (a) Prepare two accounts (b) Identify the “Giving account” and the “Receiving account”.
(c) Now apply the principle “Cr Giver, Dr Receiver.
All cash transactions must pass through the cash book.
(d) Receiver All cash transactions must pass through the cash book.
Credit transactions: The majority of commercial transactions are termed credit transactions, which means that the transfer of ownership takes place before payment to the supplier, i. e settlement is referred to a future date, e. g Big man bought goods, but he did not pay until 3 months later.
Steps in recording this credit transaction are as follows: (a) Prepare day books: sales, purchases, returns and journal- proper (b) Prepare two accounts (c) Identify the “Giving account” and the “receiving account” (d) Apply the principle of Double- Entry: Debit- receiver 39  Credit- Giver 3.5 GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION Transactions cash transactions credit transactions cash book day books ledger accounts ledger accounts You should memorize the following: A Debit- Entry represents A Credit- Entry represents (i) an increase in the value of assets A decrease in the value of assets (ii) a decrease in the amount A no fi n c rae a se in the value of a liability liability (iii) an item of expenditure or expenses An item of income or gain 3.6 ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE PRINCIPLE OF DOUBLE- ENTRY Jan. 1 Mr. Ojo started business with N50,000 cash Effect: Increase in Capital: Capital Account Increase in Asset: Cash Account Action Required: Dr Rent account (Receiver) Cr Cash account (Giver) Jan 4 The Proprietor put a further N500, 000 into the Bank Effect: Increase in Capital: Capital account Increase in Asset: Cash account Action Required: Dr Bank account (Receiver) Cr Capital account (Giver) Jan 5 Bought motor vehicle N600,000 paying by cheque Effect: Increase in Asset: motor vehicle account Decrease in Asset: Bank account Action Required: Dr Motor vehicle account (Receiver) Cr Bank account (Giver) Jan 8 Withdrew cheque for private use N15, 000 Effect: Increase in Drawings: Drawings account Reduction in Asset: Bank account Action Required: Dr Drawings account (Receiver) Cr Bank account (Giver) 40  Jan 25 Received Commission N80, 000 by cheque Effect: Increase in Asset: Bank increase in Commission Account (Income) Action Required: Dr Bank account (Receiver) Cr Commission receivable account (Giver) 4.
0 CONCLUSION The Double- Entry principle is a “Golden Rule” in Accounting and it operates on the basis that every financial transaction must have two aspects.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: o Defined the Double- Entry book keeping o Enumerated the Double- Entry procedure o Discussed cash and credit transactions o Given a graphical representation of transactions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (i) State and explain the Double- Entry principle (ii) Enumerate the procedure to be followed in the application of the Double- Entry principle 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (a) Complete the following table showing which account to be debited and which account to be credited; (i) Started business with cash (ii) Took cash and paid into the bank (iii) Sold goods on credit to Adeboye (iv) Returned goods to Labaran (v) Bought motor van from Kawo on credit (vi) Goods sold for cash (vii) Land sold for cash (viii) Goods bought being paid for by cheque immediately (b) Enter the following transactions in the following accounts Dec 1 Started business with N80, 000 cash Dec 2 Paid Insurance by cheque, N15, 000 Dec 3 Received refund of rent N5, 000 cash Dec 4 Bought furniture by cheque N500, 000 Dec 5 Took N50, 000 from cash and paid into the bank Dec 6 Cash drawings N11, 500 Dec 9 Withdrawn goods N30,000 for use 41  7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing Company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Mayo Associates Ltd (1988).
Accounting, Paper I, Lagos: Mayo Associates Limited and BPP Publishing Ltd 42  UNIT 8 BOOKS OF PRIME ENTRY CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1Definition of Prime Books 3.2Classification of Prime Books 3.2.1Purchase Journal 3.2.2Purchases Returns Journal 3.2.3Sales Journal 3.2.4Sales Returns Journal 3.2.5 General Journal 4.0Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The practice of the Accounting profession will be very difficult if not impossible without a day- to recording of financial transactions as they occur.
As discussed earlier, Book- Keeping is that aspect of accounting that deals with the recording of transactions.
Book- keeping deals with recording of transactions from source documents into a set of books called “Books of Original Entry” or Books of Prime Entry or Subsidiar y Books of Account.
These books include the cash book, purchases day book, sales day book, returns outward book, returns inward book, bills book and the proper journal.
This study unit discusses all the Books of Prime Entry, except the Cash Book is discussed elaborately in study.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should: • Define a Book of Prime Entry • Explain the types of Books of Original Entry • Record transactions in the Books of Prime Entry 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Prim e Books Books of Prime Entry, Subsidiary Books or Books of Original Entry are used to make first entry of transactions.
Before entries are made in the accounts, they must first be recorded in the Subsidiar y books.
The books of Prime Entry do not however form part of the Double- Entry Principle.
43  3.2 Classification of Prim e Books Typically, Prime books, which are never called accounts, are also known as Journals, Day-to- Day-Books or Subsidiary Books.
They are categorized into two, Special Journals and General Journal.
The specialised Journals consist of the following: (I) Sales Journal (II) Sales Returns Journal (III) Purchases Journal (IV) Purchases Return Journal (V) Cash Receipts Journal (VI) Cash payments Journal The ruling for all specialized Journal is given below: Date Particulars Folio Details Total N N From the above table, the column for particulars is meant for entering the debtor or creditor’s name and the name of items bought, sold or returned including their quantities and their unit prices.
Folio column serves as a reference column in which items like Account Number of customers/suppliers, page number of ledger accounts etcetera are recorded.
Details column, on the other hand takes care of any detailed calculations that can be made before extending the total to the cost column known as “Total” or “Amount”.
3.2.1 Purchases Journal This record all purchases of goods bought on credit.
All transactions that enter it stand as debit entries and are subsequently totaled and transferred to the debit side of the purchases account.
No other purchases except, the purchase of goods, which are meant for resale, will enter this book.
For example, purchase of fixed assets or stationary is rather entered in the principal journal and not in the purchases journal.
Note: All the items standing on this book are respectively posted to the credit side of their accounts.
This is necessary in order to complete the double entry principle that says, “For every debit entry, there must be a corresponding credit entry”.
3.2.2 Purchases Returns Journal This is also called returns outward journal.
It records all returns of defective or damaged goods to suppliers.
Entries of all returns made to the various suppliers are summed – up and transferred to the credit side of an account known as purchases returns account.
The accounts of the respective suppliers are subsequently debited with the value of goods returned.
44  EXAMPLE 1 Write up the following transactions in the bought Journal and Returns Outwards Journal of P. Ramson.
AUG. 2007: Aug 5 Bought from K. Aja & Sons; 5 dining tables @ 10000k each and 20 armless chairs @ 4000k each Invoice subject to 25% trade discount 7 Returned to K. Aja & Sons; 1 dining table which was damaged 13 Bought from John Holt & Co. Ltd 100 bags cement @ N1,250 a bag 80 Hausa mats @ N250 each Invoice subject to 5% trade discount.
15 Returned to John Holt & Co. Ltd, 4 bags of cement which coagulated.
SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE 1 IN THE BOOKS OF P. RAMSOM PURCHASES JOURNAL FOR AUGUST, 2007 DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO DETAILS TOTAL AUG. 2007 K. AJA & SONS N N 55 dining tables @ 10000k each 500 20 armless chairs @ 4000k each 800 1,300 Less 25% Trade Discount 325 975 J O7H N HOLT & CO LTD 100 bags cement @N1,250 a bag 125,000 80 Hausa mats @ N250 each 20,000 145,000 Less 5% Trade Discount 7,250 137,750 T3R1 ANSFER TO THE DR SIDE OF PURCH ASES A/C 138,725 PURCHASES RETURNS JOURNAL FOR AUGUST, 2007 DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO DETAILS TOTAL AUG. 2007 K. AJA & SONS N N 15 dining table @ 10000k each 10 Less 25% Trade Discount 2.50 7.50 7 JOHN HOLD & CO LTD 4 bags cement @N1,250 a bag 5,000 Less 5% Trade Discount 250 4,750 31 .
T RANSFER TO THE DR SIDE OF 4,750 PURCH RETURN A/C 45  3.2.3 Sales Journal The sales daybook as it is sometimes called, records all sales of goods made on credit to customers.
The transactions that are standing in this book are aggregated and transferred to the credit side of an account called sales account.
While individual items from the same book are posted to the debit side of the respective accounts of the customers.
The book does not accept any other transaction apart from the sales of goods or items that the business is known to trade in.
An example of items that cannot be recorded in this specialized book is the sale of fixed assets on cash or credit, the cashbook and general journals are respectively meant for these sorts of transactions.
3.2.4 Sales Returns Journal This is also called returns inward journal.
It records goods sold but returned due to one reason or the other (damaged, defective, below specification, etcetera).
The treatment is same to that of purchases returns journal.
EXAMPLE 2 Write up the sales daybook of P. Pwajok & Co. March, 2007: March 3 sold to ex.
Service men welfare association: 5 case club beer @ N1000 a case 6 bottles white horse whisky @ N300 a bottle 2 cases of seven up @ N400 a case Whole subject to 10% trade discount.
March 7 sold to Railway African club: 8 bottles Aromatic schiedam schnapps @ N250 each 4 cartons Weston’s cream crackers @ N1100 a carton 40 tins Gem biscuits @ N25 a tin Invoice subject to 5% trade discount March 15 sold to Effort & Sons: 1 case bicycle Maltina @ N750 a case 50 tins of Milk @ N68 a tin 5 cases umbrella soap @ N425 a case March 23 sold to N. Nantok: 1 case of Exeter corned beef @ N1060 5 packets of Pronto cocoa @ N270 a packet 46  SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE 2 In the books of Pwajok & co SALES DAYBOOK FOR THE MARCH, 2007 Date Particulars Folio Details Total Mar 2007 Ex-service men welfare N N 3 5 cases of club beer @ N1000 a case 6 of bottles white horse whisky @ 5, 000.
00 N300 a bottle 2 cases of seven up @ N600 a case 1, 800.
00 1, 200.
00 Less 10% trade discount 8, 000.
00 7 Railway African club 800.
00 7, 200.
00 8 bottle of Aromatic Schiedam Schnapps @ N250 each 4 cartons of Weston’s cream 2, 000.
00 crackers @ N1,100 a carton 40 tins of Tin Tomatoes @ N25 a tin 4, 400.
00 Less 5% trade discount 1, 000.
00 Effort & Sons 7, 400.
00 15 1 case of Maltina @ N750 a case 370.
00 7, 030.
00 50 tins of Milk @ N68 a tin 5 cases of umbrella soap @ 425 a 750.
00 case 3, 400.
00 N. Nantok 1 case of Exeter corned beef @ 2, 125.
00 6, 275.
00 23 N1,060.
00 a case 5 packets of pronto cocoa @ N270.
00 a packet 1, 060.
00 Transfer to the credit side of sales account 1, 350.
00 2, 410.
00 22, 915.
00 47  EXAMPLE 3 From the following particulars write up the sales returns book of F. Nta for the month of October 2006: Oct. 5 S. Okoro returned, 1 wall clock @ N300 damage in transit original invoice was subject to 10% trade discount.
6 Ibrahim returned 2 wrist watches @ N1000 each (inferior quality) Original Invoice subject to 5% discount.
11 T. Uba Returned, 2 shirts @ N400 each 3 singlets @ N50 each 3 socks @ N25 each All badly spoiled.
SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE 3 In the books of F. Nta Sales Returns Book for the Month of October 2006 Date Particulars Folio Details Total Oct. 2006 N N 5 S. Okoro 1 wall clock @ N300 300.
00 Less 10% trade discount 30.
00 6 A .
Ibrahim 270.
00 2 wrist watches @ N1000.
00 each 2000.
00 Less 5% trade discount 100.
00 11T .
Uba 1900.
00 2 shirts @ N400.
00 each 800.
00 3 singlets @ N50.
00 each 150.
00 3 socks @ N25.
00 each 75.
00 31T ransfer to the debit side of sales returns 1025.
00 account 3195.
00 COMPREHENSIVE EXAMPLE 4 Enter the following transactions into the purchases book, purchases returns book, sales book & sales returns book of Y-Lee & Sons Boots & Shoes merchant, for the Month of November, 2006: Nov 5.Bought of K Chally & Sons LTd; 100 pairs gent’s brown shoes @ N45 a pair 50 pairs ladies rain boots @ N400 a pair 20 pairs slippers @ N50 a pair Invoice subject to 10% trade discount 7.
Sold to B. Gregor y; 18 pairs white tennis shoes @ N15 a pair 9 Returned to K. Chally & Sons Ltd, 5 pairs gent’s brown shoes @ N450 a pair 48  3 pairs ladies rain boots @ N400 a pair All damaged in transit.
12 B. Gregory returned: 2 pairs white tennis shoes @ N150 a pair 15 bought of Bata shoe company: 120 pairs school’s sandals @ N360 a pair 80 pairs gent’s black shoes @ N500 a pair 240 tins nugget Ox blood polish @ N100 per set of 12.
Invoice subject to 5% trade discount.
24 Sold to R. Tutu: 20 pairs school’s sandals @ N375 a pair 40 pairs gent’s black shoes @ N525 a pair 29 R. Tutu returned: 20 pairs school’s sandals 4 pairs gent’s black shoes All defective SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE 4 In the books of Y-lee & Sons Boots & shoes merchant Purchases Daybook for the Month of November, 2006 Date Particulars Foli Details Total o Nov. 2006 N N 5 K. Chally & Sons Ltd 100 pairs of gent’s brown shoes @ N450 a pair 45000.
00 50 pairs of ladies rain boots @ N400 a pair 20000.
00 20 pairs of slippers @ N50 a pair 1000.
00 66000.
00 Less 10% trade discount 6600.
00 59,400.00 15 Bata shoes company 120 pairs of school sandals @ N360 a pair 80 pairs of gent’s black shoes @ N500 a 43200.
00 pair 240 tins of nugget ox blood polish @ 40000.
00 N100 per set of 12 2000.
00 85200.
00 Less 5% trade discount 4260.00 80,940.
00 30 Transfer to the debit side of purchases account 140, 340 49  Purchases Returns Book for the Month of November, 2006 Date Particulars Foli Detail Total o Nov. 2006 N N 9 K. Chally & Sons Ltd 5 pairs of gent’ brown shoes @ N450 a pair 3 pairs of ladies rain boots @ N400 a pair 2,250 Less 10% trade discount 1,200 30 Transfer to the credit side of purchases 3,450 returns account 345 3,105.00 3,105.00 Sales Daybook for the Month of November, 2006 Date Particulars Folio Details Total Nov. 2006 N N 7 B. Gregory 18 pairs of white tennis shoes @ N150 a pairs 2700.
00 24 R. Tutu 20 pairs of school sandals @ N375 a pair 7,500 40 pairs of agent’s black shoes @ N525 a pair 21,000 28,500.
00 30 Transfer to the credit side of sales account 31,200.
00 Sales Returns Book for the Month of November, 2006 Date Particulars Folio Details Total Nov. 2006 N N 12 B .
Gregory 2 pairs of white tennis shoes @ N150 a pair 300.
00 29R .
Tutu 20 pairs of school sandals @ N375 a pair 7500.
00 4 pairs of gent’s black shoes @ N525 a pair 2100.
00 9, 600.
00 30 Transfer to the debit side of sales returns account 9, 900.
00 50  3.2.5 General Journal This Journal records all transactions, be it cash or credit, revenue or expenses, assets or liabilities.
But where other journals are maintained, example, cash-book and other special Journals, items (transactions) such as sales and purchases of goods, returns inwards and outwards are not recorded, but only credit transactions involving purchases of assets and expenses among others.
The ruling for the general journal is given below: Date Particulars Folio DR (N) CR (N) N From the above table the column for particulars is meant for entering the names of the items to be either debited or credited.
Folio column serves as a reference column in which items like page number or any reference number applicable to the entry is recorded.
Debit and Credit columns carry the amounts that will either be debited or credited to the respective accounts in the ledger as the case may be.
EXAMPLE 5 Show the following transactions in the General Journal of DBA Ltd for the month of Januar y, 2006: N Jan 1 Started business with cash 100,000 3 Purchased Motor van of N150,000 and paid a deposit of N50,000 immediately 4 Purchased goods from K. Katu 25,000 Purchased goods in cash 30,000 Paid rent in cash 20,000 7 Sold goods in cash 32,000 8 Sold goods to Fatima 23,000 10 Returned goods by Fatima worth 1,500 14 Paid wages in cash 4,000 14 Paid insurance by cheque 500 51  SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE 5 In the books of DBA Ltd General Journal for the Month of January, 2006 Date Particulars Folio Debit Credit Jan. 2006 N N 1 Cash account to capital 100, 000 Being money used in starting the business 100, 000 Motor van account to Cash Creditor 3 150, 000 Being partial payment made on a fixed asset 50, 000 purchased 100, 000 Purchases account to K. Katu 4 Being purchase of goods made on credit 25, 000 Purchases account to cash 25, 000 Being cash purchases of goods made 4 Rent account to cash 30, 000 Being an expense incurred in cash 4 30, 000 Cash account to sales 20, 000 Being cash sales made to date 7 20, 000 Fatima’s account to sales 32, 000 Being goods sold on credit 8 32, 000 Returns inwards account to Fatima 23, 000 Being sales return made for goods previously 10 23, 000 sold 1, 500 Wages account to cash 1, 500 14 Being wages of employees paid in cash 4, 000 Insurance account to bank 4, 000 Being an expense incurred by cheque 500 14 500 52  4.0 CONCLUSION The discussion we have had above has given highlight on what a prime book is about.
It records daily transactions in a systematical and chronological manner as the occur and stated on source documents.
They are therefore, divided into special and general journals and are sometimes referred to as subsidiary books or books of original entry.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has: • Defined a Book of Prime Entry; • Explained the types of Books of Original Entry; and • Showed how transactions are recorded in Books of Prime Entry.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enter the following transactions in the respective journals Y- Lee Enterprises for the Month of August, 2007: Aug 5 Bought from K. Aja & Sons; 8 dining tables @ N2,000 each and 12 armless chairs @ N1, 200 each Invoice subject to 25% trade discount 7 Returned to K. Aja & Sons; 2 dining table which was damaged 13 Bought from John Holt & Co. Ltd 54 bags cement @ N1,750 a bag 100 Hausa mats @ N250 each Invoice subject to 5% trade discount.
18 Returned to John Holt & Co. Ltd, 4 bags of cement which coagulated 24 Purchased a Lorry from UTC Motors for N300,000 on credit.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT Q1.
Define books of prime entry and write short notes on the followings a) Purchase Journal b) Purchases Returns Journal c) Sales Journal d) Sales Returns Journal Q2.
Mr. UDENYI, a dealer in textile materials had the following assets and liabilities at 31st December, 19x7: N Furniture 1,210 Cash in hand 410 Creditor – J. Olawin 780 Loan – A. Oni 2,000 Debtors – B. Ashogbon 190 - A. Adeniji 270 Stock 4,120 Premises 29,500 Bank 2,750 53  His transactions for the month of January 19x8 were as follows: 3/1/x8 Purchased Ankara cloth from Aswani on credit N360 12/1/x8 Purchased suit materials from Five Star Textiles on credit for N2,000 18/1/x8 sold all the Ankara cloth pruhcased on 3/1/x8 for N600 cash 19/1/x8 Received cheque from B. Ashogbon for the balance due less 10% cash discount.
20/1/x8 Paid by cheque to A. Oni a half-year’s interest at 6% on the loan.
26/1/x8 Bought lace materials from NTM for N9,600.
28/1/x8 Purchased new furniture for use in his shop for N2,400 by cheque 30/1/x8 Received cheque of N140 from A. Adeniji and paid for sundry expenses N500 in cash.
You are required to: v. Prepare an opening journal at 1st January 19x8 vi.
Open the necessary books of prime entry to record the transactions for January 19x8 and post the ledger entries.
vii.
Balance the accounts as at 1st January, 19x8.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited 54  UNIT 9 CASH BOOK CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Cash Book 3.2 Ruling the Cash Book 3.2.1 One- Column Cash Book 3.2.2 Two- Column Cash Book 3.2.3 Three- Column Cash Book 3.3 Petty Cash Book 3.4 Contra Entries 3.5 Bank Overdraft 3.6 Dishonoured cheques 3.7 Rules for recording transactions in the Cash Book 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Almost every transaction results in the receipt or payment of money.
Hence, the cash book is a very important book because it records all cash receipts and payments of a business.
Without the cash book, the practice of accountancy will be difficult if not impossible since cash is the life wire of all organizations.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this study unit, you should: • Explain the nature and use of the cash book • Explain the different types of cash book • Rule a cash book • Prepare a One, Two, and Three- Columns Cash Book • Prepare a Petty Cash Book • Make Contra- Entries 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE CASH BOOK Cash Book is the book for recording detailed particulars of all money received and paid.
All cash transactions and transactions with cheque must pass through the cash book.
The cash book is a subsidiar y book and it is really part of the principal book called ledger.
It is the only book that combines the functions of the subsidiary and principal books.
The 55  cash and bank accounts are taken out of the ledger and combined into a single book called cash book.
It is the book for cash receipts, payments and transactions with cheques.
In the treatment of the cash book, the principle of Double- Entry system will remain unchanged.
Any transaction on credit must not appear in the book.
The term “cash book” covers the one- column, two- columns, three- columns and the petty cash book.
3.2 RULING THE CASH BOOK 3.2:1 One –column cash book The one column cashbook could either be strictly for cash transactions or bank (cheques) transactions only.
Its ruling is similar to that of a ledger account The Ruling of One-Column Cash Book Dr Cr Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount N N EXAMPLE 1 Enter the following transactions in a single column cash book of A.
B. Salami and balance off the accounts at the end of the period: Aug. 2007 N 1 commenced business with 20,000 1 Paid 3 months rent 1500 1 Bought stationary 100 2 Received from T. Kolade 10,000 3 Purchased goods paying cash 15,600 5 Purchased office furniture 4800 7 Sold goods for cash 9600 8 Cash sales 6700 10 Bought goods for cash 8500 10 Hired vehicle for conveying the goods to the business premises 450 12 Owner withdraws cash 1000 13 Paid for postage & use of phone 160 15 Paid half month wage of shop attendant 500 56  SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE 1 In the B ooks of A.
B. Salam i Cash Book for the Month of August, 2007 DR C R D ate Particulars Foli Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount o N N Aug. 1 Capital 20, 000 Aug. 1 Rent 1500 2T .
Kolade 10, 000 1S tationery 100 7 Sales 9, 600 3P urchases 15, 600 8S ales 6, 700 5O / Furniture 4, 800 10 Purchases 8, 500 10 Carriage inwards 450 12 Drawings 1000 13 Postages & phone 160 15 Wages 500 31 B alance C/d 13, 690 46, 300 46, 300 31 Balance B/d 13, 690 3.2:2 Two-column cash book This form of cash book is meant for recording transactions that have to do with cash and bank, cash and discounts, or bank and discounts only.
Dr. Two-column cash book Form at Cr.
Date Particulars Folio Cash Bank Date Particulars Folio Cash Bank N N N N EXAMPLE 2 Record the following transactions in a two-column cashbook of XYZ Ltd, and balance the cash book at the end of the period.
Jul.
2007, 1 Owner commenced business paying in the following amounts: N Cash 5,000 Cheque 25,000 The cheque was promptly paid into the bank 1 Paid licensing fees for business premises by cash 600 2 Paid rent for 6 months by cash 3,000 2 Bought goods and paid cheque 18,000 3 Bought a M/cycle for owner’s use in connection with the business and paid cheque 4,800 5 Sold goods for cash 5,000 57  6 Paid all the sales proceeds into bank 7 Bought goods paying cheque 7,800 9 Sold goods receiving payment as follows: Cash 8,600 Cheque 9,200 10 Owner withdraws cash 3,000 12 Business withdraws cash from bank 5,000 15 Paid in cash motorcycle running expenses 260 16 Paid wages in cash 2,500 17 Sold goods & received cheque 8,400 19 Paid for postage & telephone bills 250 21 Business loaned money to I. Muda 3,000 ( a cheque was given) 25 Purchased goods paying N7,500 in cheque and transportation N380 by cash 27 Cash drawings by owner, N2,000 28 Sold goods N9,200 receiving cash, the whole of which was paid into bank the next day.
29 Paid electricity charges, N150 in cash 30 Paid wages in cash N 3,000 SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE 2 In the B ooks of XYZ Ltd Dr Cash book for the Month of July, 2007 Date CPra rticulars Foli Cash Bank Date Particulars Foli Cash Bank o o 58  N N N N July 1 Capital 5000 25000 July 1 License fees 600 5S ales 5000 Rent 3000 6C ash C 5000 Purchases 18000 9S ales 8600 9200 Motor cycle 4800 12B ank C 5000 Bank C 5000 17S ales 8400 Purchases 7800 28S ales 9200 Drawings 3000 29C ash C 9200 Cash C 5000 M/cycle expenses 260 Wages 2500 Postages & phone 250 Loan (I. Muda) 3000 31 Purchases 7500 Carriage inwards 380 Drawings 2000 Bank C 9200 Electricity 150 Wages 3000 Balance C/d 3,460 10,700 32,800 56,800 32,800 56,800 Balance B/d 3,460 10,700 3.2:3 Three-column cash Book The Cashbook, as mentioned earlier, is a book of prime entry and records Cash Account and Bank Account.
It does not stop there, it goes to the extent of having columns for recording both cash discount received and allowed.
Cash Discount Prompt payment will often be rewarded by a saving called cash discount.
The entries will be- Debit – Creditor’s account with the full amount due Credit – Bank (or cash) Amount with the actual payment sent - Discount Received Account with the discount received.
In practice, the discount element will be recorded in the discount column of the three- column cashbook.
Periodically this column will be totaled and the amount posted to the credit of Discount Received Account.
If discount is allowed to debtors who pay promptly, similar entries are made- Debit – Bank (or Cash) Account with the actual payment received.
- Discount Allowed Account with the amount of discount 59  Credit – Debtor’s personal account with the full amount due.
Again the discount column will be totaled periodically and posted to the debit of Discount Allowed Account.
Three Column Cash Book As its name implies this have three money columns on each ‘side’: one for cash, one for bank, and one to record discount.
Ruling of a Three- column cash book Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars Folio Discount Cash Bank Date Particulars Folio Discount Cash Bank N N N N N N EXAMPLE 3 Record the following transactions in a three-column cash book of A. Apuwa and balance the accounts at the end of the period.
N June, 2007: 1 Balance brought forward from May Cash 5,600 Bank (Overdraf t) 38,500 2 Sold goods receiving cheque in settlement 80,290 3 Bought goods amounting to N42,000 and paid N40,950 in full settlement by cheque 5 Paid to Omozogie stores on account of an old debt, cheque N13,000 and received discount of 450 8 Sold goods for cash 26,900 8 Paid into bank 30,000 10 Bought goods & paid cheque 22,000 discount received was 1,100 12 Paid electricity bill for previous month N360 cash 13 Withdraw from bank 5,000 15 Paid telephone charges 480 16 Paid wages in cash 1,800 18 Cash drawings by owner 2,500 20 Sold goods N36,400 & received cheque This amount was net of N1600 cash discount 60  23 Receiving cheque from Namallam (N12,000 subject to discount of 5%) in respect of debt owned since the previous month.
24 Sold goods for cash 8,600 25 Paid into bank 7,000 27 Paid rent in cash 650 28 Paid hotel & travelling expenses (cash) 1,200 29 Paid wages (cash ) 1,800 30 Paid insurance premium by cheque 1,900 SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE 8 In the B ooks of A. Apuwa Cash Book for the Month of June, 2007 DR Date CPaRrt iculars Folio Disc.
Cash Bank Date Particulars Folio Disc Cash Bank 61  N N N N N N June 1 Balance B/f 5600 June B1 alance B/f 38500 2S ales 80290 P3u rchases 1050 40950 8S ales 26900 S to re5s 450 12550 8C ash C 30000 B8a nk C 30000 13 Bank C 5000 P u r1c0h a ses 1100 20900 20 Sales 1600 36400 1E2l e ctricity 360 23 Namallam 600 11400 1C3a s h C 5000 24 Sales 8600 T e l1ep5h one 480 25 Cash C 7000 W16a ges 1800 D r a1w8i ngs 2500 B a n2k5 C 7000 R e n2t7 650 H o t2e8l & 1200 travelling W a2g9e s 1800 I n s u3r0a nce 1900 B a l3a0n ce C/d 310 45290 2,200 46,100 165,090 2,60406 ,100 165,090 30 Balance B/d 310 45290 3.3 PETTY CASH BOOK There are various methods of dealing with small disbursements, the oldest methods being to supply a clerk with a round sum out of which to make payments for such small items as may occur; when the cash in hand is reduced to a small amount, a further sum is handed to him.
The book is ruled similar to a ledger account, with one cash column on each side.
The method of dealing with petty cash transactions, which is generally adopted nowadays, is known as the impress system.
In this system, a specified sum of money is allocated to the person in charge of the petty cash, which may be a petty cashier or any designated person.
The amount handed over at the beginning of a period is known as a float of which any amount expended from it is replenishable at some given intervals or at anytime when the float is getting exhausted.
Therefore, at the commencement of each new period, the balance of petty cash in hand is always the fixed ‘imprest’ amount.
The cheque for the advance to petty cash is entered in the cash book (Cr) and posted to the debit side of the petty cash book that contains analysis columns.
For analyzed expenditures, their totals are transferred, in most cases, to the nominal accounts in the General ledger.
By this method, the petty cash book is not only a book of original entry, but also an essential part of the double entry book-keeping, and the balance of petty cash in hand must therefore be included in the Trial Balance.
62  Format for Petty Cash book Receipts Date Particulars Folio Am ount Analysis Columns T&T M/E O/E Etc N N N N N N EXAMPLE 4 Jerotel Hotel maintains a petty cash system for the purpose of carrying on miscellaneous cash transactions.
The following petty cash transactions were undertaken during the first part of June 2004.
Record the transactions in the Petty Cash Book of the Hotel: N June 1 Received from cashier 2,000 2 Purchase of provisions 75 5 Purchase of foot mats 180 6 Repairs of furniture 124 8 Purchase of drinks 156 9 Purchase of groceries 42 11 Postage 48 15 Half month wage of security man 300 18 Servicing of motor vehicle 349 25 Fueling of M/Vehicle 630 30 Newspaper vendor 187 SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE 4 In the B ooks of Jeroteller Hotel Petty Cash Book for the month of June 2004 Office Furniture Postage Wages Motor Receipts Date Particulars Amount Refresh- Ment Expenses Maintenance expenses N June N N N N N N N 2000 1 Float 2 Provision 75 75 5 Foot mats 180 180 63  6 Furniture repairs 124 124 8 Drinks 156 15 9 Groceries 42 6 11 Postage 48 4 48 15 Wage 300 2 300 18 Servicing M/V.
349 349 25 Fueling of 630 630 Amt replenishable 1904 273 180 124 48 300 979 30 Cash Balance c/f 96 2,000 July 2,000 96 1 Cash balance b/f EXAMPLE 5 Using the following transactions, show the petty cash book - imprest system; of Olayinka Moses A/c.
All expenditure should not be more than N1000.
Replenishment is made when float runs out.
2007, Jan: 1 Issued N2,000 to petty Cashier 3 Purchased stamps N400 10 N200 was given to messenger as taxi fare 11 Office cleaner received N1,000 for cleaning materials 15 Paid B ikut Ltd N300 16 Replenishment 17 Gave Williams N400 to travel to Abuja.
20 Stamps bought N400 20 Bought Bics and Pencil N100 23 Taxi fares to bank N300 25 Shade & Co. received N600 on account 31 Replenishment.
PETTY CASH BOOK Receipt Date Particular Paym ents Amt Analysis N 2007 N N N N N N N Travel postage cleaningstationerySundries ledger 2,000 Jan.1 Cash (float) 3 Stamps 400 400 10 Taxi fares 200 200 64  11 Office cle.
1000 1000 15 Bikut Ltd 300 300 1900 16 Cash (Replenishmt) 18 Williams 400 400 20 Stamps 400 400 100 20 Bic & Pencil 100 23 Taxi fare 300 300 25 Shade & Co 600 600 1800 31 Cash (Replenishmt) 3700 900 800 1000 100 900 31 Balance c/d 2000 5,700 5700 2,000 Feb 1 Balance b/d 3.4 CONTRA ENTRIES These are entries made in cash book when cash is deposited into the bank account out of the cash in hand or when cash is withdrawn from the bank for office use.
(a) Cash paid into Bank Dr: Bank Column Cr: C ash Column with amount deposited (b) Cash withdrawn from the Bank Dr: Cash Column with value of cheque Cr: B ank Column 3.5 BANK OVERDRAFT The Bank account can be overdrawn.
The customer can take more than what he has in the bank to meet urgent needs.
This is refered to as granting of an overdraft to a customer.
In such a situation, the bank account balance will be on the credit side and it is a liability in the balance sheet.
3.6 Dishonoured Cheques These are cheques received from the customers but were rejected by the bank as a result of wrong signature, Incorrect amount and insufficient funds in the account.
When the cheque is received, the cash book is debited but when it is dishonoured, the cash book will be credited immediately.
3.7 RULES FOR RECORDING TRANSACTIONS IN THE CASH BOOK (i) C ash receipt from Debtors Dr: Cash Column Cr: Personal account of debtors (ii) Cheque receipts from debtors Dr: Bank Column Cr: Personal account of debtor 65  (iii) Cash Sales Dr: Cash Column Cr: Sales account in the ledger (iv) Sales by Cheque Dr: Bank column Cr: Sales account in the ledger (v) Income received (cash) Dr: Cash Column Cr: Income account in the ledger (vi) Income received (cheque) Dr: Bank column Cr: Income receivable account (vii) Cash receipts on sale of assets Dr: Cash column Cr: Asset account in the ledger (viii) Cheque receipts on sale Dr: Bank column Cr: Asset Account in the ledger (ix) C ash payments to creditors Dr: Creditors Account in the ledger Cr: C ash Column (x) Cheque payments to Creditors Dr: Creditors Account in the ledger Cr: B ank Column (xi) C ash purchases of goods Dr: Purchases account in the ledger Cr: C ash Column (xii) Cheque purchases of goods Dr: Purchases account in the ledger Cr: B ank column (xiii) Cash purchases of Assets Dr: Asset account in the ledger Cr: cash column (ivx) C heque Purchases of Assets Dr: Asset account Cr: B ank column 66  (xv) Cash paid for Expenses Dr: Expenses Account in the ledger Cr: C ash Column (xvi) Expenses paid with Cheque Dr: Expenses Account in the ledger Cr: B ank Column (xvii) Cash paid into bank Dr: Bank column Cr: C ash column (xviii) Cash withdrawn from bank Dr: Cash Column Cr: B ank Column (ixx) C ash withdrawn for personal use Dr: Drawings account Cr: C ash Column 4.0 CONCLUSION The cash book is part of the principal book, the ledger.
The cash book consists of the cash and bank accounts taken out of the ledger and bound separately for the sake of greater convenience.
It is also a book of original entry, as cash receipts and payments are not normally entered in the subsidiary books.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: Explain the nature and use of a cash book; Gave a hypothetical ruling of a typical cash book; Enumerated the different categories of a cash book; Illustrated how transactions are recorded in the cash book; Discussed and illustrated the preparation of a book; Discussed Contra- Entries; Explained Over- Drawn accounts; Explained treatment of dishonoured cheques; Discussed the rules for recording transactions in the cash book.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (a) What is a cash book?
Explain its use (b) Explain the terms ‘cash”, “contra”, “Dr”, and “Cr” in a cash book 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 67  1.
Rochas Okorocha started business first march, 200 x 9 with cash of N40,000 and the following transactions took place during the month.
March 2: Bought goods for cash 10,000 5: B ought furniture for cash 5,000 8: C ash Sales 15,000 11: Paid rent 1,500 12: C ash Sales 1,000 15: Lent C, Onuaha 5,000 18: B ought Stationery 500 19: Paid Wages 1,000 25: Purchased goods for cash 1,000 27: C .
Onuaha paid on account 2,500 28: R eceived from D Obadiah 10,000 29: C ash sales to date withdrew cash for private use 7,500 30: Paid D. Obadiah 5,000 paid Insurance premium 10,000 31: Purchases sales 5,000 Required Enter the transaction in the cash book of Rochas Okorocha 2.
ABC Ventures had the following transactions for the month of January 200 x 9 as follows: N Jan. 1 Balances Cash 7,000 Bank 8,000 3 Bought goods for cash 3,000 4 Bought stationery for cash 700 6 Paid A. Akole by cheque 3,000 9 Bought goods by cheque 3,500 12 Cash Sales 2,000 16 Withdrew cash from the 2,000 For Office use 18 Paid Insurance premium 2,500 By cash 21 Paid wages and salaries by 1,900 Cash 23 Cash sales paid into Bank 3,000 24 Bought goods by cheque 4,000 28 Drew cheque for private use 1,500 29 Paid cash into Bank 3,000 30 Bought furniture by cheque 6,000 Required 68  Enter the above transactions in the cash book of ABC Ventures for the month of Januar y 20 * 9 7.0REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Bastor, A.
(1979).
Elements of Accounts For Elementar y and Intermediate Stage Students, London: Casell Ltd Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts, London: Pitman Books Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A and Kazeem,R.
A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Tamaza Publishing Company Limited UNIT 10 CLASSIFICATION OF ACCOUNTS CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0 Objectives 69  3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of an Account 3.2 Entering Accounts 3.2.1 Debit and Credit 3.2.2 The Balance 3.3 Classification of Accounts 3.3.1 Personal Account 3.3.2 Impersonal Account 3.4 Rules for Debiting and Crediting Accounts 3.4.1 Tabular Representation 3.4.2 Summary of Rules for Entering Accounts 3.4.3 How to make an Entry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION It was shown in one of the previous units that changes in the value of assets and liabilities could be calculated arithmetically, but the method shown would not be suitable if the number of transactions were very large.
Moreover, the calculation itself did not show whether the item was an asset or a liability, and gave no indication of the nature of the transaction.
To overcome such difficulties, these calculations are embodied in ‘accounts’.
(‘Account” is usually abbreviated to ‘Alc’).
This unit discusses how to make entries into an account and the classification of Accounts.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this study unit, you should: • Define an Account • Record transactions in an Account • Correct and classify transactions into their respective classes • Balancing an Account 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION OF AN ACCOUNT Longe and Kazeem (2006: 29) defined an account as a record in a double entry system that is kept for each class of asset liability, revenue and expense and Garbutt (1982: 106) sees an account as a ledger record in a summarized form of all the transactions that have taken place with the particular person or value specified.
The principles of double entering book keeping are applied in recording transactions in accounts.
3.2 ENTERING ACCOUNTS A separate account (sometimes more than one) is opened for each asset and each liability.
It takes, roughly, the form of the letter ‘T’ 70  The name of the asset or liability to which the account refers is written on the horizontal line.
The vertical line divides the amount into two sides, one side to show additions and the other to show deductions.
Thus, the ‘pulses’ are kept together on one side and the ‘minuses’ on the other, and the difference between the two sides will show the value of the asset or liability.
3.2.1 Debit and Credit The left- handed side of an account is known as the ‘debit- side’.
It is usually abbreviated to ‘Dr’.
an entry on the debit side is called a ‘debit entry’.
An account is said to have been ‘debited’ if an entry is made on its debit side.
The right- hand side is known as the ‘credit side’, abbreviated usually to ‘Cr’.
An entry on the credit side is called a ‘credit entry’.
An account is said to have b‘cereend i ted’ if an entry is made on its credit side.
It is customar y (but not essential) for the sides of the accounts to be indicated in the heading.
An account for cash Bank would appear as follows: Dr Cash at bank Cr 3.2.2 The Balance The difference between the two sides of an account (which, as stated above, represents the value of the asset or liability) is known as the ‘balance’.
If the debit side is larger than the credit side, the balance is a ‘debit balance’.
If the credit side is larger than the debit side, the balance is a ‘credit balance’.
If there is only one item in an account, the balance is equal to that item.
If the item is on the debit side, the balance will be a debit balance.
If the item is on the credit side, the balance will be a credit balance.
The balance is so called because if a sum equal to the difference between the sides is placed on the smaller side, both sides would then be equal, or ‘in balance’.
3.3 CLASSIFICATION OF ACCOUNTS Accounts can be classified into: I.
Personal account II.
Impersonal account 3.3:1 Personal account These are accounts for the names of individuals, firms and business enterprises e. g Segun account, Mohammed Nigeria Ltd Accounts, Debtors and Creditors account.
3.3:2 Impersonal account 71  These are accounts for properties, item of expenditures and income.
It can be divided into two namely: (a) Real account: These are accounts for things we can see, touch or move.
They are accounts for assets e. g land and building account, machinery account e. t. c. (b) Nominal account: These are accounts for expenses incurred, Income received, losses and gains e. g rent account, discount received account, discount allowed account, Interest account e. t. c. 3.4 RUL ES FOR DEBITING AND CREDITING ACCOUNTS I.
The account which “receives” is debited with the value that comes into the account II.
The account which “gives” is credited with the value that goes out of the account.
These rules can now be applied to the classes of account.
3.4:1 Tabular Representation Classes of accounts Debit side Credit side (i) Cash account Money received Money paid (ii) Personal account Receiving Giving (iii) Real account Asset bought Asset sold (iv) Norminal accounts Expenses and losses Profit, Incomes And gains 3.4:2 Summary of Rules for Entering Accounts Debit (a) Assets Credit (a) Liabilities (b) Additions to (b) Additions to liabilities Assets (c) Deductions from assets (c) Deductions from Liabilities 3.4:3 How to m ake an Entry The date of each transaction is entered in the accounts, and a brief description of its nature 4.0 CONCLUSION It is very important that you commit the rules for Debiting and Crediting of accounts to memory as this infor ms the first step in opening accounts for assets and liabilities, including capital.
72  5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: • Attempted a definition of an account • Explained how entries are made in accounts • Gave a classification of accounts • Discussed Rules for Debiting and Crediting Accounts • Explained how an Account is Balanced SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS a.
What is a debit balance?
b.
What is a credit balance?
c. You are required to complete the following table showing which account to be debited and those to be credited: I.
Started business with money in cash II.
Paid part of the opening cash into the bank III.
Bought goods on credit from Abdullahi IV.
Sold goods on credit to Akpan V. A motor car was sold for cash VI.
Cash purchases VII.
Oluwatosin returned goods to us VIII.
We returned goods to Abdullahi IX.
Dare lent us cash X.
Received commission in cash 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Q1.
Complete the following table showing the accounts to be debited and credited a.
Goods returned to Olalade b.
Goods sold for cash c. Cash sales d. Machinery purchased for cash e. Motor car purchased on credit from Abu Abdusalam f. Received rent in cash from tenants g. Fixtures sold for cash h. Goods sold, a cheque being received immediately i.
Paid rent by cash j.
Paid general expenses by cheque k. Paid telephone by cheque l. R eceived by cheque a refund of Insurance already paid 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, London: Abina Publishers 73  Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing Company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited UNIT 11 LEDGER ACCOUNTING CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0 Objectives 74  3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Ledger 3.1.1 Ruling of the Ledger 3.2 Classification of Ledger Accounts 3.3 The Rules for Debiting and Crediting Ledger Accounts 3.4 Capital and Revenue Expenditures 3.5 Application of Double- Entry System in the Ledger 3.6 Posting to the Ledger 3.7 Balancing a Ledger Account 3.8 Interpretation of Account Balances 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The ledger is the final destination of all transactions in the subsidiary books.
It is a Principal Book and the most important book of account.
The ledger serves as a means of keeping permanent records of assets, liabilities, Income and expenses and the Trial balance is usually extracted from the standing balances in the ledger accounts at the end of the accounting period.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this study unit, you should be able to: • Explain Ledger Accounting • State the Division of Accounts • Differentiate between various classes of accounts • State the Rules for Debiting and Crediting Ledger Accounts • Apply Double- Entry System in Ledger Accounting • Post transactions to the Ledger • Balance ledger accounts • Interpret Account Balances 3.1 THE LEDGER The ledger is the principal book of account because the outputs of all the other books of original entry are posted into it for balancing and because balances extracted from it are regarded as final summaries to be used in the trial balance.
The ledger is rationally used in keeping accounts.
The ledger is usually divided into a number of separate books, each of which is allocated to a particular class of transactions.
For example, the account of all persons from whom a trader purchases goods, that is, his creditors.
3.1.1 Ruling of the Ledger The ledger is ruled thus: 75  Name of Account Cr Dr Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Am ount N N Particulars – short description of the corresponding entry Folio – number of page or any reference number on which the double entry is found.
3.2 Classification of Ledger Accounts Some authors describe all accounts either as personal accounts or as impersonal accounts.
Personal accounts are accounts of debtors and creditors, which are kept to each of the credit customers or suppliers of a business.
The word ‘personal’; means the purchases or a sale recorded in a personal account is between the business and another specified business or other organizations or individuals.
It does not mean transactions between two individual people.
Personal accounts are kept in personal ledgers.
There are two of these: a.
The sales ledger-personal accounts of credit customers (debtors) b.
The bought ledger or purchase ledger-keeps the personal accounts of suppliers (creditors).
.
Impersonal accounts are further divided into Real Accounts and Nominal Accounts.
Real accounts refer to accounts in which property is recorded such as buildings, machinery or stocks.
Nominal accounts, on the other hand, are those, which are concerned with revenues and expenses.
They relate to types of expenses- rent, rates, insurance, electricity, telephone, postage, etcetera - rather than the person to whom the money is paid, because they are more concerned with the reasons for payment than the person to be paid.
The diagram for this classification is shown below: Ledger Accounts Personal Accounts Impersonal Accounts Debtors Accounts Creditors Accounts Real Accounts Nominal Accounts Revenues Expenses 76  3.3 The Rules for Debiting and Crediting Ledger Accounts (principles of each class of accounts) CASH ACCOUNT PERSONAL ACCOUNT Debit Credit Debit Credit Receipts Payments Receiver Giver REAL ACCOUNT NOMINAL AC COUNTS Debit Credit Debit Credit Property Property Expenses Income Acquired Realized & Loses & Gains 3.4 CAPITAL AND REVENUE EXPENDITURES It is essential to distinguish between expenditures and receipts of a Capital nature and expenditures and receipts of a revenue nature.
You can see the distinction in the way that the accounts have been grouped – Nominal (that is, Revenue receipts and Expenditures) and Real (that is, Capital receipts and expenditures).
The table below include examples of Capital & Revenue Receipts & Expenditures: REVENUE CAPITAL Receipts Expenditure Receipts Expenditure - Sales - Rent & Rates - Sale of Purchase of fixed - Discount - Purchases Fixed Assets Assets - Bad debt - Salaries & Wages - Loan - Repayment of loans recovered - Insurance - Issue of shares - Renovation of fixed - Rent - Trade expenses Assets received - Bad debt - Repairs of Fixed Assets 77  It is important to know why a distinction is essential.
To quote two extreme examples – first, if a capital or revenue expenditure is incurred, the entry will be made in the debit side of the item’s account, and then for the revenue and capital receipts, the treatment will be vice versa.
Second, if a new building costing N200,000 is debited to the profit and loss Account in the year of purchase, the profit (or the loss) for that year will be seriously affected either positively or negatively and will not reflect the correct result of trading.
Similarly, the sale of a building should not be included in the sales figure for the period in question.
Even if any profit (or loss) arises such sales, it should not be entered into the general trading results; otherwise, the effect would be to distort a trend from one year to the next.
Such profits and losses are of an unusual nature and should be identified as such even though they will contribute to the final profit and loss for the period.
Therefore, only profit or loss arising on fixed assets disposal should be shown in a Profit and Loss Account.
3.5 APPLICATION OF DOUBLE ENTRY SYSTEM IN THE LEDGER When confronted with any transaction, ask yourself three questions: I.
Which two accounts are affected?
Give them names II.
What types of account are they?
Classify them, for example, real, personal or nominal III.
Which one is to be debited and which is to be credited?
The account giving value is CREDITED and the account receiving value is DEBITED.
For proper understanding of accounting, you must commit to memory the principle which states that: 3.6 POSTING TO THE LEDGER Posting to the ledger is initiated through the journals or the main cash book/ petty cash book.
In making these postings, the double entry principle is strictly observed; similarly, posting errors should be avoided.
After postings are properly done into the ledger, the two sides of the ledger account are totaled and the ledger is balanced.
78  EXAMPLE 1 Post the following entries from the sales Journal to the ledger of Adebowole & Co. for the month of February 2005.
Date Particulars Folio Details A mount Feb. Oki & Oka Ltd N N 2 30 accounts text @ N350 each 10, 500 10 scientific calculators @ N250 each 2 , 5 0 0 1 3 , 0 0 0 Less 10% trade discount 1, 300 1 1 , 7 0 0 Kim Jat & sons 6 20 packets of eraser @ N55 per packet 1, 10 0 100 HB pencils @ N10 each 1, 000 Less 5% trade discounts 2, 1 0 0L e d g e r A c c o u n t s o f A d e b o w o l e & C o .
D1r0 5 1 , 9 9 5 SALES ACCOUNT 28 Transfer to the credit side of Sales account 13, 695 Dr SALES ACCOUNT CDrA TE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT N Feb. N 28 Sundries 13,695 Dr OKI & OKA LTD Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 2 Sales 11,700 79  Dr KIM JAT & SONS CDrA TE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 6 Sales 1,995 EXAMPLE 2 Post the following transactions from the Purchases Journal of Nicholas Ltd to the respective Ledger Accounts for the month of February 2008 Date Particulars Folio Details A m o u n t N N February 2 Jenni & co L t d 50 reams of duplicating papers @ N400 each.
2 0 , 0 0 0 100 bottles of glue @ N30 each 3, 000 23, 000 Modern Stores 3 100 Account texts @ N300 each 30, 000 50 packet of erasers @ N50 a packet.
2 , 5 0 0 150 HB pencils @ N8 each 1, 200 3 3 , 7 0 0 Less 3% trade discount 1, 011 32, 689 28 Transfer to the Dr side of purchases account.
55, 689 Ledger Accounts of Nicholas Ltd for the month of February 2008 Dr PURCHASES ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 28 Sundries 55, 689 80  Dr JENNI & CO. ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT N Feb. N 2 Purchases 23,000 Dr MODERN STORES ACCOUNT C rD ATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT N Feb. N 3 Purchases 32,689 EXAMPLE 3 Post the following entries from the General Journal to the Ledger of Jude Okpara & Co. for the month of February 2004 GENERAL JOURNAL Date Particulars Folio DR CFeRb ru a ry N 2 N Motor van 1 2 0 , 0 0 0 To cash 1 2 0 , 0 0 0 Being purchased of an asset in Cash.
3 Furniture & fittings 15, 0 0 0 To modern furnishing co. 1 5 , 0 0 0 Being purchases of an asset (F &F) on Credit.
5 Modern furnishing co. 10, 0 0 0 To bank 1 0 , 0 0 0 Being part- payment made to a creditor, Modern Furniture Co.. Accounts of Jude Okpara & Co. for the month of February 2004 6 Stationary 2 , 0 0 0 To cash 2 , 0 0 0 Being purchase of stationery in cash.
Dr MOTOR VAN ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 2 Cash 120,000 81  Dr FURNITURE & FITTINGS ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 3 Modern Furnishing Co. 15,000 Dr STATIONERY ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 6 Cash 2,000 Dr MODERN FURNISHING CO. ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N Feb. N 5 Bank 10,000 3 Furniture & 28 Balance C/d 5,000 Fittings 15,000 28 Balance B/d 5,000 Dr CASH ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N Feb. N 28 Balance C/d 122,000 2 Motor Van 120,000 6 Stationery 2,000 122,000 122,000 28 Balance B/d 122,000 Dr BANK ACCOUNT CDrA TE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT N Feb. N 5 Modern Furnishing Co. 10,000 82  EXAMPLE 4 Post the following transactions of Odido & Co. from the Cashbook to the respective ledger accounts of the business for the month of February 2007.
Dr Two Column Cash Book Cr Date Particulars folio Cash Bank Date Particulars Folio Cash BFeabn k N N Feb N 1 B a l a n cNe b /f 130, 000 80, 000 2 Machinery 100, 000 5 Oki & Oka Ltd 11, 000 5 Aliko & co 1 06, 0 0 0 Sales 20, 000 6 Rent 2 , 70 0 0 Cash 25, 000 6 Kings stores 3 2 , 6 0 0 6 Jenni & c o 2 3 , 0 0 0 7 Bank 2 5 , 0 0 0 7 Wages 1 2 , 0 0 0 7 Balance c/d 1 1 , 0 0 0 5 0 , 4 0 0 161, 000 105 000 161, 000 105, 000 7 Balance b/d 11,000 50,400 Dr OKI & OKA LTD ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT N Feb. N 5 Cash 11,000 Dr SALES ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT N Feb. N 6 Cash 20,000 Dr MACHINERY ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 2 Cash 100,000 83  Dr ALIKO & CO. ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 5 Bank 10,000 Dr RENT ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 6 Cash 2,000 Dr KINGS STORES ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 6 Bank 32,000 Dr JENNI & CO. ACCOUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 6 Cash 23,000 Dr WAGES AC COUNT Cr DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO AMOUNT Feb. N N 5 Bank 12,000 The posting from the cashbook has only one entry in the ledger because the first entry was made in the cash book.
84  3.7 BALANCING A LEDGER ACCOUNT Balancing an account involves the additions of the two sides of the account and finding the difference of the two totals, which will be used as balance carried down (bal.
c/d) and balance brought down (bal.
b/d) in the same account.
Balance carried down and balance brought down are often referred to as “Balance Carried Forward (Bal.
C/F)” if the balance will be taken to the beginning of another period and “Balance Brought Forward (Bal.
B/F)” if it is brought from another period.
Accounts with only one entry are given a single ruled line under their figures indicating balances brought down.
Balancing of an account is a necessity because it provides a summary of the account, which is used in providing useful accounting information to users.
3.8 INTERPRETATION OF ACCOUNT BALANCES I.
In a debtor’s account, the debit side is expected to be greater than the credit side, therefore, the balance c/d would be on the credit side of the debtor’s account, but when it is brought down (bal b/d) in the next period, it is a debit balance.
Therefore, a debit balance in debtor’s account, receivable accounts and other assets account represent an asset.
II.
In a creditor’s account, the credit side is usually greater than the debit side.
Balance c/d is on the debit side and balance b/d on the credit side.
This s a liability.
III.
The cash account will always be a debit balance, except where it is a bank account when it can be a credit balance (bank overdraft).
IV.
The capital account will always be a credit balance.
4.0 CONCLUSION Ledger accounts give the origin of every transaction and the parties involved.
They also show the details of the movement in each account.
Hence, the ledger is a ver y essential book containing a group of accounts with detailed Information useful for decision making.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: • Explained the concept of ledger accounting • Applied the Double- Entry Principle in ledger accounting • Posted transactions to the ledger • Balanced the accounts • Interpreted the balances SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS a.
What is a ledger?
State its characteristics b. Differentiate between a ledger and an account c. Summarize the principle of double entry in one sentence.
d. Write up the following transactions in the books of Arewa Consultative Forum Ltd and balance the accounts for the month of January, 2009: 85  Jan 1: Started business with N32,000 cash Jan 2: Purchased furniture by cash N4,800 Jan 3: Purchased stationery N 7,000 cash Jan 4: Purchased goods on credit from Mallam Abdulrahaman N10,000 Jan 15: Sold goods for N 12,000 cash Jan 18: Sold goods to Chai on credit N4,800 Jan 20: Paid advertisement expenses N2,000 Jan 25: Paid Mallam Abdulrahaman N7,000 cash, being part of settlement of goods purchased Jan 28: Paid rent in cash N30,000 Jan 31: Paid salaries and wages N 6,000 cash 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write up the following transactions in the books of Saminu Turaki and balance the accounts as at the last date: August 1: Started business with N 150,000 in the bank August 2: Bought motor van by cheque N 30,000 August 3: Withdrew cash N 5,000 from the bank for business use August5: Received Commission in Cash N 30,000 August 7: Paid rent in cash N 12,000 August 8: Paid electricity bill N 1,000 by cash August 9: Cash sales N 1,000 August 11: Cash purchases N 15,000 August 15: Paid wages by cash N 2,000 August 16: Sold goods on credit N 10,000 to Ayodele August 17: 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing Company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Garbutt, D. (1982).
Carter’s Advanced Accounts: A manual of Book- keeping and Accountancy for Students, London: Pitman Books Limited Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited 86  UNIT 12 THE TRIAL BALANCE CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition 3.2 Uses of a Trial Balance 3.3 Rules of the Trial Balance 3.4 Format of a Trial Balance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As stated in previous units, assets are usually entered on the debit side of an account, and the liabilities on the credit side, it is expected that the total of the debits would equal the total of the credits.
This is true because the total assets are equal to the liabilities plus the capital ( L + C = A ).
Also, that each subsequent transaction involved one entry on the debit side, and an equal entry on the credit side.
It follows that the total debit entries are still equal to the total credit entries provided no mistake has been made.
It is impossible to guarantee that no mistake will ever be made.
Therefore, as soon as all transactions are double- entered in the accounts, it is usually to make a preliminar y check upon the accuracy of the entries by taking out a “Trial Balance” to see if the total of all debit entries is equal to that of all the credit entries in each.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this study unit, you should be able to: • Define a Trial Balance • Discuss the Uses of a Trial Balance • Explain the Rules for extracting a Trial Balance • Extract the Trial Balance 3.0 THE TRIAL BALANCE 3.1 DEFINITION Trial Balance can be defined as a schedule or list that shows the debit and credit balances extracted from the ledgers, to show the arithmetical accuracy of the ledgers.
Ttehceh n ique ensures that debit and credit balances as displayed in the ledgers are compiled ( Longe & Kazeem, 2006: 68 ).
The objective of the Trial Balance is to prove the accuracy of the book- keeping.
All the ledger accounts must be balanced off and entered in the Trial B alance.
• 87  3.2 USES OF A TRIAL BALANCE The main uses of the trial balance are: a.
It helps in testing the accuracy of the double entry b.
Helps in the preparation of financial statements c. Assist in detecting errors of posting that can easily be identified by the trial balance.
3.3 RUL ES OF THE TRIAL BALANCE In preparing or extracting a Trial Balance from a list of extracted balances, the following items are recorded: Capital or Share Capital, including retained profits, should be entered in the credit column of the trial balance Drawings, including accumulated losses, should be entered in the debit side of the trial balance All assets, both fixed and current, should be entered in the debit column of the trial balance All expenses, including purchases and stationery, should be entered in the debit column of the trial balance All liabilities, including debentures, should be entered in the credit column of the trial balance All reserves and provisions, including depreciation, should be entered in the credit column of the trial balance All revenue, including sales and bad debt recovered, should be entered in the credit column of the trial balance.
3.4 FORMAT OF A TRIAL BALANCE The format of the trial balance is given below.
It has columns for particulars, debit and credit sides.
Because of the principle adopted, it must balance.
ABC LTD TRIAL BALANCE AS AT 31ST DECEMBER, 2008 Dr Cr N N Capital * Plant and Machinery * * Freehold Premises * Stock of beginning purchases * Sales * Rent and Rates * Wages and Salaries * Advertisement * Sundry expenses * Cash in hand * Bank overdraft * Debtors and creditors * * Furniture and fittings * 88  Bad debts * Provision for doubtful debts * Depreciation: Furniture and fittings * Motor van * Carriage outwards * Carriage inwards * Returns * Lighting * Telephone * Discount received * Discount allowed * Drawings * 10% loan * = = EXAMPLE Accomaeco Ltd has the following transactions for the first week of January 2006.
1 Started business with cash at N 500, 000 2 Bought delivery van from SCOA motors N350, 000 and paid cash of N50, 000 as deposit.
3 Purchased goods of N50, 000 in cash and that same date purchased goods worth N200, 000 on credit from modern stores.
3 Paid rent of N120, 000 in cash 4 Purchased office furniture in cash N20, 000 4 Sold goods to Kim & sons N300, 000 5 Sold goods in cash N150, 000 6 Kim & Sons returned goods of N30, 000 7 Cash sales N40,000 7 Paid wages N8,000 7 Paid SCOA motors N150,000 You are required to journalize the above transactions, post to the ledger and extract a trial balance.
SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE In the books of Accomaeco Ltd Sales Journal (SJ) Date Particulars Folio Details Total Jan N 4 N Kim & Sons 300, 000 7 Transfer to the credit Side of sales account 300, 000 89  Sales Returns Journal (SRJ) Date Particulars Folio Details Total January N N 5 Kim & Sons 30, 000 7 Transfer to the debit side of sales returns account.
30, 000 Purchases Journal (PJ) Date Particulars Folio Details Amount Jan. N 2 N Modern Stores 200, 000 7 Transfer to the debit Side of purchases Account 2 0 0 , 0 0 0 General Journal Date Particulars Folio DR CJaRn .
N 2 N D elivery Van 350, 000 To cash 5 0 , 0 0 0 SCOA motors 3 0 0 , 0 0 0 Being purchased of an A s s e t o n c r ed it & d e p o si t in g N50, 000 immediately.
DR Cash book for the Month of January, 2006 CR Date Particular Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 1 Capital 500,000 2 Delivery Van 50, 0 050 Sales 150, 000 2 Purchases 5 07, 0 00 Sales 40, 000 3 rent 1 2 0 , 0 0 0 3 Office furniture 2 0 , 0 0 0 7 Wages 8 0 0 0 7 SCOA motors 1 5 0 , 0 0 0 7 Balance c /d 2 9 2 , 0 0 0 690, 000 6 970 , 0 0 0 Balance b/d 292, 000 90  THE LEDGER ACCOUNTS Dr Capital Account Cr Date particular folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount N Jan N 1 Cash 2 500, 000 Dr Sales Account Cr Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 7 Balance c/d 490,000 5 Cash 150, 0 0 0 7 Cash 4 0 , 0 0 0 7 Sundries 3 0 0 , 0 0 0 490, 000 490, 000 7 Balance b/d 490, 000 Dr Delivery van Cr Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 2 SCOA motor 350, 000 7 Balance c/d 350, 000 350, 000 3 5 0 , 0 0 0 7 Balance b/d 350, 000 Dr Purchases Account C r D a te Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 2 Cash 50, 000 7 Balances c/d 250, 0 0 0 7 Sundries PJ 200, 000 250, 000 250, 000 7 Balance b/d 250, 000 Dr Rent Account C r Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 3 Cash 120, 000 91  Dr Office Furniture Account C r Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 3 Cash 20, 000 Dr Wages Account C r Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 7 Cash 8, 000 Dr SCOA Motors Account Cr Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 2 Cash 50,000 2 Delivery van 350, 000 7 Cash 150, 000 7 Balance C/d 150, 000 350, 000 3 5 0 , 0 0 0 7 Balance b/d 150, 000 Dr Returns Inward Account C r Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 7 Kim & Sons SRJ 30, 000 Dr Kim & Sons Account C r Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 4 Sales 300, 000 5 Returns 30, 0 0 0 7 Balance c/d 2 7 0 , 0 0 0 300, 000 300, 000 7 Balance b/d 270, 000 92  Dr Modern Stores Account C r Date Particulars Folio Amount Date Particulars Folio Amount Jan N Jan N 2 Purchases 200, 000 ACCOMAECO LTD Trial Balance as at 7/01/2006 Particulars Folio Dr Cr N N Capital 500, 000 Sales 490, 0 0 0 Delivery van 350, 000 Purchases 250, 000 Rent 120, 000 Office furniture 20, 000 Wages 8, 000 SCOA Motors 150, 000 Returns inwards 30, 000 Kim & Sons 270, 000 Modern Stores 200, 000 Cash 292, 000 1, 340, 000 1, 340, 000 Entries are usually made in the Trial Balance either directly from the ledger accounts or from a list of extracted balances brought down.
When a Trial Balance is prepared directly from the ledger accounts, only balances brought down are considered.
In carrying out this exercise, a debit balance brought down is entered in the debit column of the Trial Balance while a credit balance brought down is entered in the credit column of the Trial Balance.
Any self- balanced account is ignored.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: • Defined a Trial Balance • Itemized the uses of a Trial Balance • Discussed the guiding rules to be observed in preparing a Trial Balance • Extracted a Trial Balance 93  SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS Enter the following transactions in the cash book of Boko Haram, a sole trader, for the month of January 200 x 0 N Januar y: 1 Started business with cash 72,000 Bought goods for cash 18,000 Sold goods for cash 4,400 Paid carriage 800 8 Paid advertising account 800 9 Okon paid cash on account 3,400 13 Lent Jane Oladele 8,000 17 Cash sales 8,500 19 Purchased goods by Cash 16,000 25 Paid wages 1,800 28 Cash sales 7,600 29 Jane Oladele paid on account 4,000 30 Paid rent 10,000 Required Open ledger accounts and extract the Trial Balance on 31st January 200 x 0 6.0 TUTOR-- MARKED ASSIGNMENT Accamaeco Limited started business on the 1st January, 2005 with the following assets and liability: Cash at Bank N80,000; Motor Vehicles N215,000, Buildings N320,000; Furniture and Fittings N20,000; and Loan from Sociology Bank N120,000.
You are required to set up proper books, of accounts as at 1/1/2005 bcoefnosried e ring the following: Januar y, 2005.
N 2.
Withdrew Cash from Bank for petty cash (float) - 10,000.
3.
Purchases - 60,000 5 Purchased goods from Adamson on credit; 18 pieces of accounting text books at N2000 each 15 pieces of micro Econs text books at N1500 each 25 pieces of Management text books at N1800 each Less 10% trade discount 7 Paid wages - 1200 8 Cash Sales - 68,000 9 Bought Stationery - 1,900 15 Paid Wages - 1,200 16 Taxi Fare to date - 600 17 Insurance - 1,500 18 Cash Sales to date - 80,000 18 Bought Delivery Van from Nuambs LTD for N85,000 on credit.
94  19 Bought two realms of duplicating papers N850 20 Goods sold to Jackson worth N66,000 on credit.
21 Goods worth N2,000 returned by Jackson 23 Paid R ailway Fares - N450 25 Paid Adamson the sum equal to the amount of Management Text books and was allowed N500 as discount.
28 Jackson paid on account and 23/4% was allowed to him for paying before the due date.
29 Paid Sociology Bank - N20, 000 30 Cash Sales to date - N38, 000 31 Salaries - N4, 000 N O :T E All receipts were banked immediately and all payments made by cheque except payments below N2,000, which were made from petty cash.
You are required to make the necessary entries and extract a trial balance as at 31st Januar y, 2005.
2 Mr. ABOH a dealer in textile materials had the following assets and liabilities at 31st December, 19x7: N Furniture 1,210 Cash in hand 410 Creditor – J. Olawin 780 Loan – A. Oni 2,000 Debtors – B. Ashogbon 190 - A. Adeniji 270 Stock 4,120 Premises 29,500 Bank 2,750 His transactions for the month of January 19x8 were as follows: 3/1/x8 Purchased Ankara cloth from Aswani on credit N360 12/1/x8 Purchased suit materials from Five Star Textiles on credit for N2,000 18/1/x8 Sold all the Ankara cloth pruhcased on 3/1/x8 for N600 cash 19/1/x8 Received cheque from B. Ashogbon for the balance due less 10% cash discount.
20/1/x8 Paid by cheque to A. Oni a half-year’s interest at 6% on the loan.
26/1/x8 Bought lace materials from NTM for N9,600.
28/1/x8 Purchased new furniture for use in his shop for N2,400 by cheque 30/1/x8 Received cheque of N140 from A. Adeniji and paid for sundry expenses N500 in cash.
You are required to: Draw up a trial balance as at 1st January, 19x8.
95  7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and SystemPart 1, Study Pack, London: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing Company Limited Baston, A.
(1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students Cassell London Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited 96  UNIT 13 CORRECTION OF ERRORS CONTENT 1.0Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Errors 3.2 Types of Errors 3.2.1 Errors not affecting the balancing of a Trial Balance 3.3 Procedure for Correction of Errors 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION If the two sides of a Trial Balance are not equal, this is a proof of the existence of error.
There may, of course, be more than one error.
Such error(s) must be traced and corrected.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this study unit, you should be able to: • Explain the meaning of errors • Enumerate errors that do not affect the Trial Balance • Correct • errors that do not affect the balancing of a Trial Balance 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Errors According to Longe & Kazeem (2006:103), errors are mistakes made in tphree p aration of accounts, while Igben(2004:216) looks at errors as mistakes in the book- keeping entries, balancing of accounts or extraction of trial balance.
If an error is made in the books, it must be corrected.
Unless it is discovered immediately after the wrong entry is made.
it is not advisable to correct it by erasing the wrong figures and inserting the correct one, and the same is true of over-writing As.
far as possible, all corrections should be made by means of a rectification entry.
3.2 TYPES OF ERRORS Errors are divided into two categories as follows: (i) Errors not affecting the balancing of a Trial Balance, and (ii) Errors affecting the balancing of a Trial balance, 97  3.2.1 ERRORS NOT AFFECTING THE BALANCING OF A TRIAL BALANCE 3.2.1.1 Errors of Omission - this relates to transactions which are totally omitted from the account books, even though they appear on the source documents.
Consider the following: Source documents; Cash sales N20, 000 Purchases by cash N 6, 000* Paid rent N2, 0 0 0 Wages paid N1, 500 Prime Books; Dr Cash Book Cr N N Sales 20, 000 Rent 2, 000 Wages 1 , 5 0 0 Balance c/d 16, 5 0 0 20, 000 2 0B, a0l0a0n ce b/d 16, 500 *Transaction omitted from the books.
98  3.2.1.2 Errors of Original Entry – this may arise when an entry is made incorrectly in a book of prime entry and the incorrect amount is posted to the ledger.
It could be duplicating, under or over stating a figure, etc i) Consider the following with the assumption that a figure is understated: Source document; Cash sales N20, 0 0 0 Purchases by cash N6, 000< Paid rent N2, 0 0 0 Wages paid N1, 500 PErrirmore oBfo cookms mission:.
Dr Cash Book C r N N Sales 20, 000 Purchases 600 Rent 2 , 0 0 0 Wages 1 , 5 0 0 Balance c/d 15, 9 0 0 20, 000 2.
0, 000 B a l a n c e b /d 1 5 , 9 0 0 Journalizing <Transaction figure understated ii) Consider the following with the assumption that a figure is duplicated: Source documents: N Cash sales 20, 0 0 0 Purchases by cash 6, 000 Paid rent 2, 0 0 0 ^ Wages paid 1, 500 Prime Books Dr Cash Book Cr N N Sales 20,000 Purchases 6,000 Rent 2,000 Wages 1,500 Rent 2,000 Balance c/d 8,500 20,000 20,000 ^Transaction duplicated 99  3.2.1.3 Errors of Com mission:- This error is committed when an item of transaction is recorded in a wrong person’s account.
The error affects only the individuals’ accounts and not the figures in the Trial Balance.
Consider this the following: Source documents; Sold goods of N15, 000 to Suntai & co** Sold goods of N5, 000 to Suntai & Co Ltd Suntai & co returns part of the goods bought Worth N2000 SALES JOURNAL SALES RETURN JOURNAL Date Particular Folio Detail Total Date Particular Folio Detail Total N N N S u n ta iN & co 15, 000 Suntai & co 2 0 0 0 Suntai & Co. Ltd 5,000 Transfer to CR Transfer to DR Side of sales 20,000 of sales return 2000 Ledger accounts; Dr Suntai & co account Cr Dr Sales account C r N N N N S ales 5, 000** Returns 2, 000 Sundries (SJ) 20000 Balance c/d 3, 000 **Transaction swapped between Suntai & Co. and Suntai & Co. Ltd. 100  3.2.1.4 Errors of Principle:- This sort of error relates to entries of transactions in the wrong class of accounts e.g.
debiting an asset account instead of an expense account and vice versa.
Considered the following; Source document; N Cash sales 2 0 , 0 0 0 Purchases by cash 6, 000 Bought Motor Van 10,000^^ Paid for motor expenses in cash 2, 000^^ Prime book; Dr Cash Book C r N N Sales 20, 000 purchases 6, 0 0 0 Motor van 1 0 , 0 0 0 Motor expenses 2 , 0 0 0 Balance c/d 2 , 0 0 0 20, 000 2 0 , 0 0 0 balance b/d 2, 000 Ledger accounts: Dr Sales account Cr Dr Purchases account Cr N N N N Cash 20, 000 Cash 6, 000 Dr Motor expenses account Cr Dr Motor van account Cr N N N N C ash 10, 000 Cash 2, 000 ^^Transactions Swapped between Motor Van and Motor expenses accounts 3.2.1.5 Compensating Errors:- are errors which counteract each other and these do not affect the agreement of the trial balance e.g.
an over posting of N1, 500 on the debit side of the sales ledger may be compensated by an overcast of N 1, 500 in the additions of the Sales Journal.
101  Consider the following: Source document; Sold goods of N15, 000 to Sunday & co Sold goods of N5, 000 to Sundayo Ltd Prime Books; Sales Journal Date Particulars Folio Details Total (N) Sunday & co 1 5 , 0 0 0 Sundayo Ltd 5 , 0 0 0 Transfer to CR side sales a/c 19, 000^* Ledger accounts: Sales account Sunday & co a c c o u n t N N N N Sundries (SJ) 19, 000^* Sales 15, 000 Sundayo Ltd a c c o u n t N N Sales 4, 000^* ^*Figures Understated 3.2.1.6 Errors of Double Entry Principle:- This is an error that violates the golden principle of accounting and yet, it does not affect the balancing of the trial balance.
Example, where an entry from the ledger accounts is contrary to the principle of double entry, that is, an account to be debited is credited and vice versa.
102  Consider the following; Prime Books; Sales Journal Date Particulars Folio Details Total N S a f i y a N & co 1 5 , 0 0 0 Safiyatu Ltd 5 , 0 0 0 Transfer to the DR side of sales account 20, 000 Ledger accounts; Sales account Safiya & Co A c c o u n t N N N N Sundries (SJ) 20, 000# Sales 15, 000# Safiyatu Ltd a c c o u n t N N Sales 5, 000# #Entries completely reversed.
3.3 PROCEDURE FOR CORRECTION OF ERRORS Experience has revealed that the best possible way to correct mistakes is to analyse the mistakes .When there are errors in the account, the following steps should be taken: a.
You must be able to identify the type of error b.
You must identify the two accounts involved c. You must also be familiar with whether an account should have a debit or a credit balance.
Note that: I.
All asset accounts must have debit balances II.
All liability accounts must have credit balances III.
All income accounts must have credit balances IV.
All expense accounts must have debit balances V. Sales accounts must have credit balances VI.
Purchases accounts must have debit balances 103  d. Interpret the errors in the ledgers e. Correct the ledgers first before posting to the journal.
Example Show the journal entries to correct the following errors: a.
The purchase of furniture N60,000 had been entered in the furniture expenses account b.
Sales of goods N20,000 to Anyadibu had been completely ommited from the books.
c. The payment of cash to Ogundele N100,000 had been entered on the debit of cash book and credit side of Ogundele’s account d. Purchase of goods N300,000 from Adamu entered in Adama’s account e. The sales account is under cost by N600,000 as also is wages account.
f. Cash payment of N95,000 to Rare entered in the two accounts as N59,000 SOLUTION JOURNAL ENTRIES JOURNAL DR N CR N 1 Furniture account 60,000 Furniture expense account 60,000 Being purchase of furniture entered in Furniture expenses account now corrected 2 Sales 20,000 Anyadibu 20,000 Being sales of goods to Anyadibu omitted now corrected 3 Cash book 100,000 Ogundele 100,000 Being payment of cash to Ogundele mistakenly reversed now corrected 4 Adamu’s account 300,000 Adama’s account 300,000 Being purchase of goods from Adama mistakenly entered in Adamu’s account now corrected 5 Sales account 600,000 Wages account 600,000 Being correction of undercast of sales wages 6 Rare account 36,000 104  Cash book 36,000 Being correction of understated payment to Rare 4.0 CONCLUSION The preparation of a trial balance does not prove that transactions have been completely and correctly recorded in the proper accounts.
There are errors that do not affect the agreement of the trial balance and they have been comprehensively discussed in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: • Defined errors • Outlined errors not affecting Trial Balance agreement • Enumerated procedure for correcting such errors SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Show the journal entries necessary to correct the following errors: a.
Both purchases and returns outwards accounts were under cost by N 150,000 b.
Payment of cash to Sabiwu N 30,000 was completely omitted from the books c. Cash paid to Sardauna N 10,000 entered on the credit side of his account and debited to cash account.
d. Returns Inwards N 30,000 from Chukwuma was entered in Chukwude’s account e. Sales to Ayomoto N 107,000were entered in the books as N 701,000 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Defined errors b.
State and explain the errors that will not be disclosed by the trial balance c. After extracting the trial balance of Gigiring Ventures on 31st March, 2009, a difference of N 6,180 was discovered.
A renew of the ledger revealed the following errors: a.
A sum of N 720 on a creditor’s account was omitted from the balance of creditors b.
An item of furniture purchased for N 5,760 had been debited to repairs c. The payments side of the cash account had been undercost by N 3,900 d. The total of one page of the sales day book had been carried forward as N 12,924 whereas the correct amount was N 15,084 e. A debit note of N 1,260 received from a customer had been posted to the wrong side of his account.
f. Mr. Anzaku whose debts of 3,120 to the business had been written off, paid during the year.
His personal account was credited but no responding entry was made.
You are required to: I.
Prepare journal Entries to correct the errors II.
Write up the suspense account 105  7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing Company Limited Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited 106  STUDY UNIT 14 SUSPENSE ACCOUNT CONTENTS 1.0Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content – 3.1 Suspense Account 3.2 Errors that affect the Trial Balance 3.3 Steps involved in correcting errors 3.4 Correction of Errors 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Some errors will cause the trial balance not to balance.
For such errors which will affect the agreement of the trial balance will affect only one ledger account, thereby requiring one other account, which is the suspense Account for correction to be effected.
When the trial balance totals disagree and the errors are not discovered before the final accounts, it will be necessary to open a suspense account This unit discusses these errors which are likely to cause a difference in the trial balance.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should: • Explain what a suspense account is and its use • State errors disclosed by a Trial Balance • Outline steps involved in correcting the Errors • Correct errors that affect a Trial Balance 3.0 MAINT CONTENT 3.1 Suspense Account Suspense account can be defined as the account used to record the difference on a trial balance temporarily until the errors are detected and corrected.
Hence, the suspense account is an account in which the net difference in trial balance totals is recorded pending the location and correction of the errors causing the difference.
When errors affect the trial balance, it must pass through the suspense account.
107  The purpose of the suspense account is to record any discrepancy arising, from the disagreement of a trial balance.
It has two main characteristics: a) serves as an account because one of the entries of the double entry is entered while the corresponding entry goes to the affected account.
b) It serves as trial balance because no balance brought down occurs in it.
The two sides (debit and credit) automatically balanced.
A suspense account can function in many ways: i) It functions as a means of correcting errors.
ii) It functions as a means of placing an unknown or undefined amount.
It therefore serves as a temporary account where differences are accumulated until the causes of the differences are identified.
3.2 ERRORS THAT AFFECT A TRIAL BALANCE Errors affecting the balancing of a trial balance are: 1.
Errors in posting e.g transposition of figures, duplication of entries on the same side of the account, understatement or overstatement of figures etcetera.
2.
Balance unextracted.
3.
Balance extracted, but placed on wrong side of the trial balance 4.
Incomplete double entry of item or items 5.
Errors in balancing of opening figures 6.
Errors in addition.
7.
Error of transferring totals from subsidiary books (Journals) to the ledger.
8. listing a debit balance to the credit side of the trial balance and vice versa 9.
Making an entry on only one side of the accounts, omitting the second entry 3.3 STEPS INVOLVED IN CORRECTING ERRORS The procedures to be followed are: 1.
Identify the type of error 2.
If it is an error that will not affect the trial balance, it must not pass through the suspense account.
3.
If it is an error that will affect the agreement of the trial balance, it must pass through the suspense account 4.
Illustrate the errors in the ledgers and make the necessary corrections 5.
The corrections will now be posted to the journal.
3.4 CORRECTION OF ERRORS Errors, which affect or do not affect the trial balance, may come to light in a number of ways.
The disagreement of the trial balance where for instance, a difference of N15.75 is revealed by the trial balance, and investigation shows that N1.75 has been posted instead of N17.50 to the account of a creditor.
Furthermore, a complaint from a customer may reveal the fact that he has been charged erroneously with goods supplied to some other customers; any error of principle or a compensating error will very probably be discovered when the books are being audited and so on.
108  Whatever the type of error, being that affecting or not affecting the balancing of the trial balance, the entries necessary to correct these errors should be passed through the journal accompanied by adequate narration.
Thus, when a sale of N50 is debited in error to Simi & company instead of to Simi, the following correcting entry should be made in the Principal Journal and posted to the respective Ledger Accounts.
Principal Journal Date Particulars Dr. Cr.
N N Simi……………………….. Dr 50.
00 To Simi & company………………… 50.
00 Being correction of errors in posting, sales Day Book Folio In the case of errors which affect the agreement of the trial balance, the practice is frequently adopted in making that statement “balance” by inserting therein item “suspense” Account (Difference in Books)”.
Thus, if the debits in trial balance exceed the credits by N15.75 from the example above the trial balance (in skeleton form) would appear thus: - Dr C r N NSu ndry debit balances 80, 600.
00 Sundry credit balances 80, 584.
2S5u spense Account (Difference in books) 15.
75 N80, 600.
00 N80, 600.
00 A suspense account will be opened in the ledger and debited (or credited, as the case may be) with the amount of the difference; thus, in the above case it would be credited with N15.
75.
Dr Suspense Account Cr N N Trial balance 15.
75 Since the source of error is known in this case other entries may follow otherwise the entry would stop at suspense account until the error is discovered.
Thus; JOURNAL Date Particular Folio Dr (N) Cr (N) Suspense Account 15.
75 To creditors 15.
75 Being error of posting corrected accordingly 109  Dr Creditor Account/ledger Cr N N Suspense A/c 15.
75 Dr Suspense Account Cr N N Creditor 15.
75 Balance b/f 15.
75 The double entry shown above has been made possible because we assumed immediate discovery of our errors.
In the case where errors are not discovered till after the Trading and Profit and Loss Accounts and Balance sheet are prepared, the difference, which may be either a debit item or a credit item as in the above example, is usually shown in the balance sheet as “suspense account (Difference in Books)”.
EXAMPLE On extracting a trial balance of Adejoh and Co., it was discovered that there is a difference, which was carried to suspense account.
The following errors were subsequently located (i) a purchase of goods from Musa for N240.00 has been credited to the account of Wasiu (ii) A sale of goods to Mar y T. (N55.00) has been posted to the credit of her account.
(iii) Machinery sold for N380.00 had been credited to sales Account.
(iv) A sale of goods to Y. Blessedson had been correctly recorded in the sales Day Book as N240.00, but had been debited to his account as N24.00.
(v) The sales Day Book was under cast by N400.00 (vi) An amount of N60, being Rent Payable accrued in the previous period, had not been brought forward as a balance on Rent Account.
(vii) The Petty Cash balance of N25.00 was omitted from the Trial Balance.
(viii) Goods worth N100 sold to Nerat Ltd on credit has been mistakenly posted to the account of Noroh Ltd a debtor.
(ix) Goods purchased from Mitsen Plc for N300 not posted into the Prime books.
(x) Stationery purchased for N40.00 in cash has been posted to Cash Book as N4.00.
Give the Journal entries necessary to correct the books and show the entries that must be made in the Suspense Account.
110  SUGGESTED SOL UTION TO EXAMPLE IN THE BOOKS OF ADEJOH & CO. JOURNAL Dr (N) Cr (N) i Wasiu To Musa 240 Being correction of error in posting purchases to the credit 240 of Wasiu instead of Musa Ii Mary T. 110 To Suspense Account 110 Being entry necessary to correct posting of sale of N55 to the wrong side of her account iii Sales Account 380.00 To machinery 380.00 Being correction of error in posting proceeds of sale of machinery to sales account.
iv Y. Blessedson 216 To suspense account 216 Being correction of error in under debiting sale by 216 v Suspense account 400 To sales account 400 Being adjustment of error in under casting sales Day Book by N400 vi Suspense account 60.00 To rent account 60.00 Being adjustment of balance omitted vii Nerat Ltd 100.00 To Noroh Ltd 100.00 Being correction of an error of commission viii Purchases account 300.00 To Mitsen Plc 300 Being goods bought and invoice not posted ix Stationery account 36.00 Cash Book account 36.00 Being correction of error in under – crediting stationery in a Prime book.
NB: No Journal entry is required to correct the omission of the Petty Cash Balance of N25.00, which was omitted from the Trial Balance.
A credit entry of N25.00 to suspense account is therefore all that is necessary.
Dr SUSPENSE ACCOUNT Cr N N Sales 400 Trial Balance 109 Rent 60 Mary T. 110 111  Blessedson Y.
216 Petty Cash 25 N460 N460 When an error is discovered in either the Journal or the Ledger, it must be corrected.
Such an error is never erased, for this may indicate an effort to conceal something.
However, the method of correction will vary with the nature of error committed and the stage of the error in the accounting procedures at which it is discovered.
If an error is discovered in a Journal entry before posting, it may be corrected by ruling a single line through the incorrect amount or account name and writing the correct amount or account name above it.
Consider the Following: Source documents: N Sold goods to Soludo & co 20, 000 Sold goods to Sodengi Ltd 5, 000 Sold goods to Neta & sons 10, 000 PRIME BOOK: Sales Journal Date Particulars Folio Details Total N N Soludo & co 1 0 , 0 0 0 Sodengi Ltd 5 ,5 0 0 Neto & sons 10, 000 Note: Journal entries before correction PRIME BOOK: SALES JOURNAL DATE PARTICULARS FOLIO DETAILS TOTAL N N Soludo & co 20,000 Sodengi Ltd 5,000 Neta & Sons 10,000 35,000 Note: Journal entries after correction 112  As can be seen above, errors were made against the figure of Soludo & Co Sodengi Ltd and the name of Neta & Sons.
These were immediately corrected before the posting to the ledger took place.
Likewise, if an incorrect amount was posted to an account, you may correct it in the same manner if the account has not been balanced and trial balance extracted.
However, if an amount was posted to the wrong account, it is best to correct the error with a correcting journal entry.
For example, the following journal entry is used to record the purchase of motor accessories of N80, 500 in cash.
Journal (when an error was committed) Date Particulars Folio Details T o t a l NJu n e 1 4 M o t o r VNe hicles 80, 5 0 0 To Cash Journal (when error is detected) 8 0 , 5 0 0 Being purchase of motor accessories Date Particulars Folio Details Total June 17 MotoNr E x p e n s e s N 80, 5 0 0 To motor vehicles 8 0 , 5 0 0 Being correction of entry of June 14 in which motor vehicle account was debited in error for the purchase of accessories Again, whatever the type of error, except error of balances unextracted or extracted and placed on the wrong side of the trial balance, being that affecting or not affecting the balancing, of the trial balance, the entries necessary to correct these errors should pass through the journal accompanied by adequate narration as demonstrated above.
4.0 CONCLUSION Mistakes in accounting can only be rectified when you know their sources.
It is always advisable to interpret the errors in the ledger before correction.
The Suspense Account is an account that is usually used to correct errors especially errors that always puts off the equality of the Trial Balance 5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: • Discussed the suspense account • Outlined some errors that affect the balancing of a Trial Balance • Enumerated the steps involved in correcting errors • Demonstrated how errors affecting the Trial Balance are corrected SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 113  1.
The trial balance of Deji Company on 31st March, 1995 did not balance.
He opened a suspense account for the difference and then prepared his financial statements.
His balance sheet is as follows: Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 1995.
N N N Capital 1/4/94 6093 Fixed Assets 1,900 Add Net Profit 2 , 9 7C 0 u rrent Assets 9,063 Stock 2,146 Less Drawings 2,500 Debtors 3,142 6,563 Cash 1,862 7,150 Creditors 2,475 Suspense A/c 12 N9,050 N9,050 The following errors were discovered in April, 1995: i) Bank Charges of N7 was entered in Cash Book but the double entry was not completed.
ii) Loss on sales of fixed asset of N12 was correctly entered in the Motor Van account but had been charged to depreciation account as N21.
iii) A cheque of N86 for the purchase of fixed asset had been correctly entered in the cash book but entered in the asset account as N66.
iv) A sale of goods to Mr. Bello for N46 was correctly entered in the sales Day Book but was posted to Bello’s account as N64.
v) A credit note for N17 received from Femi, a Creditor, has been correctly entered in the subsidiary records but posted to Femi’s account as N19.
vi) The debit balance of N122 on Mallam’s account in the sales ledger on 28th Februar y was carried down as N132 and included in the trial balance at this figure.
You are required to: a) Make the journal entries required to correct these errors b) Show the suspense account in the ledger.
c) Calculate the correct amount of profit for the month of March 1995 d) Draw up the corrected balance sheet as at 31st March, 1995.
2. a) Certain errors do not cause a difference in the trial balance.
List any four of such errors and give an example of each.
114  b) The trial balance of Efforter Enterprises failed to balance on 31st December, 2007.
The sum of the credits was greater than the sum of the debits by N9,080.
On checking through the books the following errors were discovered: 1.
Sales account was overcast by N5,680.
2.
Discount allowed of N450 was credited to Discount received the correct entry was made in the debtors accounts.
3.
The account of P. Dalo, a debtor, was debited with credit sales of N370 to A Dalo.
4.
Purchases of N8,780 were correctly credited to Bank, while N7,870 was debited to Purchases Account.
5.
A cheque of N1,500 received from a Customer for goods supplied was credited to bank and debited to the sales account.
6.
Stationery of N170 bought from petty cash was debited to petty cash account, but the correct entry was made in the stationery account.
7.
Sales returns of N280 for cash were recorded by crediting cash account and sales returns account and also debiting sales accounts.
8.
Motor Vehicle repairs of N720 paid by cheque were not recorded in the books.
9.
Bad debts of N500 (written off): were recorded by crediting provision for bad debts account and also crediting sundry Debtors accounts.
10.
Carriage inwards paid from petty cash N650 was credited to correct petty cash account only.
You are required to: a) Make journal entries to correct the errors.
b) Open a suspense account and show how the entries will appear.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
The trial balance of Deji Company on 31st March, 1995 did not balance.
He opened a suspense account for the difference and then prepared his financial statements.
His balance sheet is as follows: Balance Sheet as at 31st March, 1995.
N N N Capital 1/4/94 6093 Fixed Assets 1,900 Add Net Profit 2 , 9 7C 0 u rrent Assets 9,063 Stock 2,146 115  Less Drawings 2,500 Debtors 3,142 6,563 Cash 1,862 7,150 Creditors 2,475 Suspense A/c 12 N9,050 N9,050 The following errors were discovered in April, 1995: vii) Bank Charges of N7 was entered in Cash Book but the double entry was not completed.
viii) Loss on sales of fixed asset of N12 was correctly entered in the Motor Van account but had been charged to depreciation account as N21.
ix) A cheque of N86 for the purchase of fixed asset had been correctly entered in the cash book but entered in the asset account as N66.
x) A sale of goods to Mr. Bello for N46 was correctly entered in the sales Day Book but was posted to Bello’s account as N64.
xi) A credit note for N17 received from Femi, a Creditor, has been correctly entered in the subsidiary records but posted to Femi’s account as N19.
xii) The debit balance of N122 on Mallam’s account in the sales ledger on 28th Februar y was carried down as N132 and included in the trial balance at this figure.
You are required to: a) Show the suspense account in the ledger.
b) Calculate the correct amount of profit for the month of March 1995 d) Draw up the corrected balance sheet as at 31st March, 1995.
2.
The trial balance of Taimako & Co as at 1st December, 1994 did not balance.
The following errors were discovered.
1.
Cash purchases of N5,525 were credited to the bank account but N5,255 was debited to the purchases account.
2.
Rent received from a tenant of N200 was credited both to the rent received account and the Bank account.
3.
Bad debts recovered N160, was debited to debtors account and no credit entry was made.
4.
Sales return of N82 was mistaken for Purchases and the correct entries for purchases were made (cash was refunded to the customers).
5.
A debit balance of N172 on stationery account was listed on the credit balance.
116  6.
Furniture purchased on credit for N5,000 was credited to the furniture account and no other entry was made.
7.
An electric bill of N224 paid, was credited to bank account as N424 and debited to electricity account as N442.
8.
N230 paid to James Amusa a creditor, was credited to Jimmy Amusa, a debtor, and also credited to the bank account.
You are required to: a) Determine which column of the trial balance is greater than the other by posting the entries stated above and by how much.
b) Prepare a suspense account to effect the correction of the detected errors.
c) List five types of errors that can be made without affecting the trial balance.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing company Limited Baston, A (1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary and Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited 117  STUDY UNIT 15 BANKING SYSTEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of B ank Accounts 3.1.1 Current Account 3.1.2 Deposit Account 3.1.3 Loan Account 3.1.4 Savings Account 3.2 Inter- Bank Transfers 3.3 Bank Statement 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the ways a business can guide against loss of cash through theft and fraud is to open and maintain a bank account.
Apart from guiding against theft, a business entry or customer can also enjoy some credit facilities and benefit from other professional services.
In this Study Unit, Banking matters that are relevant to you have been extensively discussed.
2.0 LEARNING OBJECTIVES At the end of this study unit, you should • Explain the types of Bank accounts a business or individual can open • Discuss how Inter- Bank Transfer are done • Define a Bank statement 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TYPES OF BANK ACCOUNTS 118  Banks offer various types of accounts for both existing and potential customers.
Specifically, for a commercial undertaking, there are three main types of accounts which are usually available: current Accounts; Deposit Accounts and Loan Accounts.
3.1.1 Current A ccount This is the account, which must be held if cheques are be used.
Of course before any cheque can be drawn, there must be sufficient money in the bank account to cover it.
If not, drawings in excess of monies, which have been lodged, will cause an overdraft, if there is an understanding between the customer and the bank.
Anything to the contrary will cause the cheques to ‘bounce’ or be “dishonoured”.
The normal situation will be that customers will be owed money by the bank; that is, customers will be creditors.
Where customers overdrew their accounts however, they are debtors of the bank.
In the books of such a business, therefore, the bank will be shown as a creditor.
In banking transactions, via current account, three parties are involved in most cases - the bank; the holder of the cheque account (Current Account) and the holder of an issued cheque who will be going to present it to the bank for payment.
They are respectively called drawee, drawer and payee, respectively.
3.1.2 Deposit Account A deposit account will be opened for a customer, when that party has a surplus of funds over day to day needs.
Interest will be paid proportionately to the period of deposit (if it is call deposit) which is normally retired on demand.
If it is a time deposit, prescribed period will be required before monies can be drawn off, although in effect money can be drawn on demand provided the customer is prepared to be penalized by a loss of interest.
However, tenors vary for “time deposits” (that is, 30,60 or 90 days).
Withdrawal can only be met on or after the maturity date.
Withdrawal before maturity date attracts similar penalty with call deposit.
The precise terms for operating a deposit account tend to vary from bank to bank.
No cheque book is issued for deposit accounts.
3.1.3 Loan Account If a customer makes a special arrangement with the bank for a loan, an account separate from the current account will be opened and called a loan account.
The amount of the loan will be transferred to the credit of the beneficiary’s current account while the loan account is debited with same amount.
Repayments will probably be debited to the current account and credited to the loan account in accordance with a predetermined arrangement.
Probably interest on the loan account will also be debited to the current account.
3.1.4 Savings Account This type of account is meant for the small savers to keep their surplus funds.
This account is usually opened by individuals, clubs, associations, salary earners, petty traders e. t. c. Customers may not be granted overdraft facilities on this type of account and Interest is payable on the sum standing to the customer’s credit.
3.2 INTER- BANK TRANSFERS 119  Through the use of computer and the Internet, a lot of electronic equipment is now available which enables banks to transfer funds from the account of one customer to another without the need for exchange of paper document.
This electronic equipment is turning the monetary system to a cashless society.
At present in Nigeria, some of the available Electronic banking products are: i. Auto- Teller Machines (ATM) ii.
Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) iii.
Electronic Fund Transfer at point of sale (EFTPOS) iv.
Electronic Card Products (Debit Card) There are two popular debit cards; a.
Pass Card b.
Smart Card c. Credit Cards There are two basic types of credit cards: a.
Bank Credit Cards b. Non- bank Credit Cards 3.3 BANK STATEMENT A business enterprise will record money paid into the bank and the sums drawn from the bank with cheques in the cash book.
On the other hand, the bank will record all the transactions in its books.
The book which the bank prepares showing the transactions between it and the customer is known as “Bank Statement” the bank usually sends a bank statement to its customer at the end of every month.
The statement contains details of the receipts and payments by and on behalf of the customer for that period.
Receipts will include cash paid into the customer’s account and those paid by third parties direct into the bank.
Until the customer receives the bank statement or a credit advice in respect of the direct credit to his bank account, the business may not be aware of it or the amount involved.
Payment or withdrawal will also include details of cheques issued by the customer, bank charges and payments made on behalf of the customer to third parties by the bank (if the customer so directs the bank, this is called a standing order).
The balance at the end of the period represents the balance as per bank statement.
This balance can be a credit balance (favourable) or a debit balance (Roevmeredmrabfet)r. th ough that in the cash book of the customer, a favourable balance is a debit balance and a credit balance is an overdraft.
As a matter of necessity, the balances of the cash book and bank statement must be equal.
But at a given date, the balances of the cash book are unlikely to agree with the balance on the bank statement due to certain reasons which are discussed shortly.
When there is a difference between the balances, then there is need for reconciliation.
120  3.4 Payee This is a person in whom a cheque bears his name or a person who presents a bearer’s cheque that does not carry anybody’s name.
3.5 Drawer Drawer is the person or firm that issues out a cheque to its supplier (payee) or some other persons to be presented to the bank.
3.6 Drawee Drawee is the bank that will pay/honour the cheque that has been drawn on behalf of the customer (drawer), who operates an account with them, for the benefit of the supplier (payee).
3.7 Debit Balance A debit balance on a bank statement shows that the customer has no money in the account rather; he/she owes the bank.
The technical word for this sort of balance is known as overdraft.
This contrasts with the balance as shown in the cash book (bank column) because an overdraft is known as a credit balance and a debit balance means the customer has money.
3.8 Credit Balance This in the bank statement shows that the customer has money, whereas the cashbook (bank column) credit balance means a bank overdraft, whilst a debit balance means there is money in the account.
4.0 CONCLUSION One of the ways to guide against loss of Cash through theft and fraud is to open and maintain a Bank Account.
Apart from guiding theft a business entity or customer can also enjoy some credit facilities and professional advice from its/his Bank.
There are four main types of account a customer may keep with a Bank.
These are Current accounts, Deposit Account, Loan Account and Savings.
5.0 SUMMARY This Study Unit has: • Discussed the main types of Bank Accounts • Explain how Inter-Bank Transfers are effected • Defined a Bank 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write briefly on bank accounts 2.
Write short notes on the following banking terms a) Unpresented Cheques 121  b) Uncredited cheques c) Bank Charges d) Standing Order Payments e) Dishonoured Cheque 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Asaolu, A.
(2005).
Financial Accounting for Schools and Colleges, Ibadan: Polygraphic Ventures Ltd Baston, A.
(1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary and Intermediate Stage Students London: Cassell Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Jennings, A. R. (1997).
Financial Accounting, Islands: DP Publications Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing Company Limited 122  STUDY UNIT 16 BANK RECONCILIATION STATEMENT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Reasons for disagreement between the Cash Book and Bank Statement 3.2 Basic Terms in Bank Reconciliation 3.3 Advantages of Bank Reconciliation 3.4 Stages in Bank Reconciliation 3.5 Preparation of a Bank Reconciliation Statement 3.6 Bank Overdraft 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor- Marked Assessment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The bank and its customer (e. g a business entity) maintain Independent records in respect of the transactions taking place between them.
Therefore, it is necessary to reconcile the bank statement balance with the bank balance in the cash book to be assured that the two are in agreement on the amount of money deposited and cheques drawn.
Usually, as earlier pointed out, the bank column balance and bank statement are not always in agreement and they need to be reconciled.
2.0LEARNING OBJECTIVES o Define Bank statement o Outline reasons for disagreement between the cash book and bank statement o State the steps involved in the Recognition of Discrepancies o Prepare a Bank Reconciliation Statement 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 123  3.1 REASONS FOR DISAGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CASH BOOK AND BANK STATEMENT The timing and Information differences which can cause disagreement are: 1.
Unpresented cheques 2.
Uncrdited cheques 3.
Dishonoured cheques 4.
Bank charges and Interest 5.
Standing order 6.
Dividends 7. Credit transfers 8.
Errors by the bank 9.
Direct debits 10.
Other errors like under casting or overcastting of the cash balance brought down.
3.2 BASIC TERMS IN BANK RECONCILIATION Bank reconciliation involves some basic terms that need to be explained: 3.2.1 Unpresented Cheques These are cheques that are issued out but which have not yet been presented to the bank for payment.
Bank balance will exceed cashbook balance to the extent of the value of these cheques.
To reconcile both balances, the amount should either be added to cashbook balance or subtracted from the bank balance.
3.2.2 Uncredited cheques These are cheques that have been received from other parties and lodged with the bank but have not been cleared by the bank and credited into the firm’s account.
Bank balance will be less than the cash book balance to the extent of these cheques.
To reconcile, the amount should either be deducted from the cashbook balance or added to the bank balance.
3.2.3 Standing Order Paym ents This is an order given to a bank by its customer to make regular payments of a certain amount to another person’s account on his/her behalf.
The customer is then notified afterwards through a document known as a debit advice.
A good example of this sort of payment is life assurance premium, or any other standing contributions.
3.2.4 Standing Receipts or Remittance These are incomes flowing directly to a customer’s account from sources such as dividends and interest.
The bank receives the income, which may be on a regular basis, on behalf of the customer and subsequently credits his/her account before the relevant credit advice is sent to the customer.
If credit or debit advice has not been received by the date of the reconciliation, the bank balance will exceed the cashbook balance.
To reconcile, the cashbook should be adjusted if the income or payment relates to the expired period.
If this is not necessarily 124  so, however, the amount should be added to the cashbook balance or deducted from the bank balance.
3.2.5 Bank Charges These consist of all debit advices raised by the bank to cover sundry fees payable by the customer, for example, cost of cheque book, commission on turnover, transfer fees, special clearance fees, interest charges, etcetera.
These charges are usually notified to the customer by means of a document known as a “debit advice”.
If the customer has not received the relevant advice, the bank balance will be less than the cashbook balance.
Therefore, the cashbook should be adjusted with the charges since they invariably relate to the outgoing period.
3.2.6 Dishonoured Cheque This is a cheque in which a bank's customer lodged into a bank as a collection from a debtor or payment made by cheque from a similar source but returned unpaid for reasons such as “signature irregular”, “alteration on date, name or figure, without endorsement”, lack of adequate money in the account”, e.t.c.
To reconcile, the cashbook will need to be readjusted by crediting the adjusted cashbook and debiting the customer’s account.
This is a reversal of the entries that were previously made in those accounts.
3.3 ADVANTAGES OF BANK RECONCILIATION Bank reconciliation is an important process in every organization.
It has the following advantages: (I) It enables firm/customer detect any cause of discrepancy between his cashbook balance and the bank statement balance.
(II) Errors and fraud, either by the firm’s employee(s) can be detected and corrected or recovered.
(III) Direct receipts and payments from or to outside sources can be ascertained especially where the customer is yet to receive any advice to that effect.
(IV) Charges and interest: granted by the bank for whatever reason can be seen and cashbook adjusted without waiting for debit or credit advice.
(V) A firm can take advantage of any float that may be seen when the cashbook balance is compared with the bank statement balance.
Float means the surplus bank statement balance as against cashbook balance, which may be as a result of unpresented cheques.
3.4 STAGES IN BANK RECONCILIATION (a) Tick items on the debit side of the cash book against items on the credit side of the bank statement.
Outstanding items on the debit side of the cash book but missing on the credit side of the bank statement are credited cheques.
List them.
125  (b) Tick items on the credit side of cash book against items on the debit side of the bank statement.
Items outstanding on the credit side of the cash book but missing on the debit side of the bank statement are unpresented cheques.
List them.
(c) The remaining items on the debit side of the bank statement are bank charges and standing order.
List them.
(d) The remaining items on the credit side of the bank statement are amounts paid into the bank directly for the benefit of the business entity by its customers (i.e direct credits).
(e) After all these have been adjusted, it should be possible to reconcile the cash book balance with the balance on the bank statement.
If it is not, then there are some errors which further investigation would reveal and be traced to their sources.
3.5 PREPARATION OF THE BANK RECONCILIATION STATEMENT Bank reconciliation statement preparation can be dealt with from two perspectives, namely: A.
Preparation of the only bank reconciliation statement.
B.
(i) Adjusment of the cash book (ii) Preparation of the bank reconciliation statement using the balance of the adjusted cash book.
It should be noted that whichever method is used, the answer must be equal, but the examiners prefer the second method which is more practical.
The two methods will be expatiated on thoroughly with examples.
METHOD A: PRE PARATION OF ONLY BANK RECONCILIATION STATEMENT: Under this method, only the reconciliation will be prepared.
We can start with either the cash book balance or bank statement balance.
There will be no adjustment of the cash book.
If the cash book balance is to be used, then unpresented cheques, credit transfers, dividends will be added while bank charges, standing orders, bank commission etc will be deducted to give us the balance as per bank statement.
The proforma bank reconciliation statement will be shown below.
3.6 Format of bank reconciliation statement when starting with balance of cash book Bank reconciliation as at 31st December N N Balance as per cash book * Add Unpresented cheque * Credit transfers * Dividend * Undercasting of receipt side of cashbook * * Less Uncredited cheque * Bank charges * Bank commission * 126  Standing order * Dishonoured cheque * Overcasting of receipt side of cash book * * Balance as per bank statement * Note: The balance arrived at, must be equal to the balance of the bank statement.
On the other hand, if a student wants to start with the balance as per bank statement then items like uncredited cheques, bank charges, dishonoured cheques will be added while unpresented cheques, credit transfers, dividend are deducted.
When the bank statement balance is used, the proforma bank reconciliation will look like this.
Format for bank reconciliation when the bank statement balance is used Bank reconciliation statement as at 31st December N N Balance as per bank statement * Add Uncredited cheques * Bank charges * Standing order * Dishonoured cheques * Overcasting of receipt side of cash book * Direct debits * * Less Unpresented cheques * Credit transfers * Dividends * Undercasting of receipt side of cash book * * Balance as per cash book * Note: The balance arrived at must be equal to the balance of the cash book for that period.
Illustration 1 1.
On the 31st March 1990, Ogundele’s cash book showed a debit balance of N2,000.
His bank statement showed a balance of N2,270.
On the comparison, the following were found.
a. Cheques drawn amounting to N1,500 had not been presented for payment.
b.
A standing order of N600 to a club was not taken into consideration.
c. Bank charges ofN 50 were entered in the bank statement only.
d. A dividend of N300 was paid directly into the bank and not recorded in the cash book.
e. Cheques for N1,000 were entered into the cash book and paid to the bank but had not been cleared and thus not credited.
f. A customer, Bolaji, paid N120 directly into the bank without notifying the firm.
Solution: The above question will be solved by starting with the balance as per cash book 127  Bank reconciliation statement as at 31st March 1990 N N Balance as per cash book 2,000 Add Unpresented cheque 1,500 Dividends 300 Credit transfers 120 1,920 3,920 Less Uncredited cheque 1,000 Standing order 600 Bank charges 50 1,650 Balance as per bank statement 2,270 It should be noted that students can start with the balance as per bank statement.
The workings will be shown below: Bank reconciliation statement as at 31st March 1990 N N Balance as per bank statement 2,270 Add Uncredited cheque 1,000 Standing order 600 Bank charges 50 1,650 3,920 Less Unpresented cheque 1,500 Dividend 300 Credit transfer 120 1,920 2,000 3.7 Bank Overdraf t This is a situation whereby the cash book balance might have been overdrawn.
The cash book will show a credit balance.
The adjustments needed to reconcile the disagreement are a complete opposite of when the cash book showed a debit balance.
Bank reconciliation statement as at 31st June 1999 N N Overdraft as per cash book * (OD) Add Uncredited cheque * Standing order * Bank charges * * * Less Unpresented cheques * Dividend * Credit transfers * * Balance as per bank statement * If the overdraft as per bank statement is used, then the reverse will be the case.
From the above analysis two things can be deduced; these are: 128  a.
When a student starts with overdraft as per cash book, it will look exactly like when starting with balance as per bank statement.
b.
When a student starts with overdraft as per bank statement, it will look exactly like when starting with balance as per cash book.
Bank reconciliation statem ent as at 31st December 1990 N N Overdraft as per bank statement *(OD) Add Unpresented cheque * Dividends * Credit transfers * * * Less Uncredited cheque * Bank charges * Standing order * Dishonoured cheque * * Balance as per cash book * Illustration 2 The bank column of Ogedengbe’s cash book for the month of August 1997 appeared as follows: You are required to prepare the bank reconciliation statement for the month of August, 1997 Dr Cr 1995 N 1995 N Aug 5 Sogo 540 Aug 1 Balance b/f 3,030 Aug 22 Abacha 980 Aug 3 Obe 320 Aug 30 Boga 595 Aug 17 Sanjo 770 Aug 31 Balance c/f 2.390 Aug 30 Chirma 385 4.505 4,505 The details of bank statement are as follows: Dr Cr Balance 129  1995 N N N Aug 1 Balance 3,030.00 OD Aug 6 Sogo 540 Aug 11 Obe 2,490.00 OD Aug 22 Abacha 320 Aug 23 Sanjo 980 2,810.00 OD Aug 28 Credit transfers Aug 30 Bank charges 770 1,830.00 OD Aug 31 Standing order 1, 025 2,600.00 OD 150 1,575.00 OD 285 1,725.00 OD 2,010.00 OD Solution Bank reconciliation as at 31st Aug 1995 N N Overdraft as per cash book 2,390 (OD) Add Uncredited cheque 595 Bank charges 150 Standing order 285 1,030 Less Presented cheque 385 3,420 Credit transfers 1,025 1,410 Overdraft as per bank statement 2,010.00 (OD) METHOD B Under this method, an adjusted cash book will be prepared and the adjusted balance will be used in preparing the bank reconciliation statement.
Any item that appears in the adjusted cash book will not be recorded in the bank reconciliation statement.
Many examinations now tend towards this more practical approach and examiners may mandate students to write up the cash book up- to- date before the preparation of bank reconciliation statement.
By this means, the items in the reconciliation are greatly reduced.
The format will look like this.
Dr Adjusted cash book Cr Jan N Jan N Jan Balance b/f * Jan Bank commission * Jan Credit transfers * Jan Bank charges * 130  Jan Dividends * Jan Standing orders * Jan Receipt undercast * Jan Dishonoured cheques * Jan Payment overcast * Jan Payment undercast * Jan Receipt overcast * ____ Balance c/d * * * ____ Balance * ____ Note: If the payment side is greater than the receipt side, then the balance is overdraft which will be treated as explained above.
Bank reconciliation statement as at __________________ N Balance as per adjusted cash book * Add Unpresented cheques * * Less Uncredited cheques * Balance as per bank statement * Illustration 3 On the 30th November 1993 Olukunmi and Sons’ cash book showed a debit balance of N3,500 whereas the bank statement showed a balance of N 2,325.
On investigation the following items were discovered to have caused the discrepancy.
a.
The bank had made charges of N310 which had not been entered in the cash book.
b.
A cheque received for N2,000 entered in the cash book had not been entered by the bank until December 3rd 1993. c. A standing order for subscription of N150 had been entered in the bank statement as paid but not in the cash book.
d. The following cheques were drawn but not yet presented for payment in the bank: cheques for N300, N600, N250.
e. A cheque drawn for N50 had been entered as N60 f. A cheque for N35 previously received and paid into the bank had been returned by the bank.
g. A customer paid N160 directly into their account in the bank.
It had not been entered in the cash book.
You are required to prepare: i.
Adjusted cash book ii.
Bank reconciliation statement as on 30th Nov 1993.
Solution St ep1: The adjusted cash book will be prepared.
Dr Adjusted cash book Cr 1993 N 1993 N Nov Balance b/f 3,500 Nov Bank charges 310 131  Payment overcast 10 Nov Dishonoured cheques 35 Credit transfers 160 Nov Standing order 150 ____ Balance c/d 3,175 3,670 3,670 Note: Payment overcast is arrived at by deducting N50 from N60 Bank reconciliation statement as at 30th Nov.., 1993 N N Balance as per adjusted cash book 3,175 Add Unpresented cheques 300 600 250 1,150 4,325 Less Uncredited cheque 2,000 Balance as per bank statement _____ ERRORS ON BANK STATEMENT If and when the Bank Reconciliation Statement (or Account) has been prepared on the lines indicated above, the balance as shown by this statement differs from the balance in the Cash Book (after adjusting for bank charges, commission, etcetera), it is apparent that an error or errors have been made in the writing up of the Cash Book statement.
In order to locate such errors the following steps should be taken: (i) All uncredited cheques and unpresented cheques reflected on the current bank reconciliation statement should be thoroughly checked to ensure that they are correctly shown.
(ii) It is possible to have a cheque or cheques shown on the previous bank reconciliation statement as unpresented cheques still unpresentable in the current period.
Thus, the previous Reconciliation Statement should be examined to see that all cheques shown therein as being unpresented have since been paid or are shown in the present Reconciliation Statement as still being unpresented.
(iii) Balance brought forward in the cash book and bank statement should be checked.
(iv) The cash book should be reviewed to check for payment (or receipt) that is equal to the amount of the error.
An amount may have been recorded as paid (or received) in the bank column of the cash book and for one reason or the other, such amounts, have not been debited (or credited) in the bank statement.
(v) The bank statement should also be examined for any debit or credit figure equal to the amount of the error.
An amount may have been paid into (or out of) the bank and not entered in the Cash Book accordingly.
(vi) Castings of Cash Book and bank statement should be checked.
If the above methods of locating errors do not reveal the error, then; All entries 132  (vii) The bank statement should also be examined for any debit or credit figure equal to the amount of the error.
An amount may have been paid into (or out of) the bank and not entered in the Cash Book accordingly.
(viii) Castings of Cash Book and bank statement should be checked.
If the above methods of locating errors do not reveal the error, then; (ix) All entries in the Cash Book must be compared in detail with the entries in the Bank Statement.
4.0 CONCLUSION Businesses the world over maintain Bank Accounts.
Good Corporate Governance demands that a Bank Account is opened of a necessity and as an internal control tool.
Reconciliatory Statements is prepared at Convenient Intervals reconciling the cash book and the Bank Statement.
This ensures that legitimate differences between the balances of the bank statement and the cash book.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has: o Defined a Bank Reconciliation Statement o Explained reasons for discrepancies between the Cash Book and Bank Statement o Enumerated stages in the preparation of a Bank Reconciliation Statement o Prepared a Bank Reconciliation using the two main methods SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
From the following, showing all workings and calculations, prepare a statement reconciling the balance in the Cash Book with the balance in the Bank Statement in the Books of Sheriff Nig.
Ltd. N Bank Statement balance 205 CR Cash Book balance 2,035 CR Cheque drawn but not presented 3,160 Amount paid into the bank but not yet credited 750 Entries in the bank Statement not yet recorded in the Cash Book Payments made under Standing Order 40 Dividends received directly by Bank 120 Bank Charges 50 Cheque paid in but returned by the bank marked R/D 200 2.
The Treasurer of Lekki Social Club has the following ledger balances on 1st Januar y 1999.
N Club house and ground 2,000 Investment at cost 960 Fixtures and Furniture 320 Accrued Expenses 35 Estimated Excess Income (Profit) for the month was 29 133  Since the Treasurer did not keep proper records of receipts and payments for the month, he decided to prepare a bank reconciliation statement before presenting the account to the Club members.
The bank statement of the Club on 31st January 1999 showed a credit balanced of N205.
A comparison of the statement with the “Receipts and payment Book” of the Club revealed the following: N i) Cheque drawn but not presented 3,160 ii) Amount lodged in the bank but not credited 725 iii) Entries in Bank Statement not recorded in Receipt and Payment Book.
-Payment under standing order for loan refund 35 -Interest received on deposit account 18 -Bank Charges 15 -Cheque paid in but returned with R/D 120 You are required to prepare a bank reconciliation statement showing the balance on 31st Januar y 1999.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT Q1.The Madonna Stores had a debit balance of N1,728 in its Bank account on 30th April, 2005.
On the same date it received a Bank Statement from its Bankers indicating it had only a balance of N246.
i. Cheques received from All and Frank for N150 and N62 respectively had been entered in the cash book but not yet credited by the bank.
ii.
Interest of N37 paid by the Bank has not yet been entered in cash book.
iii.
Mail transfer of N475 to Boys High School Suleja has not been recorded in the Cash Book.
Charges for the transfer were N18.
iv.
Sales of N286 made on 28th April were deposited in the Bank but have not yet been credited by the Bank.
v. A standing order transfer of N100 from the business account to a supplier’s account at the end of every month had been affected by the Bank but had not been recorded in the cash bank.
vi.
A cheque of N74 paid into the business account by Victor a Debtor, had not been recorded in the cash book.
vii.
A cheque received from Ndubuisi for N83 was paid into the bank account but the bank credited N38 in error.
viii.A cheque book was issued to the business and its account was debited by N5 but this had not been recorded in the cash book.
ix.
Cheques of N200 and N252 were received from Dalhatu and Mark respectively but these had not yet been taken to the bank.
You are required to prepare a Bank Reconciliation Statement for the month of April, 2005 after up-dating the Cash Book.
Q2.
Explain why it is often the case that the cash book balance for Bank does not agree with the Bank Statement balance of the same date?
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING 134  Accounting Technicians Scheme West Africa (2009).
Basic Accounting Processes and System Part 1, Study Pack, Lagos: Abina Publishers Asaolu, A.
(2005).
Financial Accounting for Schools and Colleges, Ibadan: Polygraphic Ventures Ltd Baston, A.
(1979).
Elements of Accounts for Elementary ad Intermediate Stage Students, London: Cassell Jat, R. B & Jugu, Y. G (2008).
Modern Financial Accounting: Theory and Practice, Jos: Ehindero (Nig) Limited Jennings, A. R. (1997).
Financial Accounting, Islands: DP Publications Longe, O.
A & Kazeem, R. A (2006).
Essential Financial Accounting for Senior Secondary Schools, Tonad Publishers Limited Okwoli, A.
A.
(1993).
Principles of Financial Accounting, Jos: Tamaza Publishing Company Limited 135
