 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: BHM 403 COURSE TITLE: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BHM 403: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT Module I UNIT 1 Definition, Philosophy and Nature of Community Development UNIT 2 Community Development as an instrument of rural development UNIT 3 Rural Leadership and Community Development UNIT 4 Growth models and rural Development Module II UNIT 5 Principles and Philosophies of development UNIT 6 The Concept of Rural development UNIT 7 Integrated Rural development UNIT 8 Social Infrastructures and rural development UNIT 9 Social change in Rural development Module III UNIT 10 Rural Education and development UNIT 11 Rural Community and its youth developments UNIT 12 Attitudes of local government staff towards rural development UNIT 13 Social negligence in rural development UNIT 14 Health and rural development UNIT 15 The theory and practice of community development UNIT 16 Problems of development at the community level UNIT ONE: DEFINITION, PHILOSOPHY AND NATURE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition and Concept Clarification on Community Development 3.2 The Historical Development of Community Development 3.3 Approached to Community Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces the topic of community development.
It is intended primarily for students who have an interest in the topic, the main aim of this unit is to acquaint learners with the basic concepts of community development.
In order to understand community development (CD) it should be stated that it means different things to different people.
It is founded on voluntary and healthy interdependence, mutual benefit and shows responsibility.
In recent years, CD tends to have involved local people seeking and taking advantage of opportunities identifying and using their assets or working together to solve problems.
Community development has its root in several academic disciplines including Sociology, Economics, Psychology and even Architecture.
The interdisciplinary approach of CD offers several advantages, such as providing a holistic view of CD.
CD is a structured intervention that gives communities greater … over the conditions that affect their lives.
Though this may not solve all the problems faced by a local community, but it does build up confidence to tackle such problems as effectively as any local action can.
CD looks at the level of local groups and organizations rather than with individuals or families.
The range of local groups and organizations representing communities at local level constitute the community sector.
Furthermore, CD is a skilled process and part of its approach is the belief that communities cannot be helped unless they themselves agree to this process.
CD has to look both ways not only how the community is working at the grassroots, but also at how responsive key institutions are to the needs of local communities.
3.2 Historical Development of Community Development Community Development has been sometimes explicit and sometimes implicit goal of the community people, among to achieve thorough the collective effort a better life, and has occurred through history.
In the 19th century, the work of the early socialist thinkers Robert Owen (1771 – 1851), sought to create a more perfect community.
At the new Larmark and other communities.
In the United States groups of people came together to create utopian or intertwine utopian communities with mixed success.
In the United States, in the 1960’s, the term community development began to complement and generally replaced the idea of urban renewal which totally focused on physical development projects at the expense of working class communities such as the Ford Foundation and the government officials such as Senator Robert F. Kennedy took an interest in local non-profit organization that attempted to apply business and management skills to the social mission of applying low-income residents and their neighbors’.
Eventually, such groups became known as community development corporation or CDC’s.
Community planning techniques drawing on the history of utopian movements became important in the 1920’s and 1030’s in East Africa, where CD proposals were seen as a way of helping local people improve their own lives with indirect assistance from the colonial authorities.
Community development became a part of the Ujamaa village established in Tanzania by Julius Nyerere, where it had some success in assisting with the delivery of Education Services throughout rural areas, but has elsewhere met with mixed success.
In the 1970’s and 1980’s CD became a part of “integrated rural development”, a strategy promoted by the United Nations Agencies and the World Bank.
3.3 Approaches to Community Development There are six approached to Community Development - Bottom-up Approach – Under this approach, low-income communities whether in urban or rural areas needs certain basic facilities that are difficult or impossible to acquire, either due to poverty or other constraints.
Welfare –oriented governments have, therefore, attempted to provide these basic facilities, but with great success.
Recently, new approaches have been adopted to improve the situation by encouraging people to become involved in community – level decision making with respect to their needs and to implement the construction of acceptable facilities.
The communities would then shoulder a greater responsibility leading to development with a higher degree of responsibility.
The suggested strategy for the increased emphasis on the bottom-up community development has three components: o Increasing knowledge about interaction between formal and informal institutions at the local level.
o Upgrading community based components in existing and planned bank projects.
o Proposals for stand-alone community development projects, including social funds.
The term “bottom-up” implies decision making that comes from community members without official status or positions.
When the decision making process is seen to be more democratic, starting from the common people and working its way up to centralized agencies and officials, it is deemed to be bottom-up.
It is usually contracted with “top donor”.
The effect of low income communities is supposed to be an increase in “bottom-up” decision making processes.
- Community development Critical Approach – CD has always had a radiance agenda (Led with, 2005).
The practice is inspired by a vision of social and environmental justice.
It is fundamentally committed to bring about social change which contributes to the end.
Critical approaches to community development locate grassroots practice interim that drawing vision of a just and sustainable future.
The well-defined ideological base that connects with our vision provides us with a framework through which to eradicate every stage of CD process.
This is an ideology of equality informed by such values as mutual respect, reciprocity, dignity, mutuality trust and cooperation.
This offers a system of checks and balances to examine the validity of practice.
- Community Driven Development Approach (CDD) – This is an approach that gives control of development decisions and resources to community groups.
Poor communities receive funds, decide on their use, plan and execute the chosen local projects, and monitor the provision of services that result; it improves not just incomes but also the peoples empowerment, the lack of which is a form of poverty as well.
Through its support for CDD, the International Development Association (IDA), the World Bank funds for the world poorest countries, has been harnessing the energy and capacity of communities for poverty reduction since the start of the decade, IDA lending for CDD has annually over 50 operations for an average total of USS1.3 billion per year.
Through its support to CDD programmes, IDA finances services such as water supply and sanitation, housing and schools that are tailored to community needs and likely to be maintained and sustainable.
By emphasizing transparency and accountability in local decision-making, IDA’s CDD initiatives have contribution to more empowered citizenry, more responsive government particularly at the local government level, improved delivery of public goods, and services, and more sustainable community assts.
In post- conflict countries, in particular, the approval has helped deepen peace-keeping by fostering attitudes of trust and tolerance in the process of rebuilding communities.
CDD is increasingly seen as a nexus between bottom-up and top bottom approaches to improve government and service provision.
IDA naturally adopted the CDD approach as a mechanism for improved service delivery in key public sectors.
But building on the principle of participatory governance and country-based aid that are hallmarks of its support, IDA has used CDD also to foster social accountability that supports decentralization of services.
Recently, CDD has become an IDA priority for empowering poor communities and building greater accountability.
CDD was also a reaction to the failures of earlier approaches to targeted poverty reduction; such as integrated development programmes for a geographical area, and lending to agricultural credit institutions.
Such failure was also widespread outside the World Bank and encouraged a genuine more towards greater decentralization – a more away from reliance on central government as the main service provider and participation.
World Bank 2009.
CDD programmes fit well with the agenda of improving governance since, if well- designed and well-implemented, they strengthen transparency and accountability.
- Places-based Approach – There is a growing body of literature that suggests places are social constructs and that individuals help to give meaning to particular constructs and that individuals help to give meaning to particular loci Here place cannot be defined solely through geography or territory because place is also derivable through social processes.
Place is something that can be nurtured and reshaped through individual or collective effort.
A placed based approach aims to help, address and cooperate the activities of different state holders related to initiatives that promotes social well-being.
A paced-based approach promotes a framework that allows stakeholders to both develop shared meanings on place and establish promoters for action that can help guide public policy to engage local stakeholders and encourage nurturing interactive placed – focused dialogues by entering into a place-based approach discusses policy and institutional structures operating at the local, provinces and federal lvels in relation to this approach.
3.4 Principles of Community Development Community Development has been previously defined as any action taken by any agency which is primarily designed to benefit the entire community.
This defined by the following principles: - Start with the people - Build relationships, by introducing new ideas, showing how they meet identified needs - Projects to be undertaken should be kept a simple as possible.
- There should be the involvement of as many community people as possible in all activities from the start of any project.
- Train people close to their home communities.
- Train in locally acceptable ways.
- Train trainers who can then in turn train others.
- Involve local leadership - Cooperate with governments.
- Encourage interdependent relationships vs dependent or totally independent relationships - Planning services - Servicing self help groups.
- Naming support and social action groups - Building community networks - Improving quality of life - Working towards social justice - Empowering individual and communities.
- Start with the people – Here, CD should be the sole prerogative of the immediate beneficiaries.
It should be people oriented.
The communities should be solely allowed to decide on their immediate needs.
A community as example may be in need of both water and good roads.
But if they are allowed their choice, probably they would decide on water first before the road construction.
Here, efforts should be intensified on the provision of water.
Community development should be people-driven and should embrace perceived community needs.
- Secondly, CD should build bridges and relationships, by introducing new ideas, showing how they can be able to meet identified needs.
- Projects to be undertaken on behalf of the community should be kept as simple as before.
It should be what the community will be able to afford.
The technology a times when possible sheared be locally sourced.
- In case of training programmes, people should be trained within their communities to reduce transportation costs, and moreover, training should be done in locally acceptable ways, and if possible train those that can evenly retrain others.
3.5 Community Development Processes In order to streamline our development, there are specific sets of guidelines that need to be followed.
The development process consists of a set of seven steps, transaction between the different communities when the cul… are matched that describe the finalization of each step.
Depending on the situation not all the seven steps are necessary.
1.
Presentation of the idea.
2.
Unite requirements for idea execution 3.
Design specification 4.
Time and cost estimates 5.
Implementation 6.
Testing 7.
Completion 1.
Presentation of an idea – Here a community who lacks electricity will want the community to be connected to the national and this may be referred to as rural electrification.
Some other communities may need rural transformation through opening up of road networks for the evacuation of farm produce from the rural areas to urban markets.
2.
Second step in the process - uniting of requirements for idea execution.
When a community presents an idea for execution, there is need to draw a road map for the execution of the idea.
Here the community may need to form a committee on rural electrification as it concerns the community.
Here members of the committee will now put heads together and see how that need can be achieved.
3.
Then comes the step of Design Specification.
This includes time and cost estimates.
How much would be needed for its implementation and how the funds would be sourced.
It would also determine the physical instruction in terms of how many poles to be created, points of erection and how many homes would be affected.
4.
Implementation stage – the implementation stage launches all planned efforts and directly attempts to facilitate community change.
Building on the previous three stages of community action.
Throughout the precious stages, resources were gathered and assessed subgroups formed to focus on specific tasks and active citizens recruited.
In this implementation stage, these resources are formerly committed and people are given tasks of going forward to achieve the goals established by the organization and its subgroups to maximize their impact, each subgroup should – a.
Meet to review goals, objectives and immediate steps for action as action efforts are launched, it is essential that all participants be clear about the planned goals and the methods for meeting these goals.
It may be the case that some subgroups needs certain clarification on how to proceed and the resources available to support successful action.
b.
Identify clear and measurable stages or benchmark for all objectives.
While goals, objectives, and action plans have already been established, it will be useful to identify clear benchmarks or measurable impacts.
This will serve to provide activists with feedback and to show that action efforts are making progress.
Such measurable impacts will also show the general public that the organization is fostering positive changes on behalf of the community.
As stated tasks are achieved, these can be promoted and marketed accordingly.
5.
Testing – Empowered with plans and a detailed background, subcommittees can move forward.
As they take action, opportunities and mechanism for feedback and discussion should be presented.
These opportunities can be through meetings, informal gatherings or established contacts can be arrived at to provide the insight and advice needed to adjust action plans.
As achievements are made and measurable impacts achieved, it is important to celebrate and promote them through informal celebrations and other promotional awareness.
It may also be the case that some action efforts have failed.
The fact that these did not reach success is irrelevant, and should be celebrated as the first effort of what will be many valid action efforts.
CD is achieved if diverse groups are brought together and channels of communication established.
From this process, future efforts will emerge that will achieve success.
6.
Completion – CD and locally based actions are a never ending process.
Both need to be continuously cultivated.
As progress in various forms is made, it is essential that mistakes, obstacles, and inconsistencies in application be identified and addressed.
To fine tune actions, opportunities to effectively measure outcomes and provide feedback are vital to the long-term achievement of goals.
To provide feedback, formal debriefing meetings should be established at the conclusion of action efforts.
These meetings can evaluate progress, identify obstacles and explore new means of dealing with unforeseen problems.
At these meetings, all subgroups / committees can report on their activities, progress, obstacles and methods for adjusting to challenges.
The development of any community is not a onetime event in which success or failure is detailed.
It is a process where the bringing together of actively interested and diverse community action process, channels of communication and interaction are established that cut across class and other lines.
This is a remarkable achievement and represents Community Development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE ONE (1) Name and explain 3 approaches to community development ANSWERS They are:- - Bottom up approach - Upgrading community based components - Community development Critical approach - Community Driven Development Approach 4.0 Conclusion Unit one module one (1) has shown that there is no communion of people without unity.
The aggregate interaction of the people is hinged on unhindered unity existing among them.
A community is an aggregate of people who have common linguistic affinity within a geographic proximity working for a specific interest.
5.0 Summary The unit was able to define the concept of community development, the historical development of community development, approaches to community development and principles of community development and a detailed fact on the processes of community development.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments Question (1) Define and state five principles of community development Question (2) Define the term “Placed – based approach to community development” 7.0 References / Further Reading 1.
Sanders, “Theories of Community development” rural sociology, March (1958), 2.
Murray G. Ross, with B. W. Lappin.
Community organization theory principles and practice (1958).
3.
Warner Bloomberg Jnr.
“Community Organization” in Social Problems.
A modern Approach (1958).
4.
S. M. Ngie.
Minority Policies and Rural Development in Nigeria, ABU Press, Zaria, (1994) UNIT TWO: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AS AN INSTRUMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition of Community Development 3.2 Policy Issues in Community Development 3.3 Goals of Community Development 3.4 Methods of organizing Community Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference / Further Reading  1.0 Introduction To achieve economic growth and social changes where people are more eligible to receive services than there are public funds available to pay for those services, requires the spreading of efforts so that local communities and individuals can participate.
In this unit, you will learn about some policy issues, the goals in organizing of community development.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, the student should be able to:- - Define community development - Evaluate policy issues in community development - State the goals of community development and - Describe the methods of organizing community development 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of community development The United Nations Economic and Social Council defines CD as the process by which the efforts of the people themselves are united with those of the governmental authorities to improve the economic and socio- cultural conditions of communities to integrate these communities into the life of the nation, and to enable them to contribute fully into national progress.
These essential elements are: (1) The participation by the people themselves in effort to improve their level of livelihood.
(2) Secondly, the provision of technical and others in ways that encourages initiative, self and mutual help and make them more effective.
It is expressed in programs designed to achieve a wide variety of specific improvements 3.2 Policy Issues on Community Development CD whose major thrust is emphasized on streamlined change, population participation and leadership training involves a dynamic interaction between the central government and the villages or communities.
The level of success in this form of relationship has become an instrument for forging a more constructive role for government in development, helping to establish on the one hand a better understanding between the ruler and the ruled within the village and between the central government and the village authorities on the other.
The ability of community development to adapt itself to changing conditions in the village and the community life is largely due to its pragmatic approach to problem-solving in community development.
3.3 Goals of Community Development Community development is concerned with the development of the human elements within a community.
This implies the realization of human potentialities and its ability to control his environment as a measure of real development and an increase in material progress and a corresponding increase in the development of human capacities and social institutions which would have otherwise been superficial and temporary.
The major goals of community development should be – - To induce social change for balanced human and material resources - To strengthen the institutions structure so as to facilitate social change and the process of growth - To promote social justice by permitting the less privileged groups to give expression to their aspiration and to participate in development activities ACTIVITY (1) Define and name some perceived goals of community development Answer Definition as stated above.
Goals – To induce Social Change - Promote social justice, equity in resource management 3.4 Methods of Organizing Community Development CD being an instrument for inducing change has to give close attention to the strategy and tactics that it considers using and the time needed to achieve its objectives.
The methods to be used, depends largely on the characteristics of the community concerned.
In most cases, local survey to generate data or information is the first requirement of local action and thus should be done with the full participation of the rural people.
The information collected should be used for a diagnosis covering as many aspects of community life as possible.
On the basis of this, together with the projection of existing trends, it is possible to formulate alternative action proposals.
4.0 Conclusion In conclusion, the massive commitment of national resources towards the elimination of poverty and to have each distribution of basic amenities throughout the nation should be aligned with CD process to ensure meaningful rural development.
5.0 Summary In this unit, policy issues, goals and methods of organizing CD was highlighted and explained.
CD remains a reliable tool in rural transformation.
6.0 Reference / Further Readings S. M. Ngie.
Minority, Policies and Rural Development, ABU, Press, Zaria 1994.
Ishaya Sarki Habu, Theory and Practice of Policies Introductory Notes for University Students, Abu, Zaria, (Unpublished).
UNIT THREE: RURAL LEADERSHIP AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Traditional Leadership Institutions and Community Development 3.2 Defining the traditional Institution 3.2.1 The Role of the Traditional Institution and Community Development 3.3 Government and Local Institutions 3.3.1 The Conflict of priorities 3.4 Effective Leadership in Rural Areas 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Leadership is very important in any organization.
The leadership of any organization to a large extent will determine the viability of the organization.
Some communities have not realized stated objectives due to bad and inept leadership style.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, the student should be able to: - Understand the concept of leadership at the community level.
- Explain the theories and approaches to leadership - Discuss effect leadership as an agent of rural transformation 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The concept of Leadership vis-avis the traditional institutions at the community Level Leadership is a sterling ability to move men and material resources for the attendance of enacted policies or the carriage of the resolution of the people.
Leadership has either been defined or explained in various ways according to relevant experts.
It is important to understand what leadership is in terms of definition, nature and characteristics.
Leadership can be defined as an influenced process.
Areas of influence, include official position, financial controls, organizational influence, knowledge, interpersonal contacts; personal characteristics.
It involves one person trying to get others do something that he wants them to do.
This is influencing the activities of an organized group towards goal setting and achievement.
It further implies that a leader must be able to influence the followers towards setting appropriate goals and towards effective achievement.
Leadership is a sterling ability to move men and material for the attendance of the enacted policies or the people in such a manner to bring to bear the resources of such resolution.
A leader is a coordinator and a participating type so as to bring about functional result in the organizational set up in the community.
Leadership is the ability to influence authority and power to direct and re-direct priorities for effectuating the stipulated goals of an organization.
Rural leadership therefore is the ability of a person designated as a leader to influence and control the community efforts towards the realization of the objective of an area.
Traditional rulers are the custodians of local tradition and customs.
They exercise traditional authority which is usually obtained from father to son, according to local customs and traditions.
Their major functions are the fact that they help the local councils to maintain law and order in their local domains.
Secondly, they serve as a link between the people and the government by explaining to the people what the government is doing what problems his immediate environment is confronted with.
An example may be the issue of flooding or erosion.
They are also the chief priest or heads of all the traditional religion and ceremonial worship 3.2 Defining the Traditional Institution Since the pre-colonial days, even before the advent of African civilization, there was traditional institution in Africa that serves as the head of government.
There was government that was traditional in nature, tailored according to cultural contemplation to accommodate the pattern of living reasonable for then political engineering and social relations.
The government covered among other things any exigency that may consciously or unconsciously result whose spontaneity may discomfort our geo-centric occupation.
The government had all the elements of the present day organs of governance, being the legislature, judiciary and the executives sometimes embedded in one person.
The effectiveness and practicability of the three depended essentially on the persons holding and molding the political authority.
The traditional institution is a respected organ in the socio- political hierarchy of authority in any geographic divide.
The traditional rulers are more knowledgeable in rural governmental affairs.
The historical development of the people are being handed over to the custodians of culture being local kings.
These kings relate with each other and as such the development question is handled by the local leaders through studies of their existence and what the previous kings had dominantly settled their minds on.
Geographic settlement and discrepancy emanating from boundary adjustments need the input of the traditional system.
The community has a human heart and feeling and in such position, every effort for its maintenance and sustainability will always be on how every facet of organization is put in place.
The traditional lords should be recognized in the political schemes of the country’s advancement and be used for more able areas but through the pragmatic belief and consciousness of making things happen for the realization of this.
The role of the traditional institution is to liaise with the government and the people within their geographical areas with the intention of discussing their problems and solutions.
Here, the traditional rulers can set up committees whose duty would be to marshal out the community desires for physical solutions.
They are to open channels through which physical and material resources can come to the area.
It is also their role to galvanize means of economic production for the furtherance of development.
The rural areas cannot just develop on the platform of sycophancy or parasitic tendency but only fervent recourse to abide by accepted norms.
Furthermore, their roles can be said to be the following: - To make peace, adjudicate cases and provide equity and justice.
- It is the duty of the traditional lords to provide the forum for rectification of grievances.
- It is also their duty to provide project and propagate representative government which will be all embracing and accommodating.
- It is also their duty to organize economic units and develop along product lines.
This can be achieved through mobilization, education and channeling of resources to that area and concertizing the people to follow suit.
- Lastly, it is their duty to be objective and not subjective in their reasoning, allocation of values and adjudicating of cases.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE (1) Name with examples the salient functions of the traditional institution ANSWER 1) Maintenance of law and order 2) To propagate representative governance that act as the in between the government and the people 3) Custodian of the traditional institution.
4) Organization of economic duties.
3.3 Government and the Local Institution The 1976 Local Government reforms gave impetus to local institutions.
Government had generally piloted development programs through statutory or constitutional provisions which imperatively dictate the role the government should take.
For example, the 1999 constitution provides the fundamental objectives and directive principles of state policy which pivotally enumerated the objectives and principles of the government to the entire geographical boundaries in Nigeria.
The government as a matter of necessity should then accordingly: - Provide the executive capacity, for the local leaders in harnessing , propagating and projecting the aims of the rural areas within their confines.
- They should resuscitate all organs and agencies of local leadership respecting cultural contemplations.
- Also, providing capital and material resources to the local population for self – reliance and economic involvement.
- The government should establish community agencies to be controlled by the local chiefs with authority.
- As a matter of priority should engender economic development in the local areas.
The government in order to bring about development in the rural areas has legal means avenues of promoting human resources, development and management which basically is the central focus of an enduring development.
The contemplation of the government must resolve around how to organize the rural areas with industrial inputs for greater results and again their contemplations should be to stop the waste of industrial resources.
Furthermore, the government should create institutions like, social, economic, industrial resource and cultural groups for practical and effective growth in local science.
The people in these local institutions should be experienced personnel who are educated people so as to be able to control and manage their functions.
The essence of local institutions is to put into perspective the reasonable decisions of the people into focus thereby guiding against any infiltration of ideas which may emanate from the distortion of priorities.
The establishment of local institutions will bring glaringly the picture of the rural needs, gazette them for real solution and consequent growth and promotion of the motives of the rural dwellers.
The social resource group will see to the organizational relationship growth and commitment to the attainment of an enduring social stratum.
The economic resource group will see to the management of local economic resources.
The industrial resources group which pivotally must be responsible for industrial initiation and training of local personnel on technical lines for the change in the rural set-up.
The cultural resource group should be in charge of the maintenance of the good aspect of culture and expunge or eradicate the harmful ones.
Example is the widowhood practices in the Eastern part of Nigeria.
The support of the government to all these groups will greatly impact on the transformation of the rural set-up.
3.4 Conflict of priorities at the community level The traditional values though revered in the society sometimes engage in activities that negate the essence of their existence.
They sometimes act outside their assigned functions.
The crux of the matter is that the development of the rural areas would have been put in a better perspective if the traditional institution is deeply involved in local restructuring.
There is also the issue of lack of enlightenment.
Those selected to lead are often not enlightened on matters concerning their immediate domains.
Most of them are into power due to hereditary consequences that may not have any experience in the art of administration and development.
The structure of traditional administration had made it increasingly difficult to use the local leaders to create enabling governmental role.
Another area of conflict between the traditional institution in one hand and the other levels of government is the non-inclusion of their roles in the Nigerian Constitution.
The government is of the opinion that traditional administration is their creation and therefore should abide by their administrative bureaucracy.
3.5 Effective Leadership at the Community Level Leadership is an integral part of management.
Leadership effectiveness measures to an extent to which the leader achieves the functions of his office or set out goals.
Leaders should therefore, have the following characteristics, intelligence, self-confidence, initiatives, capacity, and socio- economic status.
Leadership characterized by mediocrity cannot achieve the set-out goals.
The rural leadership has its statutory functions or its target associated with them.
It is the responsibility of the leadership to achieve these targets.
Failure means slowing down progress, which reflects on output.
The problem this creates is ultimately traced to the leadership.
4.0 Conclusion In any organization, business or community leadership plays a major role in the survival of such organizations.
Leadership takes the decisions and make sure they are carried out.
Here, traditional institutions have a crucial role to play in community development 5.0 Summary The unit analyzed the issue of rural leadership in terms of defining the traditional institutions.
The role of traditional institutions and community development, government and local institution, the conflict of priorities and effective leadership at the community level.
6.1 Tutor-Marked Assignments Question (1) List the salient character traits of a community leader Question (2) Define leadership and state why it is necessary at the community level 7.0 References / Further Readings 1) Umebali E. E. Chukwu Emeka, E. E. O and Njoku A. O (ed) (2000).
Contemporary Issues in Local Government and Rural Development.
Enugu.
Computer Edge Publishers.
UNIT FOUR: GROWTH MODELS AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Growth models in Rural Development 3.1.1 Classical and neo-classical model 3.1.2 Internal combination theory 3.1.3 Basic Resource Theory 3.1.4 Dual Economy Model 3.1.5 Expert Led Model 3.1.6 Urban Industrial Model 3.1.7 High Input pay-off Model 3.1.8 Diffusion Model 3.1.9 Induced Model 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Models are abstractions from reality which are used in explaining rural community development and growth.
Rural growth is necessary as it is used to demonstrate rural development.
Rural development assumes a under view and therefore embraces all fields of human endeavors.
Growth models are used to explain rural growth which brings about rural development.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, the student should be able to: - Explain the usefulness of rural growth models.
- Define what models are and their usefulness.
- Discuss growth models and their effect on rural transformation.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Classical and Neo-classical growth model The classical and neo-classical or new classical model states that the growth of any economy whether rural or non-rural is a function of capital investment and the employment of lab our.
However, capital tends to flow into sectors characterized by high rate of return and high marginal productivity to promote economic growth in rural areas.
It is necessary to undertake measures which will raise the rate of the return without regulation and with no thought of conservation.
A situation which intensifies the operation of diminishing returns.
Another limitation is its abstraction from technological changes.
The role of natural resources in promoting development is a function of technological change, for example, the impact of agricultural technology.
In such an economy, capital accumulation plays the classical role off being the engine of growth but for a steady growth, agriculture must be commercial, a process which requires considerable investment by the government in the agricultural sector as in Nigeria.
It implies that resources must be concentrated in the dynamic, commercial modern sector while withdrawing from the subsistence sector for this purpose.
This model does not give an accurate representation of the structure and performance of a typical under developed country.
It was believed that this strategy would guarantee cumulative growth of incomes, employment and rapid structural transformation of underdeveloped economies.
The problem confronting the classical model is that there must not be much skilled manpower to harness the resources.
Secondly, it does not sufficiently emphasize the operation of the laws of diminishing return to labour or capital in the face of rapid population growth and eventually static population and technology.
There is no regulation on the harnessing of the resources of the community.
Optimal harnessing is a function of the level of technology.
3.2 Internal Combination Theory Internal combination theory attributes economic growth and development to forces within the region or the internal sources including technology specialization, economies of scale and the existence of growth, stimulating institutional, political, administrative arrangements.
These can be deliberately created or modified.
Internal combination theory ignores the importance of improved growth of labour as a factor in economic development.
It ignores the role of community service and infrastructure, which by generating external economies account for high rate of return to capital investments.
Internal combination theory places an exaggerated emphasis on the factor and input prices as a determinant of investment and growth thereby ignoring the role of institutional and organizational arrangements.
Moreover, it ignores the crucial role of technology, which by shuffling the production function to the right tends to reduce cost and increase the rate of returns on capital investments.
3.3 Basic Resource Theory The basic Resource Theory states that economic growth depends on the presence, availability, good and reliable magnitude of basic natural resources within a particular or economic regions.
The development resources attracts investment capital to these areas which in term increases income and employment.
The availability of resources in rural areas does not mean economic development.
It is only with the combination of factors of production that economic development can come in.
The theory argues that the development of these resources attracts investment capital to these areas and increase income and enhances employment.
It would be wrong to assume that the availability of basic natural resources in an area is sufficient guarantee for rapid development.
The basic result theory does not sufficiently emphasize the operation of diminishing returns to labour or capital in the face of rapid population growth and essentially static production technology.
Besides, in many countries, the exportation of basic resources fully encounters a bottle-neck way of labour scarcity and higher wages.
To break this bottle neck will be by the way of labour saving technology.
3.4 Dual Economy Model This model distinguishes between modern and rural sectors.
In rural sector, there is the absence of savings and capital formation, no technology, use of family labour which produces for only family consumption.
The modern sector is market oriented and uses capital equipment and technology.
Based on the foregoing, therefore, resources are concentrated on the dynamic commercial sector for this purpose.
However, the implication is that all resources should be channeled to the modern sector.
Nevertheless, there are some limitations to this model, there are no savings that will necessitate capital formation.
The idea that resources should be concentrated in already developed areas does not lead to development.
And lastly, it assigns very restrictive role to agriculture.
3.5 Export-led Model This explains economic development in terms of emergencies and expansion of markets for exports production.
This achieves cumulative growth in income, employment, etc.
The opening of market in other parts of the world expanded the demand for export of which production was intensive in the use of the abundant land and labour resources of the less developed economies.
This led to a fuller utilization of previously under-utilized law and labour.
The expansion of exports also increased investments in infrastructure facilities.
The limitation to this model is that it assumes a perfectly elastic export demand for agricultural exports.
The model ignores that crucial question of demand and market access for the agricultural exports of less developed countries.
Also, there is no mention as to the strategy for promoting agricultural production.
Lastly, the model has not offered guide in an increasingly industrialized economy where there is competition for agriculture, and the provision of raw materials between export market and domestic agro-allied industries.
3.6 Urban Industrial Model This model explains the fact that the nearer the location of agricultural production to urban areas, the greater the probability of increased agriculture output, employment and incomes.
This is because nearness to urban area reduces transportation, cost of both output and input and creates an expanded market for agricultural products, thus encouraging specialization.
3.7 High Input Pay-off Model This model assigns a strategy role to new high yielding input varieties and educated rural labour.
3.8 Diffusion Model This explains why there is substantial productivity difference among farmers in the same economic and geographical areas.
This is mainly due to differences in farmers adoption of new varieties of seeds and mechanization including chemical inputs.
3.9 Induced Model Problems arise in the course of economic development.
The problems are also handled as they come.
The contribution of the model includes identifying relevant variables and carrying out research.
They are also part of the government policy.
The growth models explain ways and means of developing the rural areas.
4.0 Conclusion This unit has discussed the growth models which try to describe the various views of rural development.
The models are characterized by some limitations.
This model encourages enhanced rural output and employment and income of the rural people.
The models demonstrate the various approaches to the rural development.
5.0 Summary The growth models are more in number and each has its own approach to rural development.
They range from classical to neo-classical models and serve as guides to development in the rural areas.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments Discuss the relevance of these models in rural development .
7.0 References / Further Readings Olajide, S. O. et al (1981).
Elements of Rural Economics: Ibadan University Press.
Publishing House, University  UNIT FIVE PRINCIPLES AND PHILOSOPHIES OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Principles and Philosophies of Development 3.1.1 Principles of citizen Participation 3.1.2 The principle of self-help 3.1.3 The principles of felt-need 3.1.4 The principle of self-reliance 3.1.5 The principle of self-growth 3.1.6 The principle of self-direction 3.2 Conditions that can generate interest in industrial self-development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction There is need for a student to know the meaning of principles and philosophies as regards community development.
Community development plays a significant role in the national economy through the rural economy.
A principle is deliberately evolved to produce or determine desired results.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit, the student should be able to: - Discuss the meaning of principles and philosophies with special emphasis on community development - State and explain different principles as regards community development - Analyze conditions that can generate such interests in an individual 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles and Philosophies in Development  A principle is a spring of actions according to Webster’s Reference Library.
It is manifested in common-sense and value statement which serves as a guide to action.
A principle is embedded in some basic truth, law or assumption which portrays some essential quality or element that determine some intrinsic natural or characteristics of behaviour.
The principle of self-preservation is the basis for reasoning or action.
This is so because it is a rule of action or conduct from impulse, installation or incitement.
This is a major attribute due to the fact that every principle is meant to produce or determine a particular result(s) or outcome, such as self-actualization in the growth of democracy, the attainment of popular participation in community programmes.
Also, it elicits understanding on which community competence is built.
A principle can be viewed as a comprehensive proposition from which others are derived.
It can also be the ultimate basis of the existence of any feelings through an action geared towards the attainment of desired objectives.
On the other hand, the philosophy behind the principle is a guide to action, which can be neatly woven into the process of community development.
A principle is deliberately evolved to produce or determine desired results.
Community development denotes social change, and a major implication is that this change can be deliberately induced to produce the desired result of improving the system values, structures and usages for local communities.
As a tool for purposive social change, community development must be guided by principles aimed at producing in its citizens the will to be determined to realize the objectives for community improvement.
Hence, the preparation of citizens for effective participation in the social, economic and political advancement of their communities desires and possibly, the compulsion to accept the fact that people can be deliberate in intent and sturdy in action in overcoming such limiting circumstances of life such as poverty, ignorance, disease and the idea that people can work themselves out of their inhibitions into transforming the community.
Community development involves a problem-solving process, through which citizens are enabled to grow in competence for a co-operative solution to community problems.
Any principle built around the need to attain such growth will form the veritable spring board for action to enable the people identify their problems, and to deal and learn from their problems in order to move forward.
Some of such principles may be identified as follows: 3.1.1 Principle of Citizen Participation This principle is deeply inherent in the very concept of community development, which enjoins that whatever is done to improve the welfare of a people must endeavor to elicit the enthusiasm of such a people.
The idea of participation as it applies to community development strongly implies that success is assumed where the effort of a local community is supplemented or aroused by the direction of government authorities.
This idea portrays community development as a cooperation or partnership in progress.
The principle further stipulates that the local people should take part in the planning, execution, utilization assessment of the social amenities or facilities designed to improve their welfare.
It is such participation that gives the people the pride of ownership of the facilities completed in the process of community development.
The principle of citizen participation emphasizes the initiative of the people as the means of stimulating the active involvement of all citizens in the work of community development.
This implies that the stimulus needed for the success of development programmes has come both from the people themselves and from governmental authorities.
The community itself has to learn to realize and express its particular needs for development while executive planning must be based on the needs rather than on programmes laid down from some more remote source, and therefore neither truly represent what is actually required by the community nor likely to evoke the enthusiasm of the people or to serve their active participation.
3.1.2 The Principle of Self Help This is the main end-product of community development.
- Enables people to exploit to their advantage the resource which would, otherwise, be dormant.
- Makes use of under-utilized labour.
- Increases the competence and confidence of a community in handling of its affairs.
- Constitutes a pre-requisite for survival in the modern world.
- Enables people to change the way they look at their responsibilities and helps them to cultivate the sense of local initiative and effort.
- Enhances the development of democratic values and processes.
- Promotes the idea of ultimate control by the people.
- Fosters a substantial degree of freedom by individuals and groups.
- Leads to a considerable amount of government decentralization.
- Promotes widespread citizen participation.
3.1.3 The Principle of Felt-Need This stresses that people must be able to identify what they want to do in order to achieve their desired development.
This is possible if they are able to understand what stands in their way to progress, and are able to do something to remove .
This obstacle is known as the problem of such a community.
The idea of needs arises from the lack of absence of something which in the opinion of such a population would facilitate the improvement of the welfare of the community if it had been present or available.
Hence, anything which may be considered essential for maintenance of a desired state of affairs is a need.
A need therefore represents an unbalance or lack of adjustment between a present situation and condition, a new or changed set of conditions assumed to be more desirable.
A need therefore exposes the problem, as it implies a gap between the two conditions of what really exists and what should preferably exists in the life of a community.
3.1.4 The Principle of Self-Reliance This principle promotes self-growth.
It upholds the need for people to take their destiny in their own hands.
This is fast growing as a new formula for community development.
Its widespread acceptance in the development planning of most African countries tends to give greater stimulus and cohesiveness to CD in these countries.
The principle promotes innovative and offers the psychological condition which is fundamental to self-employment.
Self-reliance demands that community members should apply their knowledge and skills to the resources at their disposal.
The implication is that in the process of CD, citizens must endeavour to develop and sustain a society – free of poverty, ignorance disease and squalor.
This they can achieve through putting in check those physical limitation human weakness and the social and institutional constraints that can militate against the use of natural resources.
This means that the development of communities should accommodate the integration of various aspects of community improvement such as agriculture, health, nutrition family life, education, training and approach technologies.
3.1.5 The Principle of Self-Growth This principle maintains that a community does not have to accept, or even wait to have a solution to its problems, perhaps worked out by outsiders who have no connections with the community.
It has to be able through constant practice, to diagnose its own problems.
In this process, the community should strive to rely, as much as possible, on its own resources.
It is such reliance on the resources of the community that leads to an appreciation and good management by its members of what external resources that may be infused, from time to time, in the community effort, either by government of external specialized agencies.
Self-growth implies that people can develop a stable response and self-reliant citizenry capable of mobilizing local resources for the satisfaction of the needs of their community and the attainment of a decent and wholesome life.
This means that people need change for better living.
Self-growth maintains that they are capable of changing.
3.1.6 The Principle of Self-Direction When a nation strives for self-reliance, it must be engaging in activities aimed at maximizing the use of its local resources in carrying out its programmes.
The principle of self-direction stresses that individuals and communities have the capacity to motivate themselves internally to carry out activities on their own initiative to achieve positive results for personal and community development.
The thrust of this principle is based on the philosophical ideal that adults have the capacity to develop the self-concept and the self-esteem that can help them to be self-directed.
This concept is progressive in nature, and confirms the fact that self-direction cannot be a static process.
The individual has the propensity towards the social rather than the individual demands to the terms of the society, in the process of his survival in that society.
This may raise the issue of the possibility of some constraints in the use of self-direction in carrying out project, which are community – based than individual based.
Activity (1) Define the terms principle and philosophy Answer: A principle is deliberately evolved to produce determined desired results.
Philosophy can be defined as that which is rational, reasonable sound, calm and humanitarian.
3.2 Conditions that are necessary for the generation of the process of felt-need - The first condition here is the generation of interest to be part of the community development process in the place where the individual lives and work.
- Secondly, the demand of the work schedule taken up as an individual or professional - Thirdly, exhibiting the love for community development activities for their own sake.
- The issue of pecuniary benefit and progression in the political arena in terms of seeking for political office at the grassroots level.
4.0 Conclusion A veritable feature of community development, self-direction can both prepare a community for the desired social change and remove the syndrome of alienation from the community development process.
5.0 Summary This unit was able to analyze the principle and philosophy behind the concept of community development.
Most of the principles like felt need, self-growth and direction were discussed in details.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments Question (1) State and define the principle and philosophy in community development Question (2) Discuss the principle of Felt-need in community development 7.0 References / Further Readings Olajide, S. O. et al (1981).
Elements of Rural Economics: Ibadan University Press.
Publishing House, University  UNIT SIX: THE CONCEPT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 The Concept and Definition of Rural Environment 3.1.1 Nature of Rural Development 3.1.2 Poor infrastructural facilities 3.1.3 High population Density and Gross Illiteracy 3.1.4 Low Technological Base and Underdevelopment 3.2 Concept of Development 3.3 Indices of Development 3.4 Steps in Engineering Development in Rural Areas 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference / Further Reading 1.0 Introduction There is need to understand the concept of rural development to aid the understanding of community development.
This is so especially in developing nations.
Rural development is synonymous with community development.
2.0 Objective By the end of this unit, the student should be able to: - Explain the concept of rural environment - Explain the concept of development - Discuss the indices of development and steps to bring about development in rural areas.
- Explain the concept of rural development 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Definition and Concept of Rural Development  Rural development has been defined in various ways by different authors as follows: - As a process whereby concerted efforts are made in order to facilitate significant increases in rural resource productivity with the central objective of enhancing rural income and increasing employment opportunities in rural communities for rural dwellers to remain in the area.
- An integrated approach to food production, provision of physical, social and institutional infrastructures with an ultimate goal of bringing about qualitative changes which culminate in improved standard of living of rural population.
- It also involves effecting improvement in living standards of farmers and the rural populace in general.
- The main concern in rural development is to bring about the modernization of rural society through a transition from traditional isolation to integration with the nation.
It constitutes a process of planned change for which one approach or the other is adopted for improvement and or transformation of the lot of rural populace.
It is concerned with the improvement of living in the rural areas on a self-sustaining basis through transforming the social-spatial structures of their productive activities.
- It involves creating and hindering opportunities for individuals to realize full potentials through education and share in the decision and action which affect their lives.
An effort to increase rural output creates employment opportunities and root - out fundamental cases of poverty, disease and ignorance.
The Concept of Rural Environment Development as a concept has been subjected to various theoretical interpretations and empirical operationalization consequently, it eludes any precise definition.
Nonetheless, most students of change would agree with the notion that development is a process by which a continuous increase in system’s efficiency produces the conditions which results in general upliftment.
It is that process which is concerned with the general improvement of man’s living conditions.
Thus, both the physical and psychological elements of development mutually reinforce each other in the process of general upliftment, which is indispensable to development.
Therefore, rural development is a determined and concise attempt to focus on the general upliftment of man’s living conditions in the rural area.
3.1.1 Nature of rural development Rural infrastructure constitutes the substance of rural welfare.
Efforts to raise rural welfare must therefore go beyond the traditional and limited approach of raising per capita income through agriculture.
Agricultural developments projects to the provision of rural basic needs such as health and medical facilities, rural transportation facilities, electricity, pipe-borne water and schools.
Rural Nigerians must be appreciated beyond their roles as mere producers of food and fiber for the needs of the urban economy.
3.1.2 Poor Infrastructural Facilities It is either there is complete absence of infrastructural facilities or they are in poor conditions such facilities includes good road network, electricity, pipe borne ware, health facilities.
Although they are capital intensive, they are essential in bringing about economic development.
3.1.3 High population Density and gross illiteracy Rural environments witnesses high population density.
They cluster within specific areas and thereby causing congestion.
There is no family planning, due to the low literacy rate.
Greater percentage of the rural people are not educated and this affects in the area of decision- making and in the management of economic activities.
3.1.4 Low Technological Base and Under Development Rural environment is characterized by low technology, which reduces output.
There is also under-employment.
Labour intensive activities reduce output and theory creating disguised unemployment.
3.2 The Concept of Development Development could be defined as a process of sustained increases in total and per capita income accompanied by structural transformation and modernization of socio-economic environment.
It could be economic development or growth.
Economic growth does not present the sources of increase in per capita income or the character of factors of production and infrastructure facilities.
Economic development takes into account the distribution, sources of growth, development and infrastructure and administrative framework essential to sustained economic.
In particular, development implies not merely the growth of per capita income or real income, but also its distribution, the sources of growth, the development of infrastructure, and administrative framework essential to sustained economic growth.
3.3 Indices for Development Increase in per capita income – income per head This is a major index that determines whether a society is developing or not.
But where the index signifies an increment, that means that there is a development effort.
- There is also more even distribution of income where by not few individuals are holding the nation to ransom.
Money is circulated in the hands of larger number of individuals.
- Reduction in the level of unemployment.
Where many people are employed, this means more people paying taxes and this is meant to be used for the development of the society.
- There is danger in a mono-economy.
A mono economy is a situation where an economy earns income in a single item or commodity.
Example is Nigeria that is depending mainly on oil.
So therefore, investment should be made into other ventures for diversification.
- There is also the increase in the supply of high level manpower.
.
- Balanced development should be seen in both the rural and the urban centers.
3.4 Steps in engineering development in the rural areas.
- The first step is carrying out informal survey and fact finding missions.
- Identifying small groups, leaders and interest groups.
- The third step is the identification of community problems.
- After the identification of the problems, the citizens and the government should be aware of it.
- There should also be what is known as plan articulation, proceeding on the planned action of change and evaluation and re-evaluation where necessary.
Activity 1 – Name 5 indices of Development Answer: 1.
Per capita income increment 2.
Even distribution of income 3.
Reduction in unemployment 4.
Diversification of the economy 5.
Supply of high level of manpower  4.0 Conclusion This unit explains the concept of rural development.
Rural development refers to any package designed for those living in the rural areas and most Nigerian live in the rural areas where they derive their means of livelihood.
Government at various levels has developed programmes that could enhance rural development.
The private sector also has major role to play in rural development.
5.0 Summary Developing the rural area will enhance the national income as most of resources are tapped in the rural areas.
Entrepreneurs should start thinking of establishing their business in rural areas Reference Umebali.E.E (2004): Rural Resources Farm Business and Rural Development.
UNIT 7 INTEGRATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introductions 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Integrated rural development 3.2 The role of government 3.2.1 The non government Agencies 3.2.2 The rural community 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Reading 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION The aim of any rural development programme should be to strengthen the socio economic infrastructure of development in the rural area to alleviate rural poverty.
In this unit, you will learn about integrated approach to rural development which has such components as economic and integration through participative learning.
2.0 By the end of this unit a student should be able to: - state and describe the approaches to rural development - Use your knowledge of the course to evaluate the role of your own community in rural development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 INTEGRATED RURAL DEVELOPMENT The integrated approach to rural development is a deliberate effort aimed at locating key rural development projects that will in turn attract other basic infrastructural facilities.
In other words rural development project should have linkage and multiplying effects, for example the construction of a major feeder road should form the basis for the location of large community farm, potable water supply, postal facilities, rural electrification, community skill centers and markets.
In the same vein, rural communities are agricultural in nature but agricultural development alone is not enough how ever intensified, and therefore cannot produce balanced rural development of adequate capacity, able to upgrade rural life.
Therefore rural agricultural development should lead to the development of Agro- allied industries.
Integrated rural development will thus combine modern agricultural development and the development of light and cottage industries including Services that give evident promise of improving life’s and income of the rural area dweller.
Integrated rural development involves massive investment hence, it require the joint action between the governments at its various level, the private enterprise and the rural community being developed.
3.3 THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT The Federal Government guidelines for the reform of the local government system in Nigeria in 1976 provided a frame work for the decentralization of some important function of state government to local government in order to harness local resources for rapid development.
One of the effects of the 1976 local government reforms therefore, has been the tendency to integrate community development activities and rural region programmes in to the local government system.
Local government bodies are expected to provide the principal local organization through which development at the local level operate.
Local government is typically expected to provide the equipment, technical staff and necessary funds for completion and future maintenance of community projects.
It’s also the local authority that the community look up to for assistance in providing materials and advice in the process of executing community project.
The local government are statutory bodies with legal powers to tax, regulate and promote grassroots activities and allocate resources.
The Federal Government in conjunction with the World Bank had established integrated Agricultural development projects in the states aimed at developing the rural areas.
Another programme for action for accelerated rural development by the government was the establishment of the direct orate for food, Roads and rural infrastructure with the mandate to: - Effectively promote a framework for grass root social mobilization - Mount a virile programme of development monitoring and performance evaluation and - Undertake the construction of about 60,000 kilometer of rural roads 3.2.1 NON GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATION Nongovernmental organizations are like public services organizations that are not funded by the government which are private in nature.
They make contributions within the framework of the planning towards integrated rural development in a combination of agricultural modernization and rural industrialization.
An example is the Fadama World Bank Project going on the six geopolitical zone of the nation.
3.2.2 THE RURAL COMMUNITY The part played by the rural population itself in rural development is what is called community self help programme.
In many rural communities in Nigeria, rural development is synonymous with community self help.
The rural population funding by competitive donations , levies or local taxation, the building of local infrastructures such as feeder roads, bridges and culverts rural electrification, water boreholes and pipe borne water.
They also generate and employ funds to build schools both primary and secondary.
They build health centers, maternity homes and cottage hospitals.
They strategy for acceleration the pace of rural development is based on the principle of working in close partnership with the people.
The idea here is to sensitize and mobilize the entire population especially at the grass root level and actively involve them in effective, economic and social activities.
The involvement of the people can be achieved through their voluntary association, community town unions, age and wrestling groups.
ACTIVITY 1 How effective are the current policies on rural development?
4.0 CONCLUSION Rural development is a joint exercise between the governments the private enterprises and the rural community being developed.
For integrated results the three sectors have to interact in paining an implementation.
The government is very much committed to rural development as an indication of its responsiveness to the need of the people and for the fact that development from below has gained the wide recognition globally as a strategy for accelerating social and economic progress.
5.0 SUMMARY It has been stated that integrated rural development requires joint action between the government at its various levels, the private enterprises and the rural community concerned.
The individual roles of the three parties in rural development were highlight and was concluded by reiterating that with about 80% of Nigerians living in the rural areas.
Rural development is undoubtedly the real foundation upon which any meaningful and sustainable national development can be built in Nigeria .
6.O TUTOR –MARKED ASIGNMENT What do you understand by integrated rural development?
7.0 FURTHER READING Ndegwa etal (1987) Management for Development Probity in Themes in Africa Today.
OUP Glasgow .
E.C Amnucheazi (1979) Reading in social Science issues in National Development 4th Dimension Lagos .
UNIT 8 SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTUR ES AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Social infrastructure 3.1.1 Medical and health facilities 3.1.2 Potable water and rural electrification 3.1.3 Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Reading 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 INTRODUCTION Social infrastructure support sustained Economic growth and improve quality of health and living conditions.
In this unit you will learn about social infrastructure and rural development.
The will be a special focus on the provision of medical and health facilities, potable water supply, rural electrification and education .
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit 9 students should be able to: - Explain what constitutes social infrastructure.
- Assess the importance of social infrastructure in the development of the rural areas.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE Social infrastructures remain the core element of rural welfare.
This effort to raise rural welfare must necessarily go beyond the traditional and limited approval of raising per capital income through agricultural development project to the provision of the rural basic needs in term of health and medical facilities, electricity, potable water and schools.
Rural Nigerians must be appreciated beyond their roles as mere producers of food and fiber for the needs of the urban economy to their roles as consumers and citizens equally entitled like their urban counterparts to the good things of life .
3.1.1 MEDICAL AND HEALTH FACILITIES In addition to realizing new income opportunities through production for the market, rural dwellers want to be rescued from the savages of disease, malnutrition and ignorance.
The health status of rural dweller is seriously impaired by such factors as their sources of drinking water , house types environmental sanitation, personal hygiene, nutritional status and literacy level.
3.1.2 POTABLE WATER AND RURAL ELECTRIFICATION Majority of the inhabitant of the rural areas obtains their drinking water from streams, rivers with only a negligible number having dug- wells and boreholes.
Adequate power supply is a pre-requisite for both economic and socio political development of any country.
It is for this reason that some communities stretch their resources beyond tolerable limits to find money to electrify their villages.
3.1.3 EDUCATION Formal and informal education imparts the ability to read and write and thereby enhances the production in two ways; First, famers are better able to understand and apply new economic information such as fertilizer, plant diseases and seed quality.
Others are pest control instructions, machinery operation and maintenance.
Secondly education enhances the knowledge that rural dwellers have of the nutrients value of food thereby maximizing their nutritional and social welfare.
Finally, education gives rural people dignity, self- respect and sense of belonging.
ACTIVITY What appropriate technologies do we need for sustaining rural based industrialization?
4.0 CONCLUSION Rural development seeks to achieve improvement in the quality and standard of living of the majority of the people in the rural areas through the provision of social infrastructure whose major components includes health facilities, education and rural utilities.
5.0 SUMMARY The units dealt with the element of social infrastructure and have argued that provision of social infrastructure holds the key to the attainment of the objective of the rural development which is the improvement in the quality and standard of living in the rural areas.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are social infrastructures and how do they facilitate the process of rural development?
7.0 FURTHER READING P. Ndegwa etal (1987) Management for development priority themes in Africa today.
Oup Glasgow.
K. Pultaswamalalt (1990) Poverty and Rural Development intermediate technology publications, London .
UNIT 9 SOCIAL CHANGE IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content  3.1 Nature of social changes in rural areas 3.2 Forms of social change 3.3 The school of thought 3.4 Sources of social changes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Rural areas are characterized by social changes, some maybe positive and some negative.
As is expected in a dynamic environment, changes will continue to occur.
However such changes permeate every facet of the rural development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit a student should be able to: - State the nature of social changes.
- Explain the forms of social changes - Discuss the two schools of thought in social change in the rural development.
- Enumerate the sources of social change.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 NATURE OF SOCIAL CHANGES IN RURAL AREAS Social change is a process by which alterations occurs in the structure and functions of a social system (social group, community).
Any change that occurs either in idea, norms, value, role, and social habits of a group or in the composition or organizations of their society could be referred to as social change.
3.4 FORMS OF SOCIAL CHANGE IN RURAL AREAS .
- Modifications in human attitudes and behavior pattern as a result of education e.g.
improved seedling in the area of farming.
- Alteration in social conditions resulting from changes in political or social organization.
This will result into loss of part of the family’s labour supplied by the children, an example is the instituting of universal primary education for universal basic educations.
- Effecting reforms in major legacy and functional system of the society, an example is the passing the law on valued added tax.
Whenever a law is passed it will call for a change in the way of life of people and this further call for adjustment.
- Changes in the materials culture i.e.
in the arts an artifact of the culture.
This is often the outward manifestation of changes in the non- material aspects of culture.
Social changes penetrate all aspects of social life and may manifest as: - Economic change- This occurs in the mode of production, economic relations and statuses of people in the society e.g.
industrialization, production of crops for sales rather than domestic consumption.
It could be the location of mineral in commercial quantities that will enhance income and employment .
- Political change – This deals with the change in the distributions and operating mechanism of social and political power within the social system for materials, power concentration in the hand of chiefs.
- Technological changes – Technological changes entails way of applying scientific and other organized knowledge to practical task.
Technological changes that are evident in other area are transportation, communication, health, education, housing and leisure.
- Cultural changes - This referred to the changes in the non-material aspects of culture e.g.
religion and the belief system.
Behavioral changes - This is a part of cultural changes, but it specifically embraces changes arising from the influence of reduction on the attitude and overt reaction of people.
Social change maybe planned or unplanned.
Planned social change has to do with human intervention in the shaping and direction of change towards some predefined goals.
Unplanned social change is the type that occurs suddenly usually though the act of nature, thereby affording human beings no chance to plan before it occurs.
Change may also be total or segmental in its coverage.
Total change is that which covers a wide range of activities, which may lead to a complete transformation of peoples way of life or their social institution.
Segmented change as the name implies covers only a particular portion and may not call for a total transformation of the system.
A change can also be coercive, compulsory, voluntary or democratic.
A coercive change is one that is forced on members of the society.
A community that decides to embark upon self-help projects plans for voluntary and democratic change.
So also is a nation which, after a referendum, decides to switch from a parliamentary to a presidential form of government.
Change could be imminent, referring to internally generated changes which occur without any external influence.
Contact change refers to change that is introduced into the system from sources external to that contact change or direct contact change.
Selective contact change occurs when an outsider unintentionally communicates an innovation into a social system.
Direct contact change deliberately introduces a new idea into the social system with the aim of bringing about the change in specific aspect of the system activities.
Theories of change have generally been concerned with; - The sources of social change - The time of span of change - The effect of change on the changing unit.
3.3 THE SCHOOL OF THOUGHTS - The Diffusion school : It views social change as an educational process.
It places less emphasis on the internal state of individuals but hold that the world society could be divided into two campuses on the basis of the relative modernity or permittivity of each segment.
- The Conflict Camps - This school of thought views man in the totality of his social relations and maintains that the gathering of small bit of facts about the past and aspects of the society can never yield the big truths about the social order itself.
3.5 SOURCES OF SOCIAL CHANGES A; Invention involves the recombination of existing cultural traits to fashion out new thing and the rate of which this takes place is directly related to the existing cultural base.
- Discovery is the sharing with others of a perception of a fact object or relationship which has always existed but was not known.
Discovery can enhance the cultural base in a society and therefore the rate of invention.
- Diffusion involves the spread of cultural traits from one group to another.
The following have enhanced cultural diffusion: (1) Increased and more efficient communication facilities.
(2) The speed with which people can now travel from part of the world to another and , (3) The existence of specifically trained personnel for the diffusion of innovation.
Other sources of social change include; formal educational institutions, urbanization, governmental policies, application of science and technology.
- Culture and structure of the society: This is when specific cultural traits become tightly interwoven with others in mutually interdependent manner.
Change in that direction becomes almost impossible e.g.
the rearing of cows and the religion of Fulani’s.
PREVAILING ATTITUDES AND VALUES A society that changes rapidly is the one changes in which its members are critical and skeptical of parts of its traditional cultures and are ready to accommodate and experiment with the new ideas of technology, originating externally and suppresses all those that do not confirm to its internal norms and values with change more slowly than the one which is liberal.
- Migration and population changes: This is mainly the movement of the people from one place to another, which brings them in contact with new cultural traits prevalent in other areas.
This social and cultural change is greater in society where there is constant emigration and immigration.
- Perceived Need: Here the society emphasis in determined by the need it perceives.
Emphases are placed on food and raw materials if it is in the rural areas.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is need for the students to acquaint themselves with the rural social changes as they bring about rural development.
I t is expected that the inhabitants of the rural areas will contribute maximally to those social changes that will enhance rural development.
Meanwhile, it has to be taken into consideration that high illiteracy level of the rural people retard positive changes .
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has considered rural social change, schools of thought and their sources.
The positive social change will enhance the welfare of the rural dweller.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.0 Define the term “social change” 2.0 How does social change contribute to rural development?
7.0 FURTHER READINGS Umebali E.E (2004) Rural Resource Farm Business and Rural Development Lagos.
Computer Edge Publishers.
UNIT 10 RURAL EDUCATION AND DEVELOPMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Rural Education 3.1.1 The rural area 3.1.2 Education of rural women 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A student in this unit will learn about rural education and how it transforms the rural areas.
Women education is highlighted as an integral part of rural education.
Most poverty and deprivation is found in the rural areas, due to the sparse population pattern of rural population and the concurrent problem of poor communication network due to difficult terrains.
Also, there are several logistic problems in providing the rural dweller with their fair share of education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit a student should be able to; - Discuss the provision of formal education to rural education.
- Discuss the various difficulties associated with rural education .
- State the relevance of women education to rural development .
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 RURAL EDUCATION The important of education in an individual life cannot be over emphasized.
It has long been acknowledged that education greatly affects an individual’s life chances.
This is confirmed by the high rates of income return to education.
It is however reasonable to assume that the accessibility to the school will be an important factor making for its utilization.
The rural areas are as deprived in education as they are in other respects.
Two sets of statistics could illustrate this; The first is the figure of literacy and Secondly the proportion of children of primary school age who are attending school.
The rural areas present a picture of severe and growing educational under- development.
This impairs social economic and political development of the rural community which are already desperately poor and frustrate other possible aim for education, connected with the wider definition of development such as social justice , personnel development of the people, the position of women and even levels of sickness and mortality.
3.1.1 RURAL AREAS The rural areas are comparatively under privileged.
This partly reflects the fact that rural families are also poor and partly the general bias in favor of the urban areas occasioned by the dual economy of Nigeria like any other developing country.
The disparity emerges in primary school environment that are lightly skewed in favor of the urban centers.
This urban bias is even more pronounced at the higher levels of education.
The first step towards securing social justice in the education sector of the rural population would be to devote more attention to the primary as compared with the higher levels of education.
But a solution was however found by the Federal Government with the establishment of Universal Basic Education (UBE) of the present administration , amongst others to boost basic education in the rural area and to reduce the urban- rural disparity in the provision of education.
3.1.2 EDUCATING THE RURAL WOMEN The rural woman is besotted with a lot of problems amongst which is lack of education.
Resistance to the provision of education for rural women sometimes , is the result not only of their general state of subjugation but also of the fact that the role which is assigned to them does not seem to imply any need for education.
In addition, rural women, when they marry by custom go to live with their husband’s families.
To spend time and money in educating a doctor who is going to take whatever she has gained away in marriage and a benefit to her immediate family.
However, quite apart from the considerations of social justices there is a strong case on pragmatic grounds for giving some priority to female education the rural women constitute a substantial proportion of the population.
Educating them therefore would release and inform the constructive abilities of a substantive part of the rural population.
It is also believed that both the health and nutrition of children are better where women have received some education.
There is also a link between female education and lower fertility.
All these are desirable for their own self improvement as well as having their contribution to make to economic and social transformation of the rural sector.
Activity 1 What role should women play on rural development?
4.0 CONCLUSION The yawning gap in education system between the rural areas and urban centers is not in doubt.
There is great inequality in the distribution of such education as is available between the rich and the poor, rural and urban dwellers and men and women.
This discrimination increases at the higher level of education.
As educational inequality preserves existing inequalities in power and wealth, its reduction would represent an important steps toward great social justices .
5.0 SUMMARY This unit was solely about the education of the rural women and the perceived impacts.
It also made a critique on the phenomenon of rural education and discussed also the disparity between urban and rural education .
6.0 T.M.A Define the term Education, why is it needed for rural transformation?
7.0 FURTHER READING A.M Yakubu etal (1966) the UNO at 50, an Appraisal Workshop Proceedings, Kaduna .
Amucheazi, E.C (1999) Reading in social sciences issues in welfare development.
UNIT 11 THE RURAL COMMUNITY AND ITS YOUTH DEVELOPMENTS TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Self help 3.1.1 Two way Communication 3.1.2 Development Alternative 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 T.M.A 7.0 Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will examine how youth in the rural areas are fused into the framework of community development and become active participant for the overall development of the rural community.
Community development has long been employed to co-opt local population behind new practices ranging from health and hygiene on the one hand, to farming methods on the other.
Its use in this way, though pragmatically useful will probably be no more important in the long run than its value in two other respect respects: 1- Strengthening the sense of community solidarity in a locality in order to make community action more effective.
2- Increasing the local participation in the formulation and implementation of official policies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, a student should be able to, - Define the term “community development” - Have a better understanding of community development.
- Evaluate the role of the rural youth in the organization and execution of community development projects.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.
I COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT This is a process by with the efforts of the people themselves are united with those of the governmental authorities to improve the economic, social and cultural conditions of communities and to integrate these communities into the life of the nation and to enable them to contribute fully to national progress .
This complex of processes made up of two essential elements; the participation of the people themselves in effort to improve their level of living with their initiatives and the provision of technical and others in ways which encourages initiative, self-help and mutual help and make these more effective.
It is expressed in programmes designed to achieve a wide variety of specific improvement.
3.1.1 SELF-HELP Development is meaningful where the masses of the people remain helpless.
The aim of community development is to stimulate self determination through self help.
By self-help members of community can also provide themselves with amenities such as classroom, borehole, good roads which might not otherwise be available to them.
3.1.2 TWO WAY COMMUNICATION The essence of good communication cannot be over emphasized here.
The contradictions in community development can only be resolved by incorporating in the planning process a strong vertical line of two-way communications and a clear hierarchy in which decisions of different degrees of generality can be made at different levels, in consultation with the people themselves at village level or with their representatives at higher levels.
There is an inevitable tension between the decentralized decision making inherent in community development and the reconciliation of divergent local trends and interests in a national plan for development.
3.1.3 THE DEVELOPMENT ALTERNATIVE The rural society is often based on age grading, providing both peer group support and a means by which the young maybe inducted into the skills ‘ traditionally thought necessary for the adults.
Government ought not to allow infatuation with modernization to prevent it from using this indigenous youth services as a means of bringing about desirable forms of development in the village.
There is every justification for giving special attention to the needs of the rural youth.
They represent the majority of the population, the majority of the unemployed and the future of the country.
In doing this, the assistance of the indigenous leadership of the village communities the chiefs and the elders, should also be enlisted.
The youths should be trained in activities directly relevant to the villages’ own development aspiration and where feasible, in roles which they can continue to perform within their communities after their training is completed .
Activity What role do you think the rural youth can play in the organization and execution of community development project?
4.0 CONCLUSION Community development is distinguished from social work in the community by its concentration on the needs of communities rather than on those of individual members or families.
The aims of community development as earlier indicated are twofold, first to strengthen the services of the community and help members to find common solution to their problems, some of which might be tackled by self- help activities and secondly to encourage greater participation by members of the community in the making and implementation of decision which affects them.
5.0 SUMMARY The subject of rural development is community development and self-help efforts.
The improvement of agriculture and the provisions of labour intensive employment within the rural communities are necessary tools in the empowerments of the rural youths.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you understand by the concept of self-help, how does self-help efforts help in the employment of youth in the rural areas.
7.0 REFERENCES Jennings A etal, the challenges of development in the eighties; our response Oxford, perzanon, 1982 UNIT 12 ATTITUDES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT STAFF TOWARDS RURAL DEVELPOMENT.
TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1.1 The Strategy of Development From Below 3.1.2 Rural Community Development and Local Government 3.1.3 General Attitude Towards Development 3.1.4 Attitudes Towards Community Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The focus of discussion in this unit is on development from “below” its strategy and attitudes towards community development from the perspective of local government staff and the general public.
Development from below is gaining wide recognition as strategy for accelerating social economic progress among leaders and the people of the developing nations.
The skills knowledge and capacities of people estimate important resources in self-help efforts therefore in our analysis; attention would be given to the means of improving and utilizing human resources in rural and community development undertakings.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, a student should be able to; - Explain the strategy of development from below - Assess the attitudes of the local government staff as well as the general public to rural development efforts 3 MAIN CONTENTS 1.1 THE STRATEGY OF DEVELPOMENT FROM BELOW Development from below has gained wide recognition as a strategy for enhancing social economic development in our time.
This trend is currently manifested by the government’s commitment to be more response to the needs of the people.
The Federal government guidelines for the reform of the local government system provides a framework for the decentralization of some important functions of state government to local governments in order to harness local resources for accelerated development.
To archive its major objectives, the functions of local government bodies were based on; a detailed local knowledge for efficient performances, community responsiveness and participation, significant use of discretion of understanding of individuals.
3.1.2 RURAL COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND THE LOCAL GONERNMENT Community development stimulates the self-help efforts of the people with reliance as much as possible on their own initiative to bring about a closer association between that effort and services of the government.
A local government on the other hand is a statutory body with legal powers to tax, regulate and promote local activities and allocates resources.
It is to the local authority that the community often looks up for assistance in providing materials and advice in the process of executing community projects .
Local government are typically expected to provide the equipments, funds for their completion and future maintenance of such projects similarly to discharge their duties effectively.
Local government needs the support of a participating and co-operative public.
The close interdependence of local government suggests that a chief requirement for the successful implementation of community programmes is the existence of strong and popular local government institutions.
The execution of this function may call for a shift in the primary role of government from one of maintaining law and order to one of working with and helping people to achieve their objectives.
The need for the guidance, direction and assistance of local authorizes in these programmes can be the essential components for the successful initiation and conduct of community development activities.
3.1.3 GENERAL ATTITUDE TOWARDS DEVELOPMENT The general attitude possessed by officials with respect to the nature of developmental activity and social change, shapes and conditions the decision reached and the approaches pursued by government administrators is becoming an increasing important factors in Nigeria as national policy seeks to engage active grass root participation in social and economic development.
3.1.4 ATTITUDE TOWARDS COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT Community development aims to improve the material and social conditions of people through local action.
This approach to development generally attempts to strike a balance between satisfying demands for amenities and the need to raise the income and productivity of the rural sector of the society.
In many places, government offices only assume that the end result of community development is materials’ improvement.
As a result great emphasis has , been placed on infrastructure, such as the building of roads, schools, dispensaries, community halls while insufficient attention is given to improved methods of farm production or to basic educational programmes.
Even though physical improvement are an essential aspect of community development, in a broader sense and encompasses efforts to promote the growth of the people themselves through education, training and a broadening of horizons.
ACTIVITY Explain the term “development from below” and how appropriate is it an approach to rural development.
4.0 CONCLUSION In view of the mutually reinforcing function of local government and development activities, the discussion in this unit was able to determine whether the attitudes and views held by key local government administrations are congruent with the ideals of community development and constitutes a factor likely to promote or retard community and rural development efforts.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit have systematically analyzed attitudes toward rural and community development held by local government officials and the general public.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the general attitudes of local government staff to the development of the grass roots?
7.0 FURTHER READINGS E.C Amucheaz (Ed) Readings in social sciences issues in National Development, Lagos, 1979.
Ekireme Okoh (Ed) National Conference on the New Local System in Nigeria, UNN, 1980.
UNIT 13 SOCIAL WELFARE IN RUARAL DEVELOPMENT Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents.
3.1 The philosophy behind social welfare in rural development.
3.11 The Neo-classical perspective.
3.1.2 The Marxist school.
3.1.3 The issue of Social policy.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 T.M.A 7.0 Further Readings TABLE OF CONTENTS.
1.0 INTRODUCTION.
The unit is all about some definitions of social welfare, the neo-classical and Marxist perception of social welfare as well as the policy issues in social welfare.
2.0 OBJECTIVES.
A student at the end of this unit, should be able to : - Give a good definition of social welfare, - Identify the various schools of social welfare and evaluate the policy issues in social welfare.
- 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 DEFINITION OF SOCIAL WELFARE .
The achievement of social welfare first and foremost is the alleviation of poverty in its many ramifications.
This cannot be solely a matter of redistributing more fairly what wealth is available, and the distribution network to be incorporated within a policy for economic growth.
In other words, it depends on the achievements of developments in the best sense of the word .
3.1.2 THE NEO-CLASSICAL PERSPECTIVE.
Economist of the Neo- Classical school, argue that development will occur only if countries liberate their economies from the hammer of government intention I other that the neutral advantages of a free market maybe realized.
However, close examination of the requirements for growth and for an effective social policy makes it clear that government intention is unavoidable, and that it calls for planning in which these aspects are closely integrated.
3.1.3 THE SOCIAL POLICY In the provision and development of social services, the key requirement seems to be the use of what is how often called appropriate technology.
A number of factors combine to make social welfare approaches in the developed countries unsuitable for use in many third world countries.
How GNP (Gross National Product) is important among these factors indicating a need to concentrate on preventive rather than remedial services.
In that respect, poverty has ton be focused on through the pursuit of growth and a more equitable distribution of resources like land, capital and a healthy environment rather than through income maintenance services.
ACTIVITY What would you advocate for the reason behinds social welfare in rural development?
4.0 CONCLUSION Social welfare policy based on direct work with individuals and families in need is inappropriate for third world countries is a feature of many aspects of social welfare.
This has been the case in land reform and agriculture improvement, in education and support of the needy in health, the improvement of nutrition in electing greater participation in decision making by the population.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit amply death with the definition of social welfare considered the major school of thought concerned with social welfare and policy issues in the field.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT.
What is the main thirst of social welfare policy as it relate to the grassroots developments 7.0 FURTHER READING 1.0 Adelment I. etal, Economic growth and Socialm Ewuity developing countires Stanford University Press.
2.0 Abel-Smith B. etal, Poverty development and health policy WHO Geneva.
Unit 14 HEALTH AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 1.1 Rural Nutrition.
3.1.2 Public Hygiene.
3.1.3 Primary Health Care.
3.1.4 The social Policy.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 T.M.A 7.0 Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will highlight health and rural development, health problems in relation to rural development.
It will also focus on health ands nutrition, public hygiene and primary health care.
In other words, what roles do these arms of health delivery services play in the development of the rural sector?
The human and social cost of ill-health do not require elaboration, the physical and mental suffering, the death and bereavement and family relationships either as a direct results of illness or of the economics deprivation which it bring in its …………… Its impact on development in its narrower, purely economics serves is no less serious.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, a student should be able to: - To appreciate the roles of nutrition, public hygiene and primary health care services in the development of the rural sector.
- Appreciate the human and social costs if ill-health in the rural community.
MAIN CONTENTS 2.1 NUTRITION The occupation of the rural dwellers is mainly agricultural in nature.
The connection between nutrition and poverty is clear from the fact that it is in the poorest countries that it is more prevalent.
This is partly from agriculture under development.
It is also due to the inadequate distribution of the means of existence written the country or communities concerned.
A smaller past of the problem results from dietary customs.
One of the aspects of this is preferred …………….. feeding of the male gender.
As a result, women and growing girls may receive only what is left over which is not only less attractive but also less nourishing.
A malnourished population is one whose immune system is weakened and vulnerable to disease and as such becomes less productive.
3.1.2 PUBLIC HYGIENE.
The provision of potable water and effective sewage and refuse disposal must be given equal importance with nutrition in any preventive health programme.
They are inter related.
Lack of pure water supply breeds such disease as diarrhea.
Infection of the gut and other water borne ailments which impair on the ability to ingest food.
But water control has even greater significance fort diet than the supply of water for drinking would imply, for it is required for food crops and stock both of which may die off in a prolonged drought.
Floods on the other hand can cause in…………… damage as it occurs almost annually in some low-lying rural communities.
Natural water supplies, which are not carefully monitored, are also a source of disease.
They provide a breeding place for mosquitoes, or snails harboring disease and flatworm.
The disposal of human and domestic waste poses similar questions about rural public hygiene and its implication for development.
Latrines are often times dugged near wells meant for drinking water.
3.1.3 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE.
The world health organization (WHO) initiated the movement towards the development of a primary health care programme in the rural areas in 1975 underlying the lack of adequate health services in the villages.
The programme advocated the appointment of primary health care workers with broad backgrounds and a commitment to community participation.
Participation was obviously necessary of health education was to be relevant in local terms and effective in changing behaviors, but there was to be relevant in local terms and effective in changing behavior, but there was also the growing belief that people should have more say in something which affect them and their families so intimately.
Apart from the right of everybody to understand the reasons for decision to share in making the people will only co-operate in a health programme intelligently and with the conviction if they are thus involved.
The ultimate aim after all is to establish habits consistent with health and hygiene as accepted features of daily life.
ACTIVITY Kindly assess the primary health care in Nigeria.
Has it fulfilled its purpose?
4.0 CONCLUSION.
The primacy of preventive and environmental health is emphasized in this unit.
It was also implied that the developing counties would not be able to meet the health needs of the mass to their people if they attempt to base their provision on models of the advanced countries, as it may not necessary be the most effective approach with their own socio-economics and political environment.
An appropriate technology for health based on the local situation is therefore required.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit dealt with health and rural development in which we focused attention on the roles of nutrition public hygiene and primary health care delivery services in the socio-economics development of the rural communities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT “Health is wealth”.
Discuss this statement in the concept of health and rural development in Nigeria.
7.0 FURTHER READING Akin L. Mabogunje: the development process; A spatial perspective.
London 1989 Amucheazi (Ed) Readings in Social sciences in National development.
UNIT 15 THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Definition of community development 3.1.1 Academic outlook.
3.1.2 Organizational outlook.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 T.M.A 7.0 Further reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Community development is a re………….. tool for rural transfer motion, therefore in this, a student will learn about the theory and practice of community development by exploring the philosophy, the strategies and the programme that are associated with it.
Community development has become a subject of great intellective curiosity, thus the literature in the subject matter is fast growing.
This is even more so as the subject matter cuts across disciplines like economics, sociology, history, anthropology and political science as well as development studies.
1.0 OBJECTIVES.
At he end of this unit a student should be able to - Develop a good conceptive framework of community development describe in clear terms the practice of community development.
2.0 MAIN CONTENT.
2.1 DEFINITION OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT While other concepts of development studies such as economics development political development coupled with the problem of precise definition for development, community takes it for granted and concerns itself instead with what the precise definition of community should be.
This is based on the premise that one needs to know what the community is before one can develop it.
But even then the interdisciplinary nature of community may simply be defined as a population living within the legally established city limit.
The definitions of community development are many but can be classified into two groups.
- Those who originate from the academic circle advanced in books and articles written on the subject; and those that originate from conferences and seminars.
3.1.1 ACADEMIC OUTLOOK The academic definition focusing on the social and educational values of community development, have stressed the spontaneity and growth of initiatives the independence of action and the emotional and psychological growth which community development bestows on the people who practice it.
The ultimate goal of community development is to help evolve through a process of organized study, planning actions in the physical social environment that is best suited to the maximum growth, development and happiness and as productive members of their society.
3.1.2.
ORGANIZATIONAL OUTLOOK The definition that comes under third group, have tended to emphasize the role of the government in community development.
Accordingly they have presented community development as a virgin soil for the extension of bureaucratic power.
The 1948 Cambridge conference on African administration defines.
Community development as a movement designed to the promote better living for the who community with the active participation and if possible on the initiative of the community and where this is not forthcoming spontaneously by the use of technology for arousing and stimulating it in other to secure its active and enthusiastic response to the movement in 1956 the United Nations Economics and Social Council came out with its own definitions which regards the community development as the process by which the efforts of the people themselves are formed with those of the governmental authorities to improve the economic, social and culture conditions of the communities into the life of the nation and to enable them contribute to national progress.
These conferences and seminars definitions are the ones most often adopted in the developing counties.
The reason being that in these countries, community development starts as an institutionalized part of government machinery.
ACTIVITY Differentiate between community and rural development.
State why they are inter related.
3.0 CONCLUSION Community development as strategy for implementing the conceptive formulations would be the mobilization of all the people affected by direct participation in solving perceiving problem.
This community development is a problem-solving device, a decision-making process which comes close to the rational model.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have dealt with the conception definition of community development, the philosophy, strategy and programmes associate with community development.
6.0 TMA State and explain the academic definition of community development.
7.0 FURTHER READING.
Jessie Bernard, community disorganization, international Encyclopedia of Social Sciences, vol 38 1- 4 Macmillian 1968.
UNIT 16 PROBLEMS OF DEVELOPMENT AT THE COMMUNITY LEVEL.
TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1.1 Finance 3.2.
Personnel and competence.
3.3 Politic and leadership 3.4 The community 3.1.5 Planning and ideology 4.0 Conclusion.
5.0 Summary 6.0 TMA 7.0 Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are so many problems confronting community development at the grass root level.
Measuring development at the local level can be done in form of infrastructural facilities provided and services delivered in this unit, a student will be concretely exposed to the specific problems facing community at the local level.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, a student should be able to - Identity the major problems militating against community development in Nigeria in their development efforts.
- Raise the issues discussed under each of these factors or problems 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PROBLEM AREAS.
In community development efforts some problem areas are indentified as that of finance, personnel, politics and leadership, community attitude intergovernmental relations, planning and ideology.
This is one way of classifying these problems.
It can also be classified as institutional problems, political problems and societal problems.
The first classification is favoured as just to allow the many issues generation by each problem.
3.1.1 FINANCE Finance has been observed to be the area of focus in any developmental effort.
It is the mainstay of local government, people talk move about finance, about how the competing needs in a community cannot be effective booked.
Too much money is spent on recurrent budget sometimes up t between 80 – 90% leaving a smaller percentage for social and community services.
This is not helped by the low interval revenue capacity of local government which amounts to, in average cases, not more than 10% of the local government revenue.
The overdependence on statutory allocation has made the prospect of economic and social development painfully slow in local government coupled with this; leadership is slow to explore alternative sources of revenue in local govt.
Despite the low level of finance, massive corruption takes place in local government.
Both administrative and political officials are involved.
Contracts are issued even to council staff and politicians see council as a place of rehabilitation and service to the community.
Evidence of corruption surfaces from inspection reports and probe panels, into local government.
Money meant for projects are embezzled.
3.1.2 PERSONNEL AND COMPETENCE Surveys have shown that in recent years, the quantum of staff has increased.
Also there has been more quality of staff in administration than the technical and professional fields in local government.
A survey in 1997 by the UNDP shows that the planning and research unit of local government has been understaffed and staffs who manage this unit of local government do to receive any special training to prepare them for such jobs.
One also hardly finds an economist or a statistician or a social scientist in this department.
Many of the staff in the health offices is community health staff.
Medical doctors are difficult to come by at the community level.
Agriculturalists are largely those who have gone for only an ordinary diploma level of Education.
The import of all these is the fact that planning for development is handicapped in local government because of the death of appropriate staff.
Plans therefore become an incremental thing, a traditional muddling through, than an objective and data fed document.
Professional advice to politician too suffers as a result of the quality of intellectual weight brought to bear on the exercise when it comes to its implementation, it is re……… with the same stories.
Targets and standards in plans may suffer as a result of poverty of professional requirements and competence.
Even where there are qualified staffs to do this, they will still fall victim of the corruptive influence of society brought to bear by either the contractor or politician or community pressure.
In summary, local government lack the executive, technical and professionals competence to formulate good plans and to implement them.
3.1.3 POLITICS AND LEADERSHIP The attitude of politicians to development may not coincide with established ways to doing community needs assessment by the local government bureaucracy.
Some projects are outrageously cited even without assessing their utility.
Political criteria override data based issues.
The political imposes his will partly because of the impulse driven by his constituency needs and because of his party manifesto more importantly is his perception of the community and the going-on the other tier of government.
3.1.4 THE COMMUNITY The communities often feel marginalized I development.
Local government plans and executes them.
Even community development efforts are not adequately supported by local government.
Even where the intervention occurs it is not done in a participatory manner.
The net effect of this is that the community feels marginalized from development programs and efforts.
This also affects the sustainability of projects.
The programme and project are community driven and participatory the more would want to own and sustain the programme.
This is a far cry from what happened at the local level.
This is why the community is not bothered when a health centre is burgled or the roof of a primary school is blown off.
They see themselves removed from the process as the initiative and execution was all by the governments.
Community attitude also reinforces the corruptive attitude of politicians instead of demanding for accountability from the politicians who amass lots of wealth and status symbols while in office, they perceived this as the ultimate objective of politics.
Such polities actors are acclaimed they end up saying “this is our time” the actor who dies not seize such an opportunity is branded a “fool” Going into polities means going to cut ones cake from the government.
3.1.5 PLANNING AND IDEOLOGY Local government plans in Nigeria are supposed to fit into state and national plans.
In the 1975 plans, the Federal Government came up with very catching phrases that defined the objectives of the plan such as a just and equalitarian society, a land full of opportunities these were supposed to also serve as the ideology of the plan.
Since then subsequent plans built their overall objectives around these.
However the implementation of plans since 1974 – 80 has not demonstrated any systematic effort to achieve these objectives instead plans have become more and more meaningless because they become mere documents of intentions rather documents of communications.
This attitude has spilled over too the state and local government.
State government have not demonstrated any leadership planning neither have they showed any commitments; if plans are the instruments for development , which in reality they are, the lack of commitment to them means lack of systematized development.
The type of development that takes place at the state and local government levels are impulsive, haphazard and un-coordinate.
The cumulative effects of a plan or evidence of phased development is yet to be seen.
Rolling plans ids yet to benefit the rural population.
The state and local government are satisfied with the provision of social services and rural infrastructure.
Their hope is that this attempt on their part to intervene in real economic development.
Attempts have stopped in either agriculture or building of rural markets.
Agriculture production is not enough to stimulate the rural economy.
Even then it is faced with many problems.
Markets can be seen as mere social and commercial entities that facilitates trade.
The real problem is in the area of production.
Agricultural production alone cannot improve the economic nature which ought to have been promoted by now so also glaring area like small scale industries of an agrarian nature and of nature relevant to community resources.
Such direct interventions are lacking and unit more investment is planned in employment generating ventures in rural communities; the standard of living of the rural person will not appreciate.
This is really the challenges for local government and other ties of government as they plan for rural development.
The capitalist ideology which operates at the national level must also start penetrating the rural areas for concomitant development.
ACTIVITY Identify problems of development in the community level.
4.0 CONCLUSION Problems confronting community development can be classified as institutional and societal problems.
Under institutional problems are personnel, finance, planning.
Even for the whole country the threat to development has been that of attitude.
It has become the malaise of politicians and careers civil servants.
Both parties co-operate s to channel resources away from the planned activities and stopped the development process.
The bureaucrats do the paper work and cover up.
Despite all the accountability measures, loop holes are still opened by those who should close them.
The value system the society has to change for any meaningful development to take place at all levels of government.
5.0 SUMMARY Six problems were identified in his unit as the ones confronting rapid development at the Community development.
The problems so identified are finance, personnel and competence, politics, community attitude, corruption and planning and ideology.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT.
In what ways has planning and ideology become a problem of development at the local government?
7.0 FURTHER READING Oyeyipo A Udoh: Local government as a vehicle for National development (published by the department of local government studies ABU Zaria 1984) Gboyega A Political values and local government in Nigeria (Malthouse Press, Lagos 1987)
