 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT BHM 766: RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NOUN 2 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Contents Introduction Course Course Objective Course Description Course s Study units Set textbooks Course assesement Tutor-marked assignmrnt Final Examinatiob and grading Tutor and tutorial Conclusion Introduction Welcome to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Course!
You are beginning a course about rural areas and the people who live there.
The course draws heavily on the disciplines of economics, sociology, history, anthropology, political science and development studies to understand the nature and philosophy of development at the rural areas.
For you to learn about rural life, why it is what it is and what can be done to improve the situation and how?
This is a core course of three-credit units within the Post-Graduate Diploma (PGD) in Local Government (Ordinary or Honours) Degree.
The advisory prerequisite for this course will be made known to you by the Course Co-ordinator.
RDuervaell o pment is designed to complement much of the information contained in the prerequisites.
By the time you complete the pre-requisites, you will find that Rural Development extends and builds upon your knowledge in this area.
If you are specializing in Local Government Administration or Management, you will find that RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT provides a foundation in this area.
Myouuc wh iollf lweahrant a bout Local Government Administration or Management is introduced to you in this course.
There is some overlap between these courses as they both focus on grassroots development.
You will find therefore, that the subject matter of each course interlinks with and support that of the other.
The course is made up of thirty study units.
Your study time for each unit will vary from one to four weeks.
You will find more detailed information about the contents of each unit in the section of this Course Guide entitled "Course Description".
NOUN 3 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Each study unit contains a number of self-tests.
These allow you to check your progress as you work through each topic.
At the end of each self-test is a question about your own experience.
It is advisable that you think very hard about these questions.
They ask you to apply the material you have just read to your experience in your Local Government Area or the country.
All the questions are discussed in the final unit and tutorials.
Some of your recommended textbooks are written by non- Nigerians.
You will therefore, judge whether all or some of the materials contained in them apply in the Nigerian environment.
Your opinion here therefore, matters a lot, as there are various answers to these questions.
You will learn some new terms and expressions during the course of the study You will also come into contact with new ideas, which may make you look at the concept of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT from an entirely different perspective.
This ccoouurrssee iisn nMota tlhikeem aa t ics or Accounting.
There is rarely a single correct answer.
There are, instead, different ways of looking at questions; many different ways of solving one problem; and solutions that often work only at this time, in this situation and with these people.
Most of the questions in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT do nworto hnagv aen rsiwghetr so, rb u t solutions, which work more or less effectively.
The study units, textbooks and exercises will help you master the topics over a period of about 18 weeks.
Before looking at study units or your textbooks, you should read This Course Guide thoroughly.
It tells you: • the aims and Objectives of the course • what the course covers.
• the components of the course.
• the amount of study time you need to cover the course successfully.
• how your performance in assignments and the examination will be assessed.
• how the tutorial system works.
You will probably need to refer to this Course Guide throughout the course to clarify important points about studying with the National Open University (NOU) of Nigeria Course Aims RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT aims to provide you with the basic introduction trou rtahle n pergolbeclet,m w ohfi c h has become a nagging issue of our time.
This includes how people in the rural areas live in absolute poverty, suffer from chronic malnutrition, illiteracy, shortened life span, limited access to good drinking water, health facilities avnirdtu ally lack of security of employment or a decent livelihood.
An understanding of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT will enable you to better appreciate and influence developmental NOUN 4 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT policies and programmes in favour of the rural poor who constitute about 80% of Nigerians.
The course adopts an integrated approach to the study of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DboEthV nEaLtiOoPnaMl EanNdT l oinca wllhyi csphe c ific aspects are examined.
Where possible, national and local experiences are highlighted.
Course Objectives Upon completion of this course, you should be able to: 1. explain theories and concepts relevant to the management of Rural Development.
2. apply these theories and concepts when analyzing, explaining, and attempting to tackle RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 3. idenptirfoyb ltehme sc.
ritical areas of concern in the field of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELaOndP aMrtEicNuTla t e their importance in addressing issues of rural neglect.
4. develop proficiency in systematically examining rural development problems.
Course Description RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT provides a bridge between theory and practice idne vmealonpamgeemnte nsttr aantedg i es.
It studies development at the basic level of the society and the grassroots level.
The course aims to assist administrators and policy-makers tuon d erstand the development needs of the rural people, and to equip them with the analytical skills and techniques to address the basic objectives of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DNEigVerEiaL.
OPMENT in There are thirty study units in this course: Unit 1: Definitions, philosophy and nature of Rural Developm Unit 2: Local Government as Agency of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt EL3:O PIMntEegNraTt ed RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt E4L:O PPMovEeNrtTy and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt 5E:L ROuPraMl EPNhyTs ical Infrastructures and Rural Developmen Unit 6: Social Infrastructures and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt EL7:O PRMuEraNl T Institutional and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt 8E:L ROuPraMl-EUNrbTa n Disparities Unit 9: Community Development as an Instrument of Rural Development Unit 10: RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT as a factor in National DUenvite lo1p1m: enMt anagement of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT NOUN 5 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 12: Issues in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT MUnaint ag1e3m: eTnht e Challenge of Poverty Alleviation and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt 1E4L:O LPoMcaEl NGTov ernment Reforms 8s Mobilization for Rural Development.
Unit 15: Electricity for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt EL16O: PMLEocNaTl Sources of Revenue for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt 1E7L:O TPhMe CEhNaTll enges of participation and control in grassroots Development.
Unit 18: The Structure of Local Government and the Implications for RURAL COMMUNITY AND Unit 19: AttituDdeEsV oEf LLOocPaMl GENovTe renfmfoertnst.
Staff towards Rural Development.
Unit 20: Social Welfare in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt E2L1O: PMHEeaNltTh and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt EL22O:P MTEhNe T basic needs strategy and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt 2E3L:O RPuMraEl ENdTu.c ation and Development Unit 24: The rural majority Unit 25: Role of the Social Worker in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DUEniVt 2E6L:O TPhMe REuNrTal.
Community and its Youths in Development Unit 27: Development Aid and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT PUrnoigt r2a8m: mThe e Theory and Practice of Community Development Unit 29: Rural Contribution to National Development Versus Rural Poverty Unit 30: Development, Growth and Welfare.
The units build on each other to work from the grassroots transformation to national development.
If you have completed the pre-requisite courses, you will find certain concepts in some units familiar.
But if you have not completed the pre-requisite courses, you may need to spend a little extra time familiarizing your self with some of the ideas.
However, this should not create any problems for you.
Perhaps you are not working in an organization: The skills you 0cquire on the course will still be useful to you in your day-to-day life situations.
RURAL COMMUNITY AND DcoEuVrsEe L O wPMhiEchN T icso nac e rns itself with policy formulation, policy analysis and pimolpilceym entation aimed at achieving a meaningful and sustainable development of the rural areas.
The analytical skills derivable from these activities can be applied in your dealings with any real life situation.
The course is designed to equip you with skills you can use in your job or real life.
There are adequate tutorial hours designed to assist you, try gain full advantage from tutorials you need to be up to date with your study.
Tutorials are not lectures but are designed to allow group discussion and input.
You get the most from a tutorial session, if you contribute your ideas and opinions.
Tutorials do not assist learners when they NOUN 6 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT make no input.
Your tutor will lead discussions and needs your help to make sessions successful.
The Course Calendar provides and overview of the course.
It suggests the amount of time you should use to complete the units and helps you to plan your study schedule.
It can be adjusted to fit your personal needs more closely.
The time needed to complete the study units, work through the practice exercises and assignments, and complete the other work involved in this course depends on your analytical ability and background in development studies or related disciplines.
You need to plan your own study schedule carefully.
The estimated time you need to spend on this course is about 10 hours per week.
This estimate includes time for reading the study units and studying the textbooks, completing self-tests and practice exercises, completing your assignments, undertaking the suggested reviews, attending tutorials and preparing for your final examination.
You must complete and hand in your written assignments on time.
Therefore, you need to plan and distribute your study time accordingly.
There are four assignments (TMAs) altogether to be Marked by your tutor.
One of these TMAs is required (i.e.
you must hand it in to grain the specific amount of OCAS that is assigned to this TMAs).
Other than this, the best two out of the other three will be counted towards your ucosunatiln u ous Assessment scores (OCAS).
You can find more information on assignments in a later section of this Course Guide.
Course Material In addition to this Course Guide, there are the following important components of the course.
At this time, please ensure that you have all of these materials available and can identify the various components in the course If you do not have the NOU- produced materials, you should contact the NOU immediately.
The textbooks, however, are your own responsibility.
These can be obtained from the Academic and professional book center: The addresses for the branches are in the book list that are sent to you.
Study Units Although we have recommended the amount of time you should spend on each study unit, you may prefer to study material in a slightly different way.
There is provision to detour from the pattern of the course, but you must complete the practice exercises, assignments and examination successfully.
The course is structured so that each unit builds upon previous knowledge.
Each unit includes at least seven different ways to help you study RURAL COMMUNITY AND DThEeVseE aLrOe:P MENT.
NOUN 7 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 1. reading the study unit 2. reading the textbooks 3. testing your comprehension and analytical skills by working through the self- test Questions which appears through out the units.
4. undertaking the activities that appear throughout the units.
These activities will ask you to think, observe, or under take some activities designed to help you apply your knowledge to your own experience.
5. completing the practice exercises in each unit.
6. preparing and writing problem-solving assignment 7. asking you questions about your own experiences.
Your answers help you link your experience to the course material and to Nigerian culture.
You must read each unit carefully.
It provides a commentary on the textbooks and introduce you to additional material.
Each unit also tells you how and when to complete your assignments.
If you don't read the study units carefully, you may miss important information.
Your study notes are designed to guide you through your textbooks.
You must read both the study notes and the texts.
They are not alternatives to each other.
It is also helpful to read as widely as possible.
Try to read articles in newspapers and journals, other books on the topic, and related cases.
The more you read, the better your appreciation and understanding of the subject will be.
Each unit directs you to read specific pages from chapters in the textbook.
You are expected to study and understand the principles and concepts involved.
Each unit contains self-test question, usually short ones, providing a duck on your understanding of a technique or principle you have just read about.
By attempting these short questions, you will have instant feedback on your progress.
You should attempt to answer all the self-text questions before looking at the answers.
This will help you to prepare for your assignments and examination.
After each self-test there is a question on your own experience!
At the end of each unit there is one practice exercise, which covers all areas you have studied in that unit.
It is important to complete all the practice exercises.
This will expose you to the types of questions you will be required to answer in assignments and in your final examination and also introduce you to some problems encountered in business, organizations and real life-situations.
The questions reflect the demands of the unit objectives; they are designed to help you understand and apply those principles covered in the unit.
Set Text Books There is no compulsory textbooks for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
NOUN 8 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Read as many textbooks, newspaper/journal ar ticles on the subject as possible Assignment File Assignment questions for the units of this course are contained in the section of the course materials entitled Assignment file.
You are required to complete yasosuirg n m ents and mail them together with a tutor-marked assignment (TMA) form to your tutor.
Course Assessment Your assessment for this course is made up of two components: tutor-marked assignment (TMAs) a final examination The pr actice exercise is not part of your assessment but it is important tcoo m plete all of them.
If you should have f ew pr oblems in completing your tutor -marked assignment Tutor-Marked Assignments This course has four assignments, which you will find in your Assessment File with detailed instructions on how to complete them.
Your tutor will mark and comment on.
Pay attention to the feedback and use it to improve your other assignments.
You will see from the course time table the dates to submit in your assignments.
The marks for the required TMAs and the best two out of the other three will be recorded and count towards your final mark for the credit for this course.
You can write the assignments using the materials from your study units atenxdt b ooks.
But it is preferable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a different viewpoint and a deeper understanding of the subject.
But do remember that copying from any sources without acknowledgement is plagiarism and is not acceptable.
You must make reference when you refer to or quote from others' work.
The minimum information needed is: author's name, date of publication, title, edition, publisher and place of publication.
The nature of the assignments varies, but they normally consist of either case studies or questions relating to the cases, short essays or short answer questions.
It is useful to illustrate any theoretical points with examples from your own experience.
This allows NOUN 9 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT you to demonstrate your understanding of the application of theory to real lsiifteu a tions Below are the total marks allocated to the assignments and to your feixnaaml i nation.
Title Value TMA 40% Exam 60% 100% Final Examination and Grading There is three-hour examination at the end of this course.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and the examination to review the whole course.
Review your practice exercises and assignments and your tutor's comments on them before sitting for the examination.
You will be advised of examination arrangements after you send in your examination registration card.
The final examination for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT covers information fcrooumrs ea lal npda r tsh aosf tthhee same format as the specimen examination paper, which will be discussed in the half-day school.
The examination will not contain "trick" questions or questions that try to confuse you.
That is, not consistent with the open approach, the NOU approach is difference.
To earn a passing grade for the course you must submit at least three TMAs including the required TMA, and attain a passing grade (i.e.
at least score 40) on these and on your final examination.
Tutor and Tutorials: Your tutor marks and comments on your assignments, keep close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you encounter, and provide you with aAssssiisgtannmcee.n t s should be mailed in accordance with the course calendar.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
It is a good idea to keep a copy of all the assignments you send to your tutor for marking.
The copies will prove useful, should you wish to make reference to them during telephone conversations, or if they are lost in the mail.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone if you need help.
Here are typical circumstances in which help is necessary.
Contact your tutor if: NOUN 10 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT • you do not understand any part of the study Units or the assigned readings • you have any difficulty with self-tests or practices exercises • you have a question or problem with assignments, with your tutor's comments, or grading on an assignment.
Tutors have complete authority on two points.
First, they are responsible for the grade you receive on assignments.
If you disagree with a mark, discuss it with your tutor.
Second, they alone decide if you may or may not rewrite an assignment.
To assist you in this course, regular tutorials are organized with your assigned tutor.
Very interesting activities are designed for the tutorials.
They also give yoopup o r tuanni t y to sort out any problems.
You will be notified of their dates, times, and location, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
We strongly recommend that you attend these tutorials and the half-day school.
They provide considerable assistance in your study of this course and improve your chances of gaining high marks.
They also let you meet other learners studying through the NOU.
Tutors are required to start tutorial day school sessions on time.
If a tutor fails to turn up 30 minutes after the scheduled starting time, students may assume that the session is cancelled and they should report the case to the course co-ordinator so that a make-up session can be arranged.
TMA extension Policy The assignment policy of the University as stated in the student Handbook should be observed.
Applications for extension of up to seven days should be submitted to the tutor.
For extensions of over seven days, students should note the following: 1. assignment extensions may be granted in extenuating circumstances, which should be interpreted as circumstances that are unexpected.
Work commitments and traveling are not regarded as extenuating circumstances unless they are unexpected.
2. supporting documents must be submitted along with the application for extension of over seven days to justify the claim.
Applications without supporting documents will not be considered.
3. applications for extension should be submitted either before or on the due date.
4. the decision to grant or refuse an extension is made by: * the course co-ordinator for extensions of up to 21 days; * the Dean for extensions of over 21 days.
NOUN 11 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT If the assignment is posted to the tutor, it is the responsibility of the student to check with their tutor that the assignment has successfully arrived.
Extension applications without supporting documents on the ground of postal loss will not be accepted.
The University cannot accept any responsibility for assignments that are not received by your tutor due to problems with the post.
As a precaution, you are advised to keep a copy of each assignment you submit and obtain a certificate of posting from the post office when you post your assignment.
Conclusion RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT is a subject that should interest any body who iqsu caolintyc eorfn elidfe a ibno utht et hreu ra l areas either in Nigeria or any Third world Country of Africa and Asia.
The course has therefore, been designed to help you understand the most complex problems of the developing nations which is that of modernizing the rural areas.
It requires both conceptual and analytical skills.
You must analyse and apply concepts to understand the nature and philosophy of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
Hopefully, you will find it fun, interesting and useful as an administrator or a policy- maker (or potential ones) interested in the development of your country.
Good luck, and enjoy the course.
NOUN 12 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT BHM 766: RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developers Mr. Ataha J. I.
Unit Writers Mr. Ataha J. I. Programme Leader Dr. O. J. Onwe Course Coordinator Martha U. Nkom National Open Univewrsity of Nigeria, Lagos NOUN 13 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 Definitions, Philosophy and Nature of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Definition 3.2 Philosophy and Nature of RURAL COMMUNITY AND 3.3.
DThEeV EALiOmP MaEnNd T Objective of RURAL COMMUNITY AND 1 DThEeV REuLrOalP OMuEtloNoTk 3.2.
Conclusion 2 Summary 4.0 Further Readings 5.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 6.0 7.0 1.0 Introduction: This unit will provide you with the general background information about the course by introducing you to the definitions, philosophy and nature of Rural Development as well as high lighting the salient features of a rural setting.
RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT has attracted so such attention in recent ygeoavresr ninm beontth c tihrcel e and among scholars and students of Development Studies due to the realization that the prospects for a meaningful and sustainable national development in the country lies in the transformation of the rural economy.
Not less than 80% Nigerians are rural dwellers.
2.0 Objectives: By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - define RURAL COMMUNITY AND D- EsVtaEteL OtPhMe EaNimT s and objectives of RURAL COMMUNITY AND D- dEeVscErLibOe PthMe EKNeTy features of a rural Community.
NOUN 14 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 3.1 Definitions of Development and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 3.1.1 Development Development as a concept has been subjected to various theoretical interpretations and empirical operationalization.
Consequently, it eludes any precise definition.
Nonetheless, most students of change would agree with the notion that development is a process by which a continuous increase in a system's efficiency produces the conditions which result in general up-liftment.
Upliftment in this context, could be material and quantitative while it could also be psychological and qualitative in which case it is hardly quantifiable.
In essence, therefore, development is that process, which is concerned with the general improvement of man's living conditions.
Thus both the physical and psychological elements of development mutually re-inforce each other in the process of general upliftment, which is tantamount to and indispensable to development.
3.1.2 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Rural Development is a determined and conscious attempt to focus on the general upliftement of man's living conditions in the rural areas.
3.2 Philosophy and nature of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
3.2.1 Philosophy: The general thinking or philosophy of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT is aolnw aa ynsu mprbeedri coaft ereda s ons, the most significant of which is the criminal neglect of the rural areas occasioned by the widely held belief that the attitude of rural inhabitants is reactionary and antagonistic to modern ideas.
The view is held that the rural areas are traditional; unresponsive to modern economic motivations and fatalistic and that the inhabitants are unwilling to transform the social and political conditions which they inherited.
Such viewpoint hinafdlu enced the policy makers of the 1960s in their undue emphasis of urban development to the detriment of the rural areas.
However, irrespective of this trend, contemporary development has shown that more than 80% Nigerians live in the rural areas and most of the food that is consumed in the country is produced by these rural dwellers.
Yet the rural areas lack good roads, pure water supply, modern health care institutions, electricity and industries.
3.2.2 Nature of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Rural infrastructures constitute the substance of rural welfare.
Efforts to raise rural welfare must therefore, go beyond the traditional and limited approach of NOUN 15 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT raising per capita income through Agricultural development projects to the provision of rural basic needs such as health and medical facilities, rural transportation facilities, electricity, pipe-borne water and schools.
Rural Nigerians must be appreciated beyond their roles as mere producers of food and fiber for the needs of the urban economy.
3.3.1 Aims and Objectives The President and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Force; of the Federation of Nigeria in his 1986 Budget Speech stated that: Ru ral Development will move away from past Narrow sectoral pr e- occu pation with the generation of food and fibre surplu ses to overall population of a national RURAL COMMUNITY AND DwiEthV E LeOmPpMhaEsiNs T osntr a t etghye alleviation of rural poverty and enhancement of th e quality of rural lif e. The aims and objectives of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT are therefore, basically two: (a) alleviation of rural poverty (b) enhancement of the quality of rural life.
A number of policy measures have been put in place for the realization of these aims and objectives.
This will be discussed in the next segment (unit 2) of the course.
3.4.1 The Rural Outlook: The majority of Nigerians still live in rural areas.
Farming is the major activity of rural Nigerians with arable and perennial crops being the main farm produce.
Livestock and fishery production is also significant.
Secondary rural activities are trading, food processing, weaving (basket and cloth), tool fabrication, carving, carpentry and poultry.
These secondary activities provide supplementary incomes and could constitute a major source of diversification of the rural economy in terms of small scale industries.
The rural areas lack basic amenities as potable drinking water, access roads, electricity supply, and good housing.
Infrastructures for economic development are in most cases inadequate ocor m pletely non-existent.
NOUN 16 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Exercise What current policies are being introduced to encourage and sustain rduervaell o pment in the country?
4.0 Conclusion: In this unit, you have learnt many important issues that relate to the focus and essence of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
You should by now be akbnloew tole udsgee y oouf r thbea s ic c ourse to understand why Rural Development has been considered the real foundation upon which any meaningful and sustainable national development can be built.
It is farce to talk of national development if the transformation of rural economy and life is not taking its due place.
5.0 Summary We have in this unit dealt with definitions of development and Rdeuvreallo pment and we have also discussed the philosophy and nature of Rural Development, the aims and objectives and highlighted what we have referred to as the rural outlook.
The units that follow shall build upon this introduction.
6.0 Further Reading: F. S. Idachaba, Rural Infrastructures in Nigeria, Ibadan University Press, Ibadan, 1985.
E.C.
Amucheazi (ed.
), Readings in Social Science Issues in National Development; Fourth Dimensions Publisher, Lagos, 1979.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What are the aims and objectives of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
Unit 2 Local Government as Agency of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Tab le of Content s: NOUN 17 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 1.0 Intr oduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Definitions of Local Gover nment 3.2 The Need for Local Gover nment 3.2.1 Local Gover nment and RURAL COMMUNITY AND 13.2.2 DImEpVacEtL oOfP MLEoNcaTl Govt.
Ref or ms of 1976 on RURAL COMMUNITY AND 4.0 DCoEnVcEluLsiOoPnM ENT 5.0 Summary 6.0 Fur ther Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction: In this segment of the course we shall discuss the role of Local Government as agency of Rural Development.
It is gaining currency that the rural sector cannot be regarded as antagonistic to development effort if as much as 80% Nigerians live in this area.
It is therefore, contended that if the rural sector is effectively mobilized there will be no resistance to change and that government will receive the desired co-operation in its development programmes as the feeling of belonging of the rural dwellers will be enhanced with improved standard of living.
We shall be concerned in this unit with the question of whether local government is the most appropriate agency to carry out this role and if so to what extent has this objective have been achieved.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - say what Local Government is - state the major roles of Local Government in RURAL COMMUNITY AND D- eEvValEuLatOe P MthEe N pTe rformance of Local Government as agency of Rural Development.
3.1 Definition of Local Government: Local Government in Nigeria is recognized as the third tier of governmental activity.
It is government at the local level exercised through representative councils established by law to exercise specific powers within defined areas.
These powers should give the council substantial control over local affairs as NOUN 18 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT well as the staff and institutional and financial powers to initiate and direct the provisions of services and to determine and implement projects so as to complement the activities of the state and Federal Governments in their areas, and to ensure, through devolution of functions to these councils through the active participation of the people and their traditional institutions, that local initiative and response to local needs and conditions are maximized.
Local Government is expected therefore, to do precisely what the word government implies i.e.
governing at the grassroots or local level.
3.2 The Need for Local Government The need for decentralization by devolution is further supported by the fact that centralization inhibits the active participation of the citizens in the running of their own affairs, which in most cases can lead to despotism.
LGoocvaelr n ments are established for a number of reasons: (a) to promote local freedom or autonomy (b) to provide local services or infrastructural facilities (c) to promote national unity through efficiency of administration (d) to enhance grassroots democracy.
Local Government constitutes the most critical level of government at which the momentum to sustain national development can be created.
3.2.1 Local Government and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT The functions of Local Government in Nigeria are enunciated in both the guidelines for Local Government Reform and in the 1979 constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (Read up the details in any of these documents).
The functions are basically two i.e.
exclusive and concurrent.
The functions can be further classified into three groups.
(a) the regulatory and controlling functions (b) power to engage in economic ventures like provision of transport services and commercial ventures.
(c) Provision of welfare services i.e.
distributive functions.
When a global view is taken of the various functions of Local Government in Nigeria one discovers that Local Government is most disposed to RDuervaell o pment.
First, it is the nearest level of government to most Nigerians.
Second, it is the level of government that easily lends itself to the necessary psychological preparedness for massive Rural Development.
Thus, it has a ready made institutional arrangement for social and political mobilization of the people for any governmental measure, RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT inclusive.
Finally, NOUN 19 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Local Government is the most efficient provider compared to other levels of Government in the provision of certain infrastructural facilities.
Local Government is therefore, the most appropriate agency to bring about Rural transformation within any political system.
3.2.2 Impact of Local Government Reforms of 1976 on RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT The Local Government Reforms of 1976 was aimed at the entire roer-g anisation of the previous structures of the Local Government with the view to improving the welfare of the masses within its area of jurisdiction and strengthening the effectiveness of the administrative machinery of the Local Government.
If we now recapitulate our earlier definition of Rural Development as the process by which the standard of living at the grassroots level is enhanced politically, socially and economically, you will agree that the Local Government Reforms has greatly enhanced RURAL COMMUNITY AND DexEpVanEcLiaOtePdM bEelNowT .a Ts h e reforms have enhanced greater participation of the rural people in the political activities of the Local government council.
This is so because with the reforms, greater political awareness has been stimulated and more people now realise the purpose and functions of the LGoocvaelr n ment.
Such awareness has led to greater political development in the Local Government areas.
The reforms have also generated more team spirit in the local government system as many councils have generated self-help spirit which has led to the construction of many development projects such as dispensaries, roads, maternity homes, town halls, culverts, etc.
Some rural areas have even embarked upon providing themselves with electricity, water supply and markets.
The cumulative effect of this self-help spirit is aenn h anced RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
Other developmental abcyt ivvairtiieosu se mlobcaarlk geodv ueprnomn e nts as an aftermath of the reforms include building of more classroom blocks and providing text books to pupils as well as providing farm implements like fertilizer, seedlings, tractors at heavily subsidised rates.
The local governments have also taken a greater part in improving the health of the rural populace.
The local governments have also helped to group the rural population into viable co-operative associations capable of attracting loans from many finance houses for investments which have considerably enhanced the development of the rural areas since the local government Reforms of 1976.
Exercise: What role should local government play in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion NOUN 20 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT In Nigeria, like most developing countries local governments are strategic to the development of the rural areas where about 80% of the total population live.
Being closest to the people, local governments make useful recommendations to the Central governments to enable them carry oduevt e lopment programmes in these areas.
Also they provide socio-economic amenities in the rural areas as part of their duty for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have dealt with the definition of Local Government, examined its relevance and discussed what role it could play in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DhoEwV tEhLe O19P7M6 ELNoTca al nGdo v ernment Reforms have enhanced the functional roles of the Local Governments in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 6.0 Further Reading Suleiman Kumo 8a A. Y. Aliyu (eds).
Local Government Reform in Nigeria ABU Press, Zaria, 1979.
E.C.
Amucheazi (ed.
), Readings in Social Science Issues in National Development Fourt Dimensions Publisher, Lagos, 1979.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Critically appraise the role of Local Governments as Agency of RDuervaell o pment Unit 3 Int egrated Rural Developm ent NOUN 21 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents: 1.
0 Intr oduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Integr ated Rur al Development 3.2 The Role of the Gover nment 3.2.1 The NGOs 3.2.2 The Rural Community 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Mar ked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction The main thrust of any RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Programme sthheo u l ds obcei oto-e sctorennogmthice n i nfrastructure of development in the rural area and to alleviate rural poverty.
In this unit, you will learn about integrated approach to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT which has such components as ethcroonuogmh ipca arntidc iipnatteigvrea tpiloann n ing.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - state and describe the approaches to RURAL COMMUNITY AND D- uEsVe EyoLuOr P MknEoNwTle dge of the course to evaluate the role of your own community in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
3.1 Integrated RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT The integrated approach to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT is a dloecliabtienrgat ek eeyff oRrUt aRimALed C aOt MMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT projects that will in turn iantftrraascttu r cotuthraelr fabcaisliitci e s. In other words rural development projects should have linkage and multiplying effects.
For example, the construction of a major feeder road should form a basis for location of large community farm, potable water supply, postal facilities, rural electrification, community skills centre and markets.
In the same vein, Rural Communities, by the very name, are agricultural but agricultural development alone, however, intensified, and cannot produce balanced rural development of adequate capacity, able to NOUN 22 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT upgrade rural life.
Therefore, rural agricultural development should lead to the development of agroallied industries.
Integrated RURAL COMMUNITY AND DthEusV cEoLmObPinMe EmNoTde wrnil al g ricultural development and the development of light and cottage industries including services that give evident promise of uplifting living and improving income of the rural dwellers.
Integrated rural development involves massive investment hence, it requires the joint action between the government at its various levels, the private enterprise and the rural community being developed.
3.3 The Role of the Government The Federal Government Guidelines for the reform of the Local Government System in Nigeria in 1976 provided a framework for the decentralization of some important functions of State Governments to Local Governments in order to harness local resources for rapid development.
One of the effects of the 1976 local Government reforms therefore, has been the tendency to integrate community development activities and rural welfare programmes into the local government systems.
Local Government bodies are expected to provide the principal local organs through which development at the local level is to operate.
Local Governments are typically expected to provide the equipment, technical staff and necessary funds for completion and future maintenance of community projects.
It is also the local authority that the community looks on to for assistance in providing materials and advice in the process of executing community projects.
The local governments are statutory bodies with legal powers to tax, regulate and promote grassroots activities and allocate resources.
The Federal Government in conjunction with the World Bank had established Integrated Agricultural Development Projects in the States aimed at developing the rural areas.
Another programme of action for accelerated RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT bwya sth e gtohvee r n meestnatb l ishment of the Directorate for Foods, Roads and RInufrraals tr ucture (DFRRI) with the mandate to: (a) effectively promote a framework for grassroots social mobilization (b) mount a virile programme of development monitoring and performance evaluation, and (c) undertake the construction of about 60,000 kilometers of rural feeder roads.
3.2.1 The Private Enterprise (Non-Governmental Organization) Many private enterprises or non-governmental organizations (NGOS) are today making much in-roads into RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
They make contributions NOUN 23 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT within the framework of planning towards integrated RURAL COMMUNITY AND DcoEmVbEinLaOtioPnM E NofT i na ag r icultural modernization and rural industrialization.
An example is the World Bank, and other NGOS sponsored rural development projects spread all over the country covering such areas as aegdruiccautlitounr,e ,h e alth and so forth.
3.2.2 The Rural Community The part played by the rural population itself in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DcaEllVedE cLoOmPmMuEnNityT siesl wf-hhealtp i sp r ogramme.
In many rural communities in Nigeria, rural development is synonymous with community self-help.
The rural population funds by competitive donation, levies or local taxation, the building of local infrastructures such as Feeder roads, bridges and culverts, reulercatlr i fication, water bore holes and pipe borne water.
They also generate and employ funds to build schools (Primary and Secondary).
They build health centers, maternity homes and hospitals.
The strategy for accelerating the pace of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT is based on the principle of working iwni tchlo steh pe a rtpneeorpshlei.p The idea is to sensitize and mobilize the entire populace especially at the grassroots level an actively involve them in eefcfoencotimveic and social activities.
The involvement of the people can be achieved through their voluntary associations, community/town unions, age groups and working groups.
Exercise How effective are the current policies on RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT is a joint exercise between the genotveerrpnrmiseesn t sa, nthde t hperi v aruter a l community being developed.
For integrated results, the three sectors have to interact in planning and in implementation.
The government is very much committed to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT aitss arnes ipnodnicsiavtieonne sosf to the needs of the people and for the fact that development from below, has gained wide recognition globally as a strategy for accelerating social and economic progress.
5.0 Summary You have learnt in this unit that integrated RURAL COMMUNITY AND DacEtiVonE LbeOtwPMeeEn NthTe rgeoqvueirrnesm ejnoti natt i ts various levels, the private enterprises and the rural community concerned.
The individual roles of the three parties in NOUN 24 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT were high lighted and we have cwointhc luabdoedu tb 8y0 r%ei teorfa t iNngig tehraita n s living in the rural areas, RURAL COMMUNITY AND DunEdVouEbLteOdPlyM tEheN rTe aisl f oundation upon which any meaningful and sustainable national development can be built in Nigeria.
6.0 Further Reading P. Ndegwa etal (eds.)
Management for Development Priority Themes in Africa Today, OUP Glasgow, 1987.
E. C. Amucheazi (ed.)
Readings, in Social Science Issues in Nationadle v elopment 4th Dimensions Publisher, Lagos, 1979.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What do you understand by integrated RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
Unit 4 Poverty and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT NOUN 25 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents: 1.
0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The Concept of Poverty 3.2 The Subsistence Concept of Poverty 3.3.
Poverty as Relative Deprivation 1 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Further Readings 6.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
7.0 1.0 Introduction The tragedy of rural poverty will have serious consequences for its urban neighbors as new migrants flow into the urban areas leading to the over stressing of every available social and infrastructural facilities.
It also adversely affect rural production.
In this unit you will learn about rural poverty and the impact of this phenomenon on the development at the rural areas.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - define poverty - explain carefull subsistence - poverty and poverty as relative deprivation; and - distinguish between the two concepts.
- analyse the impact of poverty on RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
3.1 The Concept of Poverty: Poverty is a relative term, a condition that can only be defined by comparing the circumstances of one group of people or an entire economy with another one.
The problem of definition of poverty arises because the indicators one uses to compare groups populations depend on a number of assumptions about adequate standards of living which some enjoy and which some do not.
Absolute poverty describes a situation in which people are barely existing, '"Where the next meal may literally be is a matter of life or death as the cumulative effects of malnutrition and starvation enfeeble all.
Many rural dwellers are in or close to this vulnerable position, relying on aid, food relief or NOUN 26 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT their own meager returns from another farming, scavenging on refuse heaps, prostitution, street hawking and so on.
3.3 The Subsistence Concept of Poverty: This concept is based on an estimate of the level of income necessary for buying food sufficient to satisfy the average nutritional needs of each adult and child within a family.
The cost of this food can be seen as the basic cost of subsistence which when added to an allowance for basic clothing (warmth), and shelter (rent) produces an income figure below which families can be said to be in poverty.
The subsistence concept of poverty has gained wacicdeep t ance globally since the turn of the twentieth century.
Its attraction lies in its apparently objective, scientifically derived assessment of the nutritional levels necessary to keep the body physically healthy.
3.2.1 Poverty as Relative Deprivation: This approach sees poverty as a process of encroaching deprivation by which people gradually slip out of the mainstream of social life, almost unnoticeably, without being the stereotype paupers in rags and tatters.
The point is also made that people need to participate in the customs, leisure pursuits, and political culture of everyday life but where their circumstances militate against this participation, and then they are relatively deprived.
Therefore, deprivation has to be measured both materially and socially Exercise Can the poverty of the rural poor be eradicated without giving them effective share in political power?
4.0 Conclusion We have seen two different conceptions of poverty, that of subsistence and of deprivation; which could be applied to the rural areas.
The two conceptions have policy implications for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
When the saudbospitsetden, cite w aopuplrdo accleha irsl y make provisions with regards to satisfying people's needs for food, warmth and shelter.
This would certainly be an advance in the context of the desperate malnourishment experienced among the rural dwellers.
However, such a strategy might only serve primarily to relieve some symptoms of poverty rather than its cause.
This is because much of the hardship suffered by the rural dwellers is due to a steady reduction in the availably land thereby leading to sharp increases in the level of deprivation.
A policy based on the relative deprivation approach would confront the primary cause of poverty and NOUN 27 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT propose a major re-distribution of land (and probably increase) in favour of the rural farmers and pastoralists.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with poverty and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DspEecViEficL OloPoMk aEtN thTe avnadr itoauksi ncgo nac e ptions of poverty and how they relate to rural dwellers.
We have argued that whereas the subsistence strategy would address only the symptoms of rural poverty, the relative deprivation approach would go into the root cause of rural poverty by addressing the issue of land ownership and proposing major land re-distribution hence, it is preferred for providing a long term to the problem of rural poverty and by extension RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
6.0 Further Readings Howard Jones, Social Welfare in Third World Development, Macmillan, London, 1990.
Suleiman Kumo 8v A. Y. Aliyu (ed.)
Local Government Reform in Nigeria, A.B.U.
Press, Zaria, 1979.
7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignment Distinguish between subsistence poverty and poverty as a relative Deprivation.
Unit 5 NOUN 28 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Rural Physical Infrastructure and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3 Rural physical Infrastructure 4 Transport Facilities 5 Storage Facilities 6 Irrigation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Reading 7.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction: Rural infrastructure constitutes the substance of rural welfare.
In this unit, you will learn about rural physical infrastructures and their importance to Rural Development.
This will be done by looking at transportation and storage facilities in the rural areas.
2.0 Objective By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - describe the rural physical facilities; - explain how they facilitate RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
3.1 Rural physical infrastructure Infrastructural facilities are essential for providing the nation's marketed surpluses of food and fibre, to earnings as well as diversifying ignecnoemraet in g capacities and gainful employment opportunity in the rural sector.
The main compoment of rural physical infrastructure are transportation facilities (such as roads, rail roads, bridges, ports and footpaths).
Others are storage warehouses, cribs, open air facilities) (machinery, equipment, building, etc.).
3.2 Transportation Facilities: NOUN 29 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Rural Roads constitute perhaps the most important infrastructure in tshtreu c tural transformation of the rural areas.
Contribution of rural roads to agriculture and rural transformation include: (a) accelerated delivery of Farm inputs (b) reduction in transportation costs especially with regard to human energy costs of head porterage and the opportunity cost of farmers on time spent trekking long distances.
Rural roads also remain the most important single element in the development of an integrated food production system in which farm produce within different agro-climatologically zones are co-ordinate, where there are no accessible rural roads.
This affects the effectiveness of public policy such as government input subsidies and land development schemes 3.3.1 Storage Facilities: Crop storage facilities preserve foods in the form that consumers need them.
The bulk of the crop storage is carried on in a farm storage facilities.
On-farm storage serves to stabilize inna-seasonal food supplies and prices.
Crops are stored in traditional facilities using traditional storage technology, barns, shumbus, kitchens, in the ground, on stakes, etc.
Another form of storage facility is the off- farm storage facility which consist of operational stocks traditionally held by state governments, co-operative societies, for inter-seasonal stabilization of supplies.
Strategic reserves are also held by Federal and State Governments to tide the nation over unexpected supply short-alls by natural and man-made disaster.
In the area of input storage, the main stored farm inputs are fertilizer, seed, pesticides and farm machinery.
Input stores must be within easy reach so that farmers can obtain their supplies at the time they must need them.
Adequate input storage capacity to regularize all year input supplies helps to minimize fluctuations in food and fibre supplies.
3.4 Irrigation Facilities The provision of assured water supply through irrigation holds the key to the stabilization of the nation's food production base.
It protects the nation's food system against uncontrollable fluctuations in domestic food production.
It further insures the nation against excessive and politically unacceptable dependence on food imports.
Exercise NOUN 30 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT What are the constraints to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion Rural physical infrastructures are critical success factors in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DefEfoVrtEs.L POoPoMr ErNurTa l physical support has accounted for the limited success in many RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT efforts.
Thus for the attainment oRfu r athl e Dobejveecltoivpems eonft which include increase rural productivity and income, diversification of rural economy and enhanced quality of rural life, attention must be paid to the provision of adequate rural physical infrastructures.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with the functions and characteristics of rural physical infractstructure.
We have seen that a good network of transportation facilities hold the key to accelerated rural transformation.
We also did point out, that unless food production campaigns are matched by a corresponding network of storage facilities, substantial post harvest would result.
It was as well indicated that constant water supply through irrigation facilities would help to stabilize the nation's food production base.
6.0 Further Readings Akin L. Mabogunji, The Development Process A Spatial Perspective, 2nd edition Unwin Hyman, London, 1989.
Andrew Webster Introduction to the Sociology of Development 2nd edition Macmillan London, 1990.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What are physical infrastructures and of what relevance are they to rural development?
Unit 6 NOUN 31 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Social Infrastructure Table of Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3 Social Infrastructure 4 Medical and Health 5 Potable Water and Rural Electrification 6 Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction: Social infrastructures support sustained economic growth and improved Quality of health and living conditions.
In this unit, you will learn about Social infrastructure and rural development.
We shall focus Specifically on tphreo v ision of medical and health facilities, potable water supply, rural electrification, and education.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - explain what constitute Social infrastructure - assess the importance of social infrastructure in the development of the rural areas.
3.1 Social Infrastructures: Social Infrastructures remain the core element of rural welfare.
Thus efforts to raise rural welfare must necessarily go beyond the traditional and limited approved of raising per capita income through agricultural development projects to the provision of rural basic needs in term of health and medical facilities, electricity, potable water and schools.
Rural Nigerians must be appreciated beyond their roles as mere producers of food and fibre for the needs of the urban economy, to their roles as consumers and citizens equally entitled like their urban counter parts to the good things of life NOUN 32 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 3.2 Medical and health Facilities In addition to realizing new income opportunities through production for the market, rural dwellers want to be rescued from the savages of dmiaselnausetr i tion and ignorance, the health status of the rural dwellers is seriously impaired by such factors as their source of drinking water, house teynpveisro, n mental sanitation, personal, hygiene, nutritional status and literacy level.
3.2 Potable Water And Rural Electrification Majority of the inhabitants of the rural areas obtained their drinking water from streams/rivers with only a negligible number having dug wells and bore-holes.
Adequate power supply is a prerequisite to both economic and socio-political development of any country; it is for this reason that some communities stretch their resources beyond tolerable limits to find money to electrify their villages.
3.4 Education: Formal and informal education imparts the ability to read and write athnedr e by enhances productivity in two ways.
First, farmers are better able to understand and apply new economic information such as fertilizer, pdliasenat s es and seed quality.
Others are pest control instructions, mopaecrhaitnioenry a n d maintenance.
Secondly, education enhances farmers a lucrative ability in the use of resources in different enterprises to maximize profits Education also enhances the knowledge that the rural dwellers have of the nutrient values of good thereby maximizing their nutritional and social- welfare.
Finally, education gives rural people dignity, self- respect and sense of belonging Exercise What appropriate technologies do we need for sustaining rural based industrialization.
4.0 Conclusion RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT seeks to achieve improvement in the qouf alilvitiyn ga nodf sthtaen mdaarjdo r ity of the people in the rural areas through the provision of social infrastructures whose major components include health facilities (hospitals, dispensaries, maternity and health centers); education facilities (primary schools, secondary schools, teacher training Colleges, technical NOUN 33 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT schools, vocational schools, and Adult education facilities) and rural utilities (electricity, water supply).
5.0 Summary In the unit we have dealt with the elements of social infrastructure and have argued that provision of social infrastructure hold the key to the attainment of the objectives of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT which is the iamndp rtohvee smtaenndta irnd tohfe lqivuianlgit yo f the rural dwellers.
6.0 Further Reading: P. Ndegwa eta 1(eds), Management for Development Priority Themes in Africa Today, OUP Glasgow, 1987 K. Puttaswamalah (ed) Poverty and Rural Development intermediate Technology publications, London, 1990 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignment: What are Social infrastructures and how do they facilitate the process of rural development Unit 7 Rural Institutional and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Rural Institutional Infrastructure 3.2 Community Banks 3.2.1 Community as the Pillar in Community Banking 3.2.2 Adapting Community Banks to the Rural Areas Conclusion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction NOUN 34 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT In this unit, you will learn about rural institutional infrastructures, the role of Community Banks in rural development and the level of community participation in rural Banking.
Rural institutional infrastructure serve mainly to pool resources and risks, liaise with other organizations, train personnel and deliver research results on new inputs and management practices to the rural dwellers.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - identify rural institutional infrastructure - describe the operational activities of rural institutional infrastures; and - state their functions in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
3.1 Rural Institutional Infrastructures: These include co-operative societies, Farmers' Unions/Groups, Community development projects made possible through rural self help institutions, financial institutions such as community Banks, Credit Societies, etc; Agricultural extension and training institutions.
A very critical factor in the national drive to reverse rural decline and to achieve significant breakthrough in the productivity and living standards of the rural populace lies in improving the availability of credit and Banking facilities in the rural areas.
Enhanced access to institutional credit enables the farmer to acquire more productive assets to employ more labour and to expand the scale of his pInrostdituucttiioonna.l credit also if properly managed and supervised, is itself are w arding educational process for the farmer on how to manage resources, handle risks, plan investment strategies and imbibe the discipline of loan repayment.
Thus, so important is the role of credit in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DinEtrVodEuLcOtioPnM oEf N tTh eth caot mthme u nity banking system can be seen as a revolutionary step in the government's effort to transform the rural area 3.2 Community Banks A community Bank is by definition a self-sustaining financial institution owned and managed by a community for the purpose of providing credit banking and other financial services to its members, largely on the basis of their self-recognition and credit worthiness.
Community Banks are intended to improve in a substantial way the availability of credit in the rural areas.
They are designed to bring banking facilities to the door steps of the rural areas thereby inculcating in them those banking habits and economic aptitudes which will enable them to survive and prosper in a NOUN 35 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT dynamic and changing modern economy.
The introduction of community banks was itself motivated by the failure of previous attempts at extending credit to the rural producer.
3.2.1 Community as Pillar in Community banking The Community, its composition and attributes, its commitment to progress, and its level of patronage and support constitute the central pillars upon which hinges the efficiency and success of community bank.
A community bank is designed to serve only one community, to exploit fully the natural and human resources that community, and to transform the community into a unit of development action.
A community under the community bparongkrianmg m e is perceived as a group of people who possess a common bond arising from residence, occupation, profession or other similar attributes and who interact fairly frequently in the pursuit of economic or social groups.
In the operation of community banks, community sanctions, traditions and norms can be exploited to facilitate or enforce compliance with certain policies aonpde ra tional modalities, which will ensure the success and progress of tchoem munity bank.
This makes community banks particularly attractive as issues could be handled and resolved without recourse to legal mechanisms to enforce things like loan repayment and other required banking ethics.
3.2.2 Adapting Community Banks to the Rural Areas The progress recorded by community banks have amply justified the vision which informed their introduction.
From 31St December, 1990 when the first community bank was commissioned in Kaduna, up to 30th June, 1993, a period of only two and half years, the number of community banks had risen to 645 with a targeted projection of 1000 community banks by the end of 1993.
The orientation, operations and services of community banks must unlike the conventional banks confor m with needs and realities of the rural economy while the institutional framework of rural society, must itself be transformed and its positive elements fully incorporated to support successful grassroots banking.
They are not allowed to engage in highly sophisticated and complex banking services such as corporate finance, foreign exchange transaction and international commercial papers.
Enough safeguard was taken to ensure that community banks retain the local focus while broad community participation in its ownership and operational structure are fully guaranteed.
Exercise What are the ethical issues involved in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion NOUN 36 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT The ambition to transform the rural sector into a productive and msporidnegrbno ard for overall national development has informed the wide spectrum of policies by successive governments.
In this unit, we have looked at such governmental policies as they relate to rural institutional infrastructures.
The lack of adequate rural finance seemed to have remained a major stumbling block to the attainment of rapid rural transformation.
The introduction of community banks appears therefore to be a right step in this qacuceeslte r a tfeodr RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
5.0 Summary What you have learnt in this unit concerns the functions and characteristics of rural institutional infrastructures with emphasis on the introduction and operations of community banks.
6.0 Further Reading Michael Lipton, Why Poor People Stay Poor Urban Bias in World Development Gower Publishing Company Ltd; England, Kathleen M. Bake r , Agricultural Change in Nigeria C a si net h e S tudies Developing World, John Murray, London, 1989.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment.
State and discuss the importance of Rural institutional infrastructure to rural development.
Unit 8 Rural-Urban Disparities Table of Contents: NOUN 37 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Rural - Urban Divide 3.2 Rural Migration 3.2.1 Rural Migration and Modernization 3.2.2 Rural Urban Migration and Industrialization 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction: One of the greatest dualities in Nigeria's development process is the yawning gap between rural and urban areas.
In this unit, you will learn about the phenomenon of rural-urban disparities and how this has given rise to tphreo b lem of rural migration, the effects of such migration and what can be done to check the trend.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - explain the phenomenon of Rural-Urban divide or disparity.
- Understand the impact of this phenomenon on development - especially RURAL COMMUNITY AND D- OEfVfeErL sOugPgMesEtiNonTs.
on what should be done to tackle the problem of rural migration.
3.1 Rural-Urban Divide The Third National Development Plan, 1975-80, recognized the serious nature of the problem of rural-urban divide or disparity by admitting that in the years past, rural areas have lagged behind the urban areas in development.
This, according to the plan document has resulted in increasing disparity between the standard of living in the rural and urban areas and in mass migration opfo p u lation from the rural to the urban areas.
3.2 Rural Migration The phenomenon of rural-urban economic gap or divide (disparity) in Nigeria has been quite intriguing.
Since the oil boom era in the mid 1970s, the tempo of urbanization in Nigeria has risen NOUN 38 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 3.1 Rural-Urban Divide The Third National Development Plan, 1975-80, recognized the serious nature of the problem of rural-urban divide or disparity by admitting that in the years past, rural areas have lagged behind the urban areas in development.
This, according to the plan document has resulted in increasing disparity between the standard of living in the rural and urban areas and in mass migration opfo p u lation from the rural to the urban areas.
3.2 Rural Migration The phenomenon of rural-urban economic gap or divide (disparity) in Nigeria has been quite intriguing.
Since the oil boom era in the mid 1970s, the tempo of urbanization in Nigeria has risen phenomenally.
The national average growth rate is estimated at 5% per annum.
However, since the cities are mostly unplanned, they are ill-equipped to receive the mass migrants.
In the absence of expanding job opportunities, shelter and other life sustaining mechanisms, congestion in the use of all conceivable urban facilities has been the common headache.
The migrants pose a common threat to the urban residents by increasing incidence of crime, congestion and pollution.
3.2.1 Rural Migration and Modernization: The policy of promoting a more rapid development of the rural areas through a sustained effort to raise agricultural productivity and provide basic human needs such as hygiene water supply, health facilities access roads, electricity and soon will help to counter-balance the strong trend towards rural-urban migration.
However, modernization is important and necessary, it is nsuoftf i cient to stem the flow of rural migrants to urban areas.
The real motive why people migrate from the rural to the urban is in quest for opportunity to make a living.
Therefore, the tide could only be stemmed if leumcpralotiyvme e nt opportunities are created along with the modern amenities.
Indeed, considering the rough life that awaits every unemployed rural migrant into urban centers, very few if any rational migrant would like to leave their rural communities if they can get good jobs there.
3.2.2 Rural-Urban Migration and Industrialization To assert that any rural-urban migration is anti-development is to ignore the industrial history of modern nations.
History has shown that industrial civilization implies urban civilization.
And since industrial culture invariably survives in urban culture, it is difficult to achieve industrialization in a significant sense without at the same time urbanizing significantly.
To the extent that a NOUN 39 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT particular style of urbanization undermines development such must therefore, be the uncontrolled and misdirected type that creates primate cities.
A planned and controlled process of urbanization constitutes a development asset.
Thus the process of urbanization that often times create rural-urban disparity is inevitable for industrial progress, the negative impact which can be avoided through deliberate control of urbanization.
Exercise What should be the basic objective of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT in oprrdoebrl e mto o afr rruersat lt-huer b an drift?
4.0 Conclusion The phenomenon of rural-urban disparity is the focus of this unit.
We have examined the problem from socio-economic and political perspectives.
One of the most complex problems of the Nigerian Society today is that of modernizing the rural areas as the quality of life in these areas still remains a major cause of concern hence, making the urban areas attractive to rural migrants.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with the phenomenon of rural-urban disparity and analyzed its impact and argued that the tide could be stemmed through creation of lucrative employment opportunities.
We also maintained that rural-urban migration per se is antidevelopment is to ignore the industrial history of modern nations for industrial culture invariably survives in urban cultures.
6.0 Further Reading Akin L. Mabogunje, The Development Process A spatial perspective 2nd edition.
Unwin Hyman, London, 1989.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What are the causes of rural-urban migration and how can it curbed?
Unit 9 Community Development as an Instrument of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Content s NOUN 40 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 1.0 I ntr oduction 2.0 Objectives 3 Definition of Community Development 4 Policy issues in Community Development 3.2.
Methods of Organizing community Development 2 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Further Readings 6.0 Tutor -Marked Assignments.
7.0 1.0 Introduction To achieve social change and economic growth where more people are eligible to receive services than there are public funds available to pay for those services, requires a spreading of efforts so that local communities ainnddi v iduals can participate.
In this unit you will learn about some definitions, policy issues, goals and methods of organizing community development.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - define Community Development - evaluate the policy issues in Community development - state the goals; and - describe the methods of organizing community development.
3.1 Definition of Community Development The United Nations and Economic and social Council, some decades ago defined Community Development thus: "the term Community Development has come into the international usage to connote the process by which the efforts of the people themselves are united with those of the governmental authorities to improve the economic, social and cultural conditions of communities to integrate these communities into the life of the nation, and to enable them to contribute fully to national progress.
This complex of processes in them made up of two essential elements: the participation by the people themselves in efforts to improve their level of living with as initiatives; and the provision of technical and others in ways which encourage initiative, self-help and mutual help and make these more effective.
It is expressed in programmes designed to achieve a wide variety of specific improvements".
This operational NOUN 41 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT definition of community development remains valid today through out the world.
3.2 Policy Issues in Community Development Community development with its emphasis on change, popular participation and leadership training involves a dynamic interaction between the central government and the village.
Though not everywhere, success in achieving this kind of relationship, community development in most developing countries including Nigeria has become an instrument for forging a more constructive role for government in development, helping to establish on the one hand, a better understanding between ruler and ruled within the village and between central government and the village authorities on the other.
The ability of community development to adapt itself to changing conditions in village and community life is largely due to its pragmatic approach to problem solving community development.
3.2.1 Goals of Community Development Generally speaking, community development is concerned with development of man (within a community) and development for man as its ultimate and central concern.
This implies that realization of human potentials and man's ability to control his environment are the measure of real development and that an increase in material progress without a corresponding increase in tdheev e lopment of human capacities and social institutions would be superficial and temporary.
Therefore, the major goals of community development are: (a) to induce social change for balanced human and material betterment (b) to strengthen the institutional structure so as to facilitate social change and the process of growth.
(c) to promote social justice by permitting the less privileged groups to give expression to their aspirations and to participate in development activities.
3.2.2 Methods of Organizing Community Development Community development being an instrument for inducing change has to give close attention to the strategy and tactics it considers using, and the time needed to achieve its objectives.
The methods to be used, depend largely on the characteristics of the community concerned.
In most cases, local surveys to generate data or information from the first requirement of local action and this NOUN 42 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT should be done with the full participation of the rural people.
The information collected should be used for a diagnosis covering as many aspects ocof m munity life as possible.
On the basis of this, together with the projection of existing trends, it is possible to formulate alternative action proposals.
Exercise What role should communities play in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion In conclusion, the massive commitment of national resources towards the elimination of poverty and to have even distribution of basic athmroeungithieosu t the nation should be aligned with community development process to ensure meaningful RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with definitions of community development, policy issues as well as the goals and methods of organizing community development and concluded that community development remains veritable instrument of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
6.0 Further Reading: S.M.
Ngu, Minority, Politics and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT in NigeriaZ, aArBiaU 1 9P9r4es.
s, Ishaya Sarki Habu, Theory and Practice of Politics Introductory notes for Unversity Students in Africa, ABU, Zaria (unpublished Zaria).
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What are the goals of Community Development and how are they achieved?
Unit 10 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT as a factor in National Development Table of Contents NOUN 43 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The Rural Population of Nigeria 3.2 Rural/ Urban Occupations 3.3 Methods of Organizing Community Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments .
1.0 Introduction The bulk of the Nigerian population who are rural dwellers, is grandly poor and because this poverty is spread over the entire rural areas, rural target groups are comparatively large and everywhere.
It is therefore, not only that RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT is a factor in national development, it is aRlUsoR nAeLce ssCaOryM thMatU NITY AND DEVELOPMENT programmes be conceived and sctornutcitnuuroedu sa, sd y tnhaem ciocr pe roofc e sas of national development rather than its ancillary.
In this unit, you will learn about the crucial factor of Rural Development in national development.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - see RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT in its proper perspective as the foundatwiohni cuhp aonny meaningful and sustainable national development could be built.
- identify the specific contributions of the rural sector to national development.
3.1 The Rural Population of Nigeria The second National Development Plan, 1970 - 74, estimated that about 80% of Nigerian population are rural dwellers.
The rural sector of the Nigerian population is distinguished from the urban sector in terms of the respective volumes of agricultural and nonagricultural components of economic activity that take place in the two sectors.
The main economic activity in the rural milieu revolves directly and indirectly around the exploitation or utilization of land.
It centers principally around farming, animal husbandry, poultry, fishing, forestry, food processing and cottage industry.
It has been estimated tahgarti c ultural activity occupies four-fifth of the rural population in Nigeria.
3.2 Rural/Urban Occupation NOUN 44 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT During the 16-year period, 1955-70, the Nigerian economy performed relatively well under an agricultural structure that was predominantly peasant.
The sector as at then employed about 80% of the country's adult working population in one form or another.
Agriculture which is the main occupation of Nigeria's rural population has made much greater contribution to the national income than industries which exist mainly in the urban centers.
However, in spite of the relatively greater contributions of the mainly rural base primary products to the national economy prior to the era of oil boom studies have shown that the benefits of government expenditures on education, health, water sinudpupsltyr,i e s and roads in Nigeria are concentrated almost exclusively in urban areas.
3.3 Rural Contribution to National Development Talking about rural contribution to national development Salah ElShakhs in Town Planning Review, XIVII/ 2 (April, 1976) P.128 wrote, "for it seems rather odd to talk of poverty in a country in which 90% of the population live in the rural areas and in which up to now, the development effort has been sustained very largely by the foreign earnings from export commodities produced in rural areas.
It seems also surprising that we should talk about the poverty of the rural commodities which produce more than 80% of the total food consumed in the country".
What has emerged from the statement is the picture of hdeeapveny d ence not only of the urban but also of the entire governmental system in Nigeria on rural contributions in their various aspects.
This dependence has however, lessened since the era of the oil boom.
Exercise Why is RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT a major cause of ccoonucnetrrine s itnoc l umdainngy Ndeigveerloiap?m ent 4.0 Conclusion We have shown in this unit, the unabated impoverishment of the rural milieu as a result of gross neglect.
Our analysis also depict that the growth of the national economy and its inherent strength including the factor of political stability are bound to be dependent to a very large extent on government's performance in the rural sector.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with the issue of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DnaEtiVonEaLl OdePvMelEoNpmT eanst ab yfa lcotookr i nign a t the rural population, their occupation vis-a- vis the urban centers and contributions.
The point was made that important as the NOUN 45 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT urban sector is to the transformation of the economy, the rural sector remains its very core.
6.0 Further Reading E. C. Amucheazi (eds) Readings in Social Sciences Issues in nationadl e velopment 4th Dimension Publishers, Lagos, 1979 Michael Lipton, Why Poor people stay_ poor Urban Bias in world Development Gower Publishing Coy Ltd, England, 1989.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Why is rural development considered a foundation upon which to build meaningful and sustainable national development Unit 11 Management of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Cont ent s: 1.0 I ntroduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Planning and Management of Integr ated Rur al Development 3.2 Rur al Development Pr ogr ammes 3.41 I ntegrated Agricultural Development Projects 3.2.2 River Basin Development Author ities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments .
NOUN 46 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about the management of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DloEokViEngL O PaMt E N tThe b y a dministration of government efforts towards planning finotre g rated RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
This income per capita, low lmitoerrtaaclyit,y h i gahn din f apnoto r housing conditions.
Its roads, electricity, water, health centers, schools and credit facilities are inadequate.
Productivity in agriculture is very low and its growth rate is very slow.
Also employment opportunities in the non-income sector are very limited in the rural areas and urban migration of enterprising rural youths is a common feature.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - State the various RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT projects initiated o- vdeers tchreib yee harosw.
RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT programmes are being managed.
3.1 Planning and Management of Integrated RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT: The first significant government efforts towards planning for integrated rural development in Nigeria was in the Third National Development Plan (1975-80).
The policy in the Third Plan was to concentrate on: (a) raising productivity in agriculture, the predominant occupation of rural people (b) providing basic amenities such as water, medical services, schools and electricity.
This was to provide a basis for more even geographic spread of physical development throughout the country and counter balance the trend towards rural-urban migration.
However, since previous government policies did not pay adequate attention to the planning and management of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DthEe VruEraLlO pPeoMpEleN pTa,r t icularly the rural poor benefited very little from the rapid economic growth of the past decades.
Due to the emphasis placed on rural development in contemporary development efforts, greater attention is now NOUN 47 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT directed at integrated RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT progammes.
The sthuicsc e sdsi roefc teifofno rwtsi liln however, depend on realistic planning and the effective management of the programme at the grassroots level.
3.2 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Programmes RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT programmes involve planned change of thhies sroucraiol -mecaonn aonmd ic environment from a less desirable stage to a more desirable stage.
In other words, it is the process by which the well being of the people is significantly uplifted, when there is a general enhancement in the quality of life of the majority of the rural people.
3.3 Integrated Agricultural Development Project: Of the various programmes on agriculture and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DthEe V EiLntOegPrMatEedN T Aing Nriicguelrtiuar,a l Development Projects (ADP) were among the major thrust of government in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
They wviearbel ef iprsrto jiedcetnst iifni e1d9 a7s2 when soon after the civil war, the country was facing food crisis, which manifested itself in soaring food prices and rising food import.
The first enclaves of the ADP system were established in Funtua (Kaduna), Gusau (Sokoto) and Gombe (then Bauchi) but today all the States in the country have been covered by the system.
The ADP system is based on the premise that a combination of factors, comprising the right teefcfehcntoivloeg y , e xpansion, access to physical inputs, adequate market and ointhfrears t r uctural facilities is essential for increased agricultural productivity and production.
It lays emphasis on the small scale farmer as the centre piece of incurmental food production activity.
3.4 River Basin Development Authorities The river basin development concept stresses the orderly and optional use of the land and water resources of a drainage area as a regional entity.
The river basin development authority (RBDA) are charged with the following functions with respect to the integrated development of their locales: (a) to undertake comprehensive development of both surface and underground water resources for multi-purpose use.
(b) to undertake schemes for flood and erosion control and water shed management; and (c) to develop irrigation scheme for crops and livestock production.
3.5 Directorate of Food, Roads and Rural Infrastructure This directorate was set up in 1986 by the Federal Government to raise the quality of life of the rural population in such areas as food and agriculture, NOUN 48 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT electrification, industrialization, water, roads and manpower development.
The Directorate of Food, Roads and Rural Infrastr ucture (DFRRI), has so far operated thr ough established institutions, usually f unding those activities consider ed relevant to its ter ms of r ef er ence.
DFRRI made considerable achievements in the ar ea of r oad constr uction and paid attention to such other ar eas as seed multiplication, intensif ication of oil seed pr oduction, agricultur e, livestock, for estry and development of indigenous technological capability.
Exercise What lessons could be drawn fr om the experiences of other countries like China, Japan, and Korea in the management of rural-ur ban development?
4.0 Conclusion The multiplicity of agencies for r ural, development in Nigeria creates management challenges.
One of the immediate management challenges is to ensur e effective inter- sectoral linkages at the planning stage and coor dination at the implementat ion stage of various rural development programm es so as to ensure the realization of the overall objective of impr oving the quality of lif e of the r ural dwellers.
5.0 Summ ary In this unit, we have dealt with planning and management of Rur aDl e velopment Pr ogr ammes.
We have argued that given the multiplicity of agencies f or Rural Development there is need f or co- ordination at both planning and implementation stages for effective and efficient goal achievement.
6.0 Further Reading F.S.
Idachaba, Rural Infrastructures in Nigeria, Ibadan University Press, Ibadan, 1985 Kathleen M.Baker, Agricultural Charge in Nigeria Case studies in the Developing World J.Murray, London, 1989.
7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Pick any community development project of your choice and describe how it has been managed.
Unit 12 NOUN 49 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Issues in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.
0 2.
0 3.
1 Introduction 3.
Objective 2 Co-operatives in RURAL COMMUNITY AND 3.
DLeEaVdeErLshOipP MEinN TR URAL COMMUNITY AND 4 DWEoVmEenL OPinM ERNUTR AL COMMUNITY AND 3.
DPeEoVplEeL’sO PPaMrtiEciNpTat ion 5 Conclusion 4.
Summary 0 Further Readings 5.
Tutor - Marked Assignments.
0 6.
0 7.
0 1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about some fundamental issues in RDuervaell o pment and Management the role of co-operative organizations, the leadership question, local governments women and mass participation in matters concerning the management of Rural Development.
While there is need for improving the implementation and management of the rural development programmes in farm and non-farm sectors, the greatest challenge of management is the harmonization of these various efforts to achieve the desired objective of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
In so doing what aprlea ytehres ?is sues or key 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you should be able to identify and discuss the roles of: - co-operatives - leadership - local Government - women; and NOUN 50 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT - mass participation in the Management of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
3.1 Co-operatives in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT: Social transformation and economic improvement have remained the objectives of most co-operative efforts.
In the context of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DNEigVerEiaL, O PanM eEffNeTct iivne co-operative system can act as a catalyst utilizing the pooled resources of the rural poor for their social and economic upliftment.
For instance, bulk purchasing and sales can strengthen bargaining power, the practice of regular savings could help in capital accumulation for expanded business while community facilities such as meeting halls, dispensaries and adult education classes could be provided 3.2 Leadership in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT The ability of leadership at the different levels to inspire confidence in their followers and involve them in decision-making is a crucial factor in Rural Development.
Leadership for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT must epnesouprlee tphaartt itchiep aruter ainl the planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development efforts.
Such leader must have aims which are believed worthy of the efforts of the people and standards of behaviour that make the people see the leader as worthy of their respect.
The social stratification in most rural Nigeria, which is based on age, provides ample opportunity for leaders to display dignity and authority.
3.2.1 Local Governments in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Local Governments by their position among the tiers of government are the nearest to the rural areas and in a unique position to be agents of rduervaell o pment.
Local Government Councilors under a democratic dispensation could be called to question for their performance in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DLoEcValE GLoOvPeMrnEmNenTt se fafnodrt se.v e n village councils are in a better position to tap the bounties of their area, exploit communal labour, improve inter-community relations and reduce RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT costs.
3.2.2 Women in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Women in rural areas suffer from institutionalized discrimination reinforced by custom.
Women constitute 60 to 80% of the total labour force in rural areas and in addition to income-generating activities, perform their roles as mothers and wives for which there is no financial compensation.
Women have also worked behind the scenes in food preservation, utilization and marketing and assuring good family food consumption patterns.
In some rural areas oNfi g e ria, women are in fact the family bread-winners while the men laze away NOUN 51 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT under trees drinking palm wine and gin or burukutu.
Unfortunately, however, the economic activities of men are often the focus of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DtoE thVeE uLttOerP MneEglNecTt polfa tnhnee wr o men.
3.2.3 People's Participation The rural dweller is both the subject and the object of social and technological transformation of his society.
This implies that the transformation should be initiated, planned and implemented by him for himself with other factors coming into the phenomenon as resources and experts.
The participation of the rural poor in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT may involve the following: (a) their coming together (unity) to break the monopoly on the use of resources held by the privileged.
(b) the identification of their own problems and needs.
(c) the analysis and articulation of these problems and needs.
(d) the commitment to the effort to get the problems solved through self- help and other help efforts.
(e) raising a leadership from among themselves that can mould a political force that will be patronized by the privileged on mutually beneficial terms; and setting standards by which they themselves can assess their own progress in terms of attitudinal and technological gains and in terms of how much they have reduced the gap between themselves and the privileged that are among them.
Exercise What contributions do we expect the respective rural dwellers to make in the development of their own areas?
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, we have surveyed efforts and activities in the management of Rural Development in Nigeria.
You are expected to generate more useful discussions from the survey to sharpen strategies for a more innovative management of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
5.0 Summary The unit has dealt with functional issues in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DwEhiVchE LthOe ProMleEsN oTf CMoa-onpagereamtievnet oinrg a nizations, leadership, Local Government, Women; and people's participation in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT were examined.
NOUN 52 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 6.0 Further Reading Olayide S.O.
etal, Nigerian Small Farmers Centre for Agric.
And Rural Development University of lbadan, lbadan, 1980.
Edward J. Ayo, Development Planning in Nigeria Up Ltd., lbadan, 1988.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Appraise the role of co-operative society in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
NOUN 53 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 13 The Challenge of Poverty Alleviation and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.
0 2.
0 3.
1 Introduction 3.
Objectives 2 The Challenge of Poverty Alleviation 3.
Leadership in RURAL COMMUNITY AND 4 DPoEvVerEtyL OAPllMevEiaNtiTon Measures 3.
Social Infrastructures 5 Socio-economic Problems of Poverty 3.
Conclusion 1.0 6 Summary Further Readings Introduction 4.
Tutor - Marked Assignments.
0 5.
In this 0 unit, 7. you 0 will learn about the challenges of poverty alleviation, the socio-economic effects of poverty and measures for the alleviation of poverty as part of a bprrooagdraemr m e of Rural Development in Nigeria.
Perhaps, the most interesting aspect of the budget 2000 to the poor masses of this country was the package of poverty alleviation measures for which a budgetary allocation of 10 billion Naira was made.
Nigerians literally heaved a big sigh of relief following the passage of the budget.
2.0 Objectives NOUN 54 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - state in your own words the challenges of poverty alleviation - evaluate the various poverty alleviation measures; and discuss the socio-economic effects of poverty.
3.1 The Challenges of Poverty Alleviation It is germane to observe that poverty is not manifested only in terms of lack of employment and liquidity but that the most grievous effects of poverty present itself in terms of pervasive spread of such nutritionally preventable diseases as kwashiorkor, inability to afford simple preventive and curative health services, illiteracy, and wide-spread social vices such as petty stealing and even daring crimes.
Though lofty the government is poverty alleviation programme conception may be, its ultimate worth would eventually be determined by how faithfully and transparently its implementers are willing to carryout this needs to brace up for this challenge, less it becomes another hope betrayed; the consequences of which are better imagined.
4.1 Poverty Alleviation Measures The profundity of abject poverty that has held hostage the preponderance of the country's masses the bulk of whom are rural dwellers the intense aenxxpieecttya,t i ons and interest that attended the announcement of the package poverty alleviation measures.
Mr. President himself aptly captured the grim situation in his declaration thus, "the twin problem of unemployment and poverty in Nigeria over the last two decades have assumed a dimension that is socially, politically and economically unacceptable.
Unemployment and poverty have been associated with prevailing social problems being manifested in youth restiveness, armed robbery, destitution, and prostitution amongst others.
No responsible government will want to fold its arms while its citizens are dying of poverty daily.
The poverty alleviation measures of the government include: NOUN 55 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 3.2.1 Social infrastructures The introduction of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) is a long term measure geared at uprooting the vestiges of poverty from society for an educated mind is a skilled personage armed with the wherewithal to apply himself to tchhea l lenges of life and wealth creation.
Agriculture has been prioritized as a veritable means of banishing hunger from the society.
The government has also placed special premium on boosting primary Health Care (PHCO programmes as a means of making health services accessible to and affordable by people at the grassroots level.
Job creation activities to provide employment for tuhnee m ployed as well as giving living wage to workers were measures geared towards reduction of poverty level.
3.2.2 Socio-economic Problems of Poverty Poverty has been associated with prevailing social problems being manifested in youth restiveness, armed robbery, destitution and prostitution, among others.
The most grievous effects of poverty manifest in terms of pervasive spread of many nutritionally preventable diseases and wide spread of social vices like pilfering, pick-pocket and capital crimes.
4.0 Conclusion The pervasive nature of poverty in Nigeria today has assumed a dimension that is socially, politically and economically unacceptable that no rgeosvpeornnsmibelnet can afford to be indifferent.
Hence, the present administration has taken the bull by the horn so to say by launching the "Poverty Alleviation Programme" with the aim of bringing about reduction in poverty level.
The programme has since metamorphosed in name into "Poverty EPrroadgircaamtimone " .
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with the challenged of poverty alleviation and Rural Development, we examined the socio-economic effects of poverty and discussed the various policy measures put in place to bring about a reduction in poverty 6.0 Further Reading Federal Republic of Nigeria Budget Speech 2000 delivered by PresideOntl u segun Obasanjo NOUN 56 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT F. S. Idachaba, Priorities for Nigerian Agriculture in the Fifth NationalDevelopment Plan, 1986-1990.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Describe and assess the poverty Alleviation measures of the present administration in Nigeria.
Unit 14 Local Government Reforms & Mobilization Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3 Local Government Reforms 4 Mobilization for RURAL COMMUNITY AND 4.0 DCEoVncElLusOioPnM ENT 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments .
1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about aspects of the 1976 political reforms in the local government and how the reforms have facilitated mobilization at the NOUN 57 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT grassroots level for meaningful and sustainable Rural Development in the country.
The reforms of the Local Government System provide for am u ltipurpose single-tier institution that applies throughout the country.
2.0 Objectives.
At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - discuss the aspects of the political reforms of the Local Government system carried out by the Military in 1976.
- evaluate the level of mobilization at the grassroots level for Rural Development as a fall out of the political reforms.
3.1 Local Government Reforms The main thrust of the Local Government system is among other things, to ensure an even and accelerated development in the grassroots level.
To this end, the Local Government Council is expected to initiate and direct tphreo v ision of services and implementation of projects of the local communities.
The Federal Government envisages a council with a wide range of powers and functions and it is planned that many more functions are yet to devolve on them as they become properly established.
3.2 Mobilization for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT In launching the new local government reform, the government spokesman declared "the Federal Government believes that it is only through an ef fective Local Government sys tem that the human and material resources could be mobiliz ed for local commun ication between the governed an d the governor.
But above all, these reforms are in tended to entru st political responsibility to where it is most crucial and most ben ef icial, that is to the people.
The Government hopes that these ref orms would f urther enshrine the pr inciple of participatory democracy and of political responsibility to every Nigerian.... ".
The Government placed much emphasis on mobilization and participation at the grassroots level.
This is in recognition of the fact that the support of the majority, whether explicitly or implicitly given, is the bedrock of democracy.
However, the mobilization and participation of the citizenry depend very much on the performance of the councils and the performance of the councils is in turn determined by such factors as personnel, funds and the relationship with the state governments.
NOUN 58 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Exercise What systems have been set in motion to ensure effective RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion The Local Government as the arm of government nearest to the villagers, the vast majority of the people is now an institution that should be given more serious attention than has been done hitherto for if it successfully carries out the functions that have been devolved on it, it will greatly transform life at the grassroots.
Much of its success depends on the ability of the system to mobilize support at the grassroots level.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with aspects of the political reforms in the Local Government System carried out by the military in 1976.
We also looked at how the reforms have facilitated socio-economic and political mobilization of the rural dwellers towards the overall development of the rural area.
6.0 Further Reading Abubakar Y. Aliyu (ed), The Local Government in Social, Political and Economic Development in Nigeria, 1976-79 A.B.U.
Zaria, 1979 Suleiman Kumo 8s A. Y. Aliyu, Local Government Reforms in Nigeria, A.B.U.
Zaria, 1979.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment To what extent has the 1976 Local Government Reforms enhanced political mobilization at the grassroots level?
NOUN 59 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 15 Electricity for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Power in RURAL COMMUNITY AND 3.2 DFEacVtoErL MOPilMitaEtiNngT A gainst Rural Electrification 3.2.1 Efforts of the Government in Rural Electrification 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Reading 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments.
NOUN 60 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about the importance of power (electricity) to Rural Development, what factors militate against rural electrification and Government's efforts at rural electrification.
Rural Development seeks to achieve among other things, improvement in the quality and standard of living of the majority of the people in the rural areas through radical approach towards improving the quality, value and nutritional balance of their food intakes, raising the standard and quality of rural housing, improving the rural health standards, creating employment opportunities and enhancing better purchasing power of the rural communities.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - state the importance of electricity (Power) to RURAL COMMUNITY AND D- iEdVenEtiLfyO tPhMe fEaNctTo rs that militate against rural electrification; and - evaluate Governmental efforts at rural electrification.
3.1 Power (Electricity) in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Adequate power supply is a pre-requisite to both economic and socio-political development of any country.
Electric power energy plays a pivotal role in the economic development of the rural sector as all the activities are linked in one way or the other with the supply of power.
Electric power assumes great importance in that its availability or otherwise is a positive demonstration of whether the community has evolved from the traditional way of living to the so-called modern living or not.
The magnetic eff ect of electr icity on the r ural population particular ly the younger gener ation is tremendous and is one of the inevitable causes of the perennial rur al- urban drift of the pr oductive sector of the population with the attendant undesirable NOUN 61 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT social consequences.
No country can in f act be r egarded as developed or pr osper ous until the power needs of both its rural and urban areas have been met.
3.2 Factor Militating Against Rural Electrificat ion There ar e certain inher ent dif ficulties in the w ay of providing electricity to the r ural ar eas.
First and for emost are the immense distances which have to be tr aver sed to tr ansport electricity from the gr id to such areas , as they are usually far fr om the grid.
Again, because of the scatter ed and low population pattern of the r ural settlements, the cost of distr ibuting electricity is astronomical.
Equally distur bing is the low demand f or electricity in the r ural ar eas as the bulk of electr icity demand which is for lighting purposes only would make any major investment on most r ur al electr if ication schemes economically unviable although they may be socially desir able and justif iable.
The unpr ecedented rise in the pr ice of f uel oil as well as the hmiagihn t enance cost has made isolated gener ation using diesel generator s most unprof itable.
3.2.1 Ef fort s of t he Governm ent in R ural Elect rif icat ion The Federal Gover nment in 1982 took the bold decision to electrify all the local government Headquarters thr ough out the countr y, which had not been electrified then as a fir st steps in opening up the potentials of the rural ar eas.
Before this time, Rural electr if ication has been undertaken to limited extent by the state government's rural electrification schemes, NEPA and communal self-help efforts.
Exercise What is the social significant of electric power to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion The overall objectives of the rural electrification scheme which iinncclruedasee d agricultural productivity, promotion of cottage and agro-based industries, and stemming the perennial rural-urban drift particularly by the rural youths have the goal of enhancing structural change in the rural sector where not less than 80% of Nigerians live.
NOUN 62 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with Rural electrification, its role in RDuervaell o pment, took an over view of government efforts to electrify the rural communities and examined the difficulties on the way of Rural electrification scheme.
6.0 Further Reading Ngu S.M., Minority Politics and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT in N19ig9e4r.
ia, ABU Zaria, Michael Lipton, Why Poor People Stay Poor Urban Bias in World Development Gower Publishing Company Ltd; England, 1989.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What are the factors that militate against the electrification of the rural areas.
Unit 16 Local Sources of Revenue for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT NOUN 63 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The Machiner y of Gover nment 3.2 Local Sources of Revenue 3.2.1 Potential Local Sour ces 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction In this unit you will learn about how funds are generated locally to finance development projects and what opportunities exist to expand or sustain the sources of funds.
The subject matter of our discussion in this unit is of topical interest because lack of adequate funds were some of the factors militating against grassroots development.
It is no doubt that a sound financial base is an indispensable pre-requisite for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - appreciate the significance of a sound revenue base for any meaningful RURAL COMMUNITY AND - evaluaDteE tVhEe LloOcaPlM soEuNrcTe.s of revenue for grassroots development - suggest measures for widening the revenue base for development at the rural sector.
3.1 The machinery of Government: The Local Government reforms of 1976 marked a turning point in the history of local Government system in Nigeria.
Generally, the aim of the systems was to stabilize and rationalize government at the Local level it was felt necessary to decentralize some significant functions of the state governments to local levels in order to harness local resources for rapid development in the nooks and corners of the rural areas.
The Local Government was recognized as the third tier of government and as such required to do precisely what the word, "government" implies i.e.
governing at the grassroots or local level.
The people NOUN 64 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT at the local level are thus given the opportunity to design programmes for raising their standard of living and improving their physical environments for this is exactly what a government should do.
3.2 Local Source of Revenue It is in realization of the need for adequate funds that the Federal Government had continued to reinforce the Local Governments with grants-in-aid.
This was necessary if the reforms were to take off successfully.
However, it is believed that greater self- reliance should be intensified by all local governments if the aims as specified in the federal Government guide lines lives are largely the encouragement of local initiatives for development.
Effective mobilization of internal sources can always be shock-proof to a situation where a short-fall in subvention is experienced.
Local Government must develop self-reliance and initiatives for financing their developments.
Local sources of revenue can be divided into two categories as follows; (a) monies derived from community tax and any rate imposed by the Local Government by virtue of the provisions of its edict (b) monies derived from licences, permits, dues, charges or fees specified by any bye- laws or rules made by a Local Government.
3.2.1 Potential Local Sources Local Sources of revenue generation based on tax rates and licences are no doubt grossly inadequate to finance the developmental efforts of the government at that level.
This justifies the call for more allocation of grants from the federal Government purse.
However, the Local Government is not expected, to be inactive in matters concerning internal sources of revenue.
They ought to exploit new sources of revenue to enable them execute variety of development projects.
To allow better use of local sources for development project the following areas of policies need to be potentially developed asos u r ces of revenue: (a) investment and operations of enterprises that can earn streams of regular income.
(b) pay - As- You- Sare collection.
(c) fees and licences collected from motor cycles should entirely be the property of the Local Government.
(d) communal development need be encouraged seriously by the local governments.
This will economize the use of labour, material resources, etc.
Exercise NOUN 65 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Discuss the impact of improved funding of the local governments on rural development.
4.0 Conclusion A lot need to be done by the local authorities to enhance their internal revenue generation efforts in order to make them selfsufficient.
There is no doubt that the grants-in-aid from the Federal and State Governments is very necessary in putting the Local Government on a sound financial footing but that is not enough to make them self-reliant.
Greater Self-reliance, initiatives and selfconfidence should prevail.
5.0 Summary: In this unit we have dealt with local sources of revenue in relation to grassroots development and argued that the local authorities need to intensify efforts at widening the scope of their internally generated revenue if they are to be self- sufficient.
6.0 Further Reading: Ekwueme Okoli, National Conference on the New Local Government system in Nigeria UNN, Nsukka, 1980.
Akin L. Mabogunje, The Development Process A spatial Perspective Unwin Hyman, London, 1989.
7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignment: Choose any Local Government and evaluate its performance in rgeevneenruatei o n and management.
Unit 17 The Challenges of Participation and Cont rol in Grassroot NOUN 66 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Intr oduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The challenge of Participation 3.2 Political Access 3.2.1 Political Mobilization 3.2.2 The Challenge of Control 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Fur ther Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about the challenges of participation and control in grassroots development.
In an ironic sense, the first major reform in the Local Government System in Nigeria was effected by a military administration.
The role of Local Government in developmental process is constrained by certain variables in the political process two of which we have isolated here fdoisr c u ssion (i.e.
participation and control) to illustrate how conflicts between these two challenges can create problems for local government in ictos n stitutional role as the prime mover of development at the grassroots level.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - identify the major variables in the political system which tend to constrain the local government in the performance of its development roles at the grassroots level.
- pose and answer the question, what does the future hold in stock for grassroots self-government.
3.1 The challenge of Participation There are four challenges, which any political unit (central or local) faces in the process of change or political development.
These challenges are authority (control), Unity, participation and distribution.
For our purpose in this unit, we NOUN 67 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT shall concern ourselves with the challenges of participation and c(aountthroolr it y) as the most pertinent issues in a discussion of the role of local government in grassroots development.
Most of the literature on political participation in the Western World see participation essentially through plesbiate cntena forms.
But as Henry Bienen has shown in the case of Kenya, we can participate in politics (and in decisions, which affect our lives) through many structures of the state and society.
Voting is a form of participation but by no means the only one.
Visits or contacts with officials of local or central government to resolve personal or group problems or to offer suggestions for change of policy; taxation and even abiding by laws, or self-help community projects such as building of bridges, schools, etc, by group are all forms of participation which are essential for political, social and economic development.
Two forms of participation can be identified as political access and political mobilization.
3.2 Political Access Participation as political access is an input into the political system from below.
People come to participate in decisions which affect their lives through representations, expressions of opinions, involvement in community programmes, etc., it may even involve anomic forms of participation (such as riots, rebellions, etc).
It is essentially access to decision-making units from the grassroots.
This form of participation is crucial to the success of genuine local government.
The government of a country that encourages this form opfa r ti cipation is on the path of "bringing people closer to the government" by offering them political access to decision-making process.
3.2.1 Political Mobilization The output form of participation can be seen in the mobilization of people by government for specific activity.
For instance, when the government mobilized people for activities such as "Operation Feed the Nation" which w"Parso d u ac e r-More-Food programme", it was mobilizing people for participation.
But the point of initiation was from above or the top.
3.2.2 The Challenge of Control Any form of decentralization that does not legally ensure autonomy ogfr a s sroot units as they make decisions which affect their lives, is not "local government".
It may be local administration.
The challenge of c(aountthroolr it y) refers to the ability of political elites at the units' centre to maximize control through penetration of the periphery.
In a state, it entails the attempt by the central government to penetrate and control substantial units so as to make NOUN 68 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT its presence felt while at local level it entails effective presence of LGoocvaelr n ment in the unit.
Exercise What kind of initiative and leadership role should traditional rulers play in their own local government areas?
4.0 Conclusion The challenges of participation and control ironically embody a paradoxical twist especially if they operate simultaneously.
For, to what extent is it logical to ask the central government to centralize control (authority) and at the same time demand that it devolves authority to grassroots units in order to offer them avenue for participation given our operational definition of participation as the extent to which people influence decision which affect their lives.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with the issues of participation and control in grassroots development.
We argued that Local Governments play important roles in grassroots development but more often than not this role is constrained by the challenges of some variables in the political system and we isolated two of such variables as participation and control and discussed them.
6.0 Further Reading Dele Olowu, Local Government in Nigeria Beyond the year 2000 December, 1989.
Adeoye Akinsany etal (ed), The Journal of Nigerian Public Administration and Management No.l Vol.
June/July, 1997, Lagos.
7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment What is the future of grassroots self-governance in Nigeria.
Unit 18 NOUN 69 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT The Structure of Local Government and the Implications for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Efforts Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3 Definition of Structure 4 Local Government and Community Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction In this unit you will learn about the structure of local Government and the implications for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
The aim is to examine tthhee e xt annto ttioo wn h ic ho f the functional or objective local government caopmprmoxuinmitayt e d the ideal community in terms of the performance of the local government units.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - define what the structure of a local government is; and understand - how the structure of the local government provided the framework for reconciling the rather contradictory demands for popular government and effective administration.
3.1 Definition of Structure: Webster's define structure as the arrangements of parts.
In the words of Samuel Humes and Eileen Martin, the structure of a local government is the framework within which public policy is determined and implemented.
It is the structure of a local government that enables the institution to reconcile the seemingly contradictory demands for popular government and effective administration.
Central to the notion of structure is the issue of size.
One great motivation for the creation of Local Government in modern times is the attempt on the part of policy makers to build local institutions that approximate as closely as possible to the boundaries of the community.
Such are institution, it is argued, will generate community aspiration and participation necessary for social NOUN 70 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT development and foster the existence of functionally efficient local institutions.
However the major problem has been how to identify an ideal community for local government.
3.2 Local Government and Community Development: The guidelines for the 1976 Local Government systems recommended that community activities will now be handled by Local Governments, coordinated through the respective states' ministries of Local Government.
Community Development has thus become the responsibility of the Local Government.
The Third National Development plan (1975-80) made the first attempt to bring Community Development activities into the framework of national development plan and allocated a total of N 193.29m to both co-operatives and Community Development activities.
The objectives of the plan with regard to Community development was to raise the quality of life of rural communities by harnessing private efforts to supplement government efforts.
Exercise To what extent has the local government served as machinery for rtruarnasl fo rmation?
4.0 Conclusion: Given the single-tier Local government unit, it must strive with integrity to identify the need of the local government.
5.0 Summary: In this unit, we have dealt with the functional definition of structure of the Local Government, and how the structure has impacted on the role the LGoocvaelr n ment in community development efforts.
6.0 Further Reading: Ekwueme Okoli (ed.
), National Conference on the New Local Government System in Nigeria, UNN, 1980 7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment: How has the Local Government performed their role of governance at the grassroots level?
NOUN 71 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 19 Attitudes of Local Government Staff towards NOUN 72 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Cont ents 1.0 Intr oduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The S tr ategy of Development fr om Below 3.2 Rural Community Development 8 Local Gover nment 3.2.1 Gener al Attitude tow ar ds Development 3.2.2 Attitudes towar ds Community Development 4.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction In this unit the focus of discussion is on development from below, its strategy and attitudes toward community development from the perspectives of Local Government staff and the general public.
Development from below is gaining wide recognition as a strategy for accelerating socio-economic progress among leaders and people of the developing countries.
The skills, knowledge and capacities of people constitute important resources in self-help efforts.
Therefore, in our analysis, attention would be paid to the means of improving and utilizing human resources in rural and community development undertakings.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: NOUN 73 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT - explain the strategy of development from below - assess the attitudes of the local government staff as well as the general public to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT efforts.
3.1 The Strategy of Development from Below Development from below has gained wide recognition as a strategy feonrh a ncing social and economic development in our time.
In Nigeria, this trend is currently manifested by the governments' commitment to be more responsive to the needs of the people.
The Federal Government's Guidelines for the reform of the local government system provide a framework for the decentralization of some important functions of state governments to local governments in order to harness local resources for accelerated development.
To achieve its major objectives, the functions of the local government bodies were based on: a. detailed local knowledge for efficient performance; b. community responsiveness and participation c. significant use of discretion of understanding of individuals.
One of the effects of the 1976 local government reform therefore, has been the tendency to integrate community development activities and rural welfare programmes into local government system.
3.2 Rural Community Development and the Local Government Community development stimulates the self-help effect of the people, with reliance as much as possible on their own initiative, and brings about a closer association between that effort and services of the government.
Local Government on the other hand, is a statutory body with legal power to tax, regulate and promote local activities and allocate resources.
It is to the local authority that the community often looks for assistance in providing materials and advice in the process of executing community projects.
Local Governments are typically expected to provide the equipment, funds fcoorm p letion and future maintenance of such projects similarly, to discharge their duties effectively; local government need the support of a participating and co-operative public.
The close interdependence of local gsuogvgeernstms e n t th at a chief requirement for the successful implementation ocof m munity programmes is the existence of strong and popular local government institutions.
The execution of this function may call for a shift in the primary role of local government from one of maintaining law and order to one of working with and helping the people.
The need for the guidance, direction and assistance of local authorities in these programmes can beses e ntial components for the successful initiation and conduct of community development activities.
NOUN 74 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 3.2.1 General Attitude Towards Development The general attitudes possessed by officials with respect to the nature of developmental activity and social change shape and condition the decisions reached and the approaches pursued by government agencies involved in the development process.
The orientation held by local government administrators is becoming an increasingly important factor in Nigeria as national policy seeks to engage active grassroots participation in social and edceovneolompimc e nt.
3.2.2 Attitude Toward Community Development Community development aims to improve the material and social conditions of the people through local action.
This approach to development gatetneemrpaltlsy t o strike a balance between satisfying demands for amenities and the need to raise the income and productivity of the rural sector of society.
In many places, government officers only assume that the end result of community development is material improvements, As a result, great emphasis is being placed on infrastructure, such as on the building of roads, schools, dispensaries, community halls and insufficient attention is given to improved methods of farm production or to basic educational programmes.
Even though physical improvements are an essential aspect of community development is broader and encompasses efforts to promote the growth of the people themselves - through education, training and a broadening of horizons.
Exercise Explain what you understand by "Development from below" and hapopwr o priate is it as an approach to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
4.0 Conclusion In view of the mutually reinforcing functions of local government adnedv e lopment activities, the discussion in this unit has sought to find owuhte t her the attitudes and views held by key local government administrators are congruent with the ideals of community development and constitute a factor likely to promote or retard community and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT efforts.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have systematically analysed attitudes toward rural acnodm m unity development held by local government officials and the general public.
NOUN 75 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 6.0 Further Reading E.C.
Amucheazi (ed)., Readings in Social Sciences Issues in National Development, Lagos, 1979.
Ekwueme Okoli (ed.
), National Conference on the New Local Government System in Nigeria, UNN, 1980.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What are the general attitude of local government staff to development at the grassroots?
NOUN 76 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 20 Social Welfare in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.0 2.0 Introduction 3.1 Objectives 3.2 Definition of Social Welfare 3.2.
The Neo-Classical Perspective 1 The Marxist School 3.2.
The Social Policy 2 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 5.0 Further Readings 6.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments 7.0 1.0 Introduction: In this Unit, you will learn about some definitions of Social Welfare, the Neo- classical and Marxist perceptions of social welfare as well as the policy issues in Social Welfare.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - define what is Social Welfare.
- identify the various schools of thought and their perceptions of Social Welfare; and evaluate the policy issues in Social Welfare.
3.1 Definitions of Social Welfare: The achievement of social welfare means first and foremost the alleviation of poverty in its many ramifications.
This can not be solely a matter of NOUN 77 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT redistributing more fairly what wealth there already is, but requires in poor countries that redistribution be incorporated within a policy for economic growth.
In other words, it depends on the achievement of development in the fullest sense of that word.
3.2 The Neo-classical perspective: Economists of the neo- classical school argue that development will occur only if counties liberate their economics from the trammels of government intervention in order that the neutral advantages of a free market may be realized.
However, close examination of the requirements for growth and for an effective Social policy makes it clear that government intervention is unavoidable, and that it calls for planning in which these aspects are closely integrated.
3.2.1 The Marxist School: The Marxists argue that social services are palliatives, softening the rigours of an exploitive capitalism.
Such measures they maintained divert attention from radical solutions, which will involve the reconstruction of the economic system itself into the safe channels of Social reform.
3.2.2 The Social policy: In the development of social services, the key requirement seems to be the use of what is now often called appropriate technology.
A number of factors combine to make Social welfare approaches in the developed cuonusunittiaebs le for use in many third world countries.
How GNP is important among these factors, indicating a need to concentrate on preventive rather than remedial services.
In that respect, poverty has to be attacked through the pursuit of growth and a more equitable distribution of resources, like land, capital and a healthy environment rather than through income maintenance services.
Exercise What should be the role of the National Youth Service Corps (NYSC) scheme in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion: NOUN 78 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Social Welfare policy based on direct work with individuals and families in need is inappropriate for third world counties and needs to be replaced with community work.
Work in communities is a feature of many aspects of social welfare.
This has been the case in land reform and agricultural improvement, in education and supports of the needy, in health, the improvement of nutrition in eliciting greater participation in decision-marking by the population.
5.0 Summary: In this unit, we have dealt with the definition of Social Welfare, considered the major schools of thought concerned with social welfare and policy issues in the field.
6.0 Further Reading: Abel- Smith B. etal, Poverty, Development and Health policy, WHO, Geneva Adelment I. etal, Economic Growth and Social Equity in Developing countries, Stanford university press .
7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignment: What is the main thrust of Social welfare policy as it relates to the gdreavseslroopomtse n t?
NOUN 79 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 21 Health and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3 Nutrition 3 Public Hygiene 3.3.1 Primary Health Care 3.3.2 The Social Policy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction In this you will learn about health problems in relation to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DWEeV shEaLllO fPoMcuEs NonT .n u tritional matters public hygiene and primary health care.
In other words, what roles do these arms of health delivery services play in the development of the rural sector.
The human and social costs of ill-health do not require elaboration, the physical and mental suffering, the death and bereavement and the effects on social and family relationships, either as a direct result of illness or of the economic deprivation which it brings in its train.
Its impact on development in its narrower, purely economic sense is no less serious.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you should be able to: NOUN 80 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT - appreciate the roles of nutrition, public hygiene and primary health care services in the development of the rural sector.
- appreciate the human and social costs of ill health in the rural community.
3.1 Nutrition The connection between nutrition and poverty is clear from the fact that it is in the poorest countries that it is most prevalent.
The situation results partly from agricultural underdevelopment.
In part, it is also due to the idniestqruibituatbiolen of the means of existence within the country or ccoomncmerunneidti.e As s maller part of the problem results from dietary customs.
One of aspect of this is preferential feeding of males including male children.
As a result, women and growing girls may receive only what is left over which is not only less attractive but also less nourishing.
A malnourished population is one whose immune system is weakened and vulnerable to diseases and as such becomes less productive.
3.2 Public Hygiene The provision of a pure water supply and effective sewage and refuse disposal must be given equal importance with nutrition in any preventive hperoagltrha m me.
In fact, the two are related.
Lack of pure water supply breeds such diseases as diarrohea, infection of the gut, and other water-borne ailments, which impair on the ability to ingest food.
But water control has even gsirgenaitfeirc a n ce for diet than the supply of water for drinking would imply, for it is required for food crops and stock both of which may die off in a prolonged drought.
Floods on the other hand can cause widespread damage as occurs almost annually in some low-lying rural communities.
Natural water supplies, which are not carefully monitored, are also a common source of disease.
They provide a breeding place for malarial mosquitoes or snails harbouring bilharzias flatworms.
The disposal of human and domestic waste poses similar questions about rural public hygiene and its implications for development.
Latrines will sometimes be too near to the wells or to a river used for drinking or other domestic use.
This poses the danger of the water becoming polluted.
3.2.1 Primary Health Care The world Health Organization (WHO) initiated the movement towards the development of a primary health care programme in the rural areas in 1975 underlining the lack of adequate health services in the villages.
The programme advocated the appointment of primary health workers with broad backgrounds NOUN 81 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT and a commitment to community participation.
Participation was obviously necessary if health education was to be relevant in local terms and effective in changing behaviour; but there was also the growing belief that people should have more say in something which affect them and their families so intimately.
Apart from the right or every body to understand the reasons for decisions an d to share in making the, people will only co-operate in a health programme intelligently and with conviction if they are thus involved.
The ultimate aim after all is to establish habits consistent with health and hygiene as an accepted feature of daily life.
Exercise The World Health Organization (WHO) initiated the movement towards the development of a primary healthcare programme in the rural areas in 1975.
What has been the achievement of this programme to date in terms of provision of adequate health services in the rural areas?
4.0 Conclusion The primacy of preventive and environmental health is emphasized in this unit.
It was also implied that the developing countries would not be able to meet the health needs of the mass of their people if they attempt to base their provision on models of the advanced countries, as it may not necessarily be the most effective approach within their own socio-economic and political environment.
An appropriate technology for health based on the local situations is therefore, required.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with health and Rural Development in which we focused attention on the roles of nutrition, public hygiene and primary health care delivery services in the socio-economic development of the rural communities.
6.0 Further Reading Akin L. Mabogunje, The Development Process A spatial Perspective, London, 1989.
E. C. Amucheazi (ed) Readings in Social Sciences Issues in NationaDl e velopment.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment NOUN 82 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT "Health is Wealth".
Discuss this statement in the context of health and rural development in Nigeria.
Unit 22 The basic needs strategy and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Cont en ts 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Definition of Ter ms 3.2 The Perception of Development fr om Below 3.2.1 Development Ver sus Indigenous Community 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction: In this unit, you will learn about the basic needs strategy.
The recognition that the nature of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT had to be reconsidered, led by academics, NOUN 83 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT development agencies, and policy makers to propose a radically dapifpferoreancth to third world development with emphasis on the Rural Sector.
This became known as the basic needs strategy.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - explain the basic needs approach to third world development represented here by focus on RURAL COMMUNITY AND - evaluaDteE V EthLeO P MStEraNteTg y in the provision of basic needs of the rural communities.
3.1 Definition of terms: Rather than giving priority to gradual economic growth measured in terms of increasing GNP, which normally leaves many millions of social casualties in its wake, the basic needs strategy seeks to do two things: a. to relieve as quickly as its possible absolute poverty through intensive direct assistance to those in desperate circumstance.
b. to meet the basic needs of all in terms,, of material wants such as food, clothing, shelter as well as Social needs like education, employment, political participation, etc.
At the heart of basic needs strategy justice and welfare based on a concern that the material resources of a society should be equitably distributed throughout the population.
For the rural communities, this approach stresses the need for land reform to make land available for poorer farmers, opening up new farmlands and making cheap loans or grants available to the rural households.
3.2 The Perception of Development from below: The philosophy of Rural Development centres on finding a solution to the problem of poverty among the rural dwellers.
Poverty implies a lack or loss of something and development means making good this loss.
Rural Communities need to grow in order to remain viable but desire development to be related to their own goals and values.
The rural areas are faced with cinoenqsuidaelirtayb alen d poverty but the nature of these disadvantages depends on the perceptions one has of social and material needs and thereby how the rural communities should develop to make good these deficiencies.
The Various Policies of planned social change, which are implemented to alleviate such problems are rooted in general conceptions of Socio- economic change and development.
The widespread interest in the Socio- economic charge of the rural NOUN 84 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT sector among scholars and policy makers today is in part a direct reflection of the circumstances of our time such as the need for meaningful and sustainable national development, which cannot be realized without the development of the rural sector.
3.2.1 Development Versus indigenous community: Today certain cultural practices and traditions stand as barriers to tdheev e lopment of many rural communities.
The people's developmental goals may therefore, be very different from those of the planners.
What counts as development at times depends on value judgments that people make when they perceive social inequality.
Debates over inequality and development are then ultimately ideological disputes that involve political as well as ecchoonicoems.i cT h e rural dwellers are at the receiving end of this debate and will find that whatever their perceptions of how things should be, the choices will be made for them.
There may be those who try to assert their independence by trying to resist this with the inevitable breakdown in social order as a result.
Development is thus not always a peaceful and effective process.
Exercise What would you consider as an ideal strategy for RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion: Different conceptions of poverty give rise to different policies to alleviate it.
There has been a shift, at least in principle if not in practice, away from a growth oriented development philosophy to one based on basic needs which is a brander Socio- economic philosophy that in its breadth and approach is more attuned to the social justice approach.
5.0 Summary: In this unit, we have dealt with the basic needs approach to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DWEeV eExpLlOaiPnMedE wNhTa.t t he approach entails, the philosophy behind it and tried to justify the current emphasis on Rural Development as the bedrock omfe a ningful national development.
Finally, we pointed out the conceptual conflicts between tradition in most rural communities and modernization.
6.0 Further Reading Howard Jones, Social Welfare in Third World Development, Macalillan, London, 1990 NOUN 85 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Dan Nabudere, The Political Economy of Imperialism, Zad press Ltd, London 1977 7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment: Explain "the basic needs" strategy and how relevant is the policy to tNhieg e rian situation?
Unit 23 Rural Education and Development Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The Rural Area 3.2 Rural Education 3.2.1 Education Of Rural Women 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Further Reading 7.0 Tutor – Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction: In this unit, you will learn about Rural Education and the development of the rural areas.
Women education is highlighted as an integral part of reudruacla tion.
Although there are many desperately poor people in the slums and among the unemployed of the cities.
Most poverty and deprivation is found in the rural areas.
Because of the relative sparseness of rural populations and the NOUN 86 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT problems of communication, which distance and a difficult terrain create, there are severe logistical problems in providing the rural dwellers with their fair share of education.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - discuss the provision of formal education, to the rural population - describe the various difficulties associated with rural education; - state the relevance of women education to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
3.1 The Rural Area The rural areas are comparatively under privileged.
This partly reflects the fact that rural families are also poor and partly the general bias in favour of the urban areas occasioned by the dual economy of Nigeria like any other developing country.
The disparity emerges in primary school enrollments that are highly skewed in favour of the urban centers.
This urban bias is even more pronounced at the higher levels of education.
The first step towards securing social justice in education for the rural population would be to devote more attention to the primary as compared with higher levels.
The aim of the Universal BEdasuicca t ion (UBE) of the present Administration in the country, among others is to boost basic education at the rural areas and reduce the urban-rural disparity in the provision of education.
3.2 Rural Education It has long been acknowledged that education greatly affects an individual's life chances.
This is confirmed by the high rates of income return to education.
It is however, reasonable to assume that the accessibility of the school will be an important factor making for its utilization.
The rural areas are as deprived in education as they are in other respects.
Two sets of statistics could illustrate this.
The first is the figures for literacy and secondly the proportion of children of primary school age who are attending school.
The rural areas present a picture of severe and growing educational underdevelopment.
This impairs socio- economic and political development of the rural communities which are already desperately poor and frustrates other possible aims for education, connected with the wider definition of development such as social justice, personal development of the people, the position of women and even levels of sickness and mortality.
3.2.1 Education of Rural Women NOUN 87 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Generally, rural women suffer deprived .
educational status.
Resistance to the provision of education for rural women, sometimes, is the result not only of their general state of subjugation, but also of the fact that the role, which is assigned, does not seem to imply any need for education.
In addition, rural women, when they marry, by custom go to live with their husbands' families.
To spend time and money in educating a daughter, who is going to take whatever she has gained away with her to another family, is not seen as a very sensible proceeding.
It has to be remembered that parents look to their children to support them in old age, and would want to see any investment they made in education in this light.
However, quite apart from considerations of social justice, there is a strong case on pragmatic grounds for giving some priority to female education.
The rural women constitute a substantial proportion of the population.
Educating them therefore, would release and inform the constructive abilities of a substantial part of the rural population.
It is also believed that both the health and nutrition of children are better where women have received some education.
There is also a link between female education and lower fertility.
All these are desirable for their own sake as well as having their contribution to make to economic and social transformation of the rural sector.
Exercise What role should women play in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion The yawning gap in education between the rural areas and urban centers is not in doubt.
There is great inequity in the distribution of such education as is available between the rich and the poor, rural and urban dwellers and men and women.
This discrimination increases at the higher levels of education.
As educational inequality preserves existing inequalities in power and wealth, its reduction would represent an important step towards greater social justice.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with the phenomenon of rural education and found that the rural sector lags far, far behind its urban counter part in the provision of education.
We also discussed the provision of education for the rural women and said that it is desirable to educate the rural woman.
6.0 Further Reading NOUN 88 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT A. M. Yakubu etal (ed.
), The UNO at 50; An appraisal workshop Proceedings, Kaduna, 1996.
E. C. Amucheazi (ed.
), Readings in Social Sciences Issues in NDaetvieolnoaplm ent.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Do you think the rural people need education and if so why Unit 24 The Rural Majority Table of Contents 1.0 Intr oduction 2.0 Objectives The industrial Bias The Living Conditions Land Refor m 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summar y 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Mar ked As signments.
NOUN 89 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 1.0 Introduction: In this unit, you will learn about a RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT aapchpireovaec hth we htwicihn satirmivse so fto e c onomic growth and social justice.
The viable strategy for achieving this would be one in which the rural economy is stimulated most in those of its segments which provide most benefit to the poor.
This would mean in our context, concentrating on the revival of agriculture, which is the main stay of rural economy.
By so doing the life of most of the poor would have been touched.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - appreciate a strategy of development which focuses on the rural majority.
- explain the main aims of economic growth and social justice of rural development.
3.1 The Industrial Bias Agriculture has great growth potential.
Because of its basic nature, it can generate external economics of great importance to the other sectors.
Given a fair market for its exports, it can earn the foreign exchange needed to buy the equipment and know-how which industrialization requires.
Also the factory workers have to be fed, and this must depend on agriculture being even more productive.
Adopting this strategy would mean a rejection of the conventional development approach in most third world countries which is biased towards industrialization.
Those countries of the third world that see industrialization as the solution to their development problems loose sight of the realities of their situation.
This has thus weighted the scales against their farmers.
To allow the agricultural sector of the economy to remain derelict or even to regress when it feeds the population, employs most of them and provides the greater part of the domestic market is not a credible way to try to advance economic growth.
3.2 The Living Conditions There is now an increasing willingness in the developing countries to take a deep look and examine the basic needs of the rural majority for shelter, health, education and social care, and above all for food.
Housing, like many other things, is seen as mainly an urban question.
It is true that the mass flight from the NOUN 90 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT rural areas has led to large numbers of people in the urban areas living under grossly unsatisfactory conditions.
However, traditional rural dwellings, constructed of mud or bush material, are not exactly ideal homes either.
The older members of the community may not be able to carry out the constant repairs, which such dwellings require if they are not to deteriorate, letting in rain and wind.
There is no sanitation, no pipe borne water, etc.
something more than palliatives is therefore required to address the living conditions of the rural dwellers.
There is every reason why as much attention should be given to rural housing as to that in the urban areas.
3.2.1 Land Reform The Primary objective of rural land reform is to relieve rural poverty bpyro v iding land for the landless or lifting some of the economic pressures from farmers with too little to yield them a livelihood.
Usually, these objectives are combined with that of making agriculture more profitable, though in a way which, will benefit most of those who live and work in the rural areas.
Although land reforms have important economic implications, its implications for social policy may be even greater.
Exercise Disillusioned by the urban-centred model of development, the rural dwellers are seeking more meaningful alternatives which will not only increase production but also liberate them from the clutches of perpetual poverty.
What should these alternatives be?
4.0 Conclusion The rural economy and especially agriculture have in the past often had to play second fiddle to attempts at industrialization.
This order of priorities has not brought economic success to many of the countries where this was the case, instead, it has damaged rural society and led to a decline in the life chances of the rural majority who live and work on the land hence, the adoption of the approach discussed in this unit becomes imperative.
5.0 Summary In the unity, we have dealt with the topical issue of an appropriate strategy or an approach to RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT whose focal point is on aogthriecru clotumrep oannden wtsi tahs sluacnhd r eform, improvement in rural housing and amenities.
NOUN 91 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 6.0 Further Reading: Hyden G., Beyond nd Ujaama in Tanzama Heinemon, London, 1980.
A. Jennings etal (eds.
), The Challenge of Development in the Eighties: Our Response, Oxford, Pergamou, 1982.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Distinguish between economic growth and social justice.
Unit 25 Role of the Social Worker in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objection 3 Social Work 4 Community Care 5 Training and Organization 3.0 Conclusion 6.0 Further Reading 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction NOUN 92 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT In this unit, you will learn about the role of the social worker in the development of the rural communities.
What we might call the human face of welfare is represented by social workers and in certain important respects by community development workers.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit, you should be able to: - state the roles played by social workers in community development - explain the difference between a social worker and a community development worker.
3.1 Social Work Social work is commonly understood to mean finding a solution to a person's difficulties through personal discussion or interaction.
Many see this kind of individualized casework as unrealistic because as they argue, the hpurombalenm s it seeks to tackle are social in nature, arising out of social conditions and relationships, and having consequences which extend beyond the individual immediately concerned.
Because social work method concentrates on tihned iv idual and adjustment to society, it is also charged with being manipulative and supportive of an often-unjust status quo as against social reform.
The social worker helps his clients to assess their needs in order to match these up with what is available.
It is a highly skilled activity, requiring knowledge of the social and personal factors, which have brought about the problem confronting the individual.
3.2 Community Care It is now assumed that the mutual aid within the extended family or what is sometimes called the "economy of affection" is on the retreat.
This is usually taken to be the inevitable result of economic growth and its accompanying modernization.
The scale of the human problems generated in an udnevdeelro p ed society are such that relatives and friends can no longer be expected to cope with them without expert advice and support including some financial support.
To see community development as a substitute for Social work with clients even in the form of community care is to misunderstand the nature of both activities.
The problems of individuals can only be tangentially approached through an approach in which the community is the clients 3.2.1 Training and Organization NOUN 93 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Social workers seek professional training and the status and pay which this can bring with it.
These are a growing sensitivity in the developing cnoouwnatdriaeyss t o the peculiar problems presented by under development and by the cultural, geographical and demographic characteristics of under development.
If they are therefore, prepared to design courses, which are informed by these insights, little will be lost by those developing countries, which use them for the training of their social worker.
Exercise What role should co-operatives play in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT?
4.0 Conclusion In the discussion under this unit, a case was made for a Social work service, suitably indigenes in developing societies.
The emphasis of the social work service would be on community care in order to utilize and perhaps give new life to the caring traditions of the third world communities.
Provisions for the care of children, elderly and the sick community care framework.
5.0 Sum mary We have in the unit dealt with the role of the social worker iDne v eRlouprmale n t. We did discuss the principle behind social work; the community cares component, and the facilities for local training of the social worker to attune him with the local environment.
6.0 Further Reading: Dreitze (ed) conflict Sociology, Academic Press New York, 1980.
Confers D., An introduction to Social Planning; in the Third World, 1982.
7.0 Tutor -Marked Assignment: Distinguish between a social worker and community development worker, NOUN 94 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 26 The Rural Community and its Youths in Developm ent Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Self-Help 3.2 Two- Way Communication 3.2.1 Development Alternative 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about how youths in the rural areas are fused into the framework of community development and become active participants for the NOUN 95 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT overall development of the rural community.
Community development has long been employed to co-opt local populations behind new practices, ranging from say, health and hygiene, on the one hand, to farming methods on the other.
Its use in this way, though pragmatically useful, will probably be no mimoproe rt ant in the long run than its value in two other respects: a strengthening the sense of communal solidarity in a locality in order to make community action more effective; and b increasing local participation in the formulation and implementation of official policies.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - have better understanding of community development; and - evaluate the role of the rural youths in the organization and execution of community development projects.
3.1 Self-Help One cannot speak of development in the real sense of meaningful asunsdt a inable development where the masses of the people are to remain helpless citizens, meekly doing what those who know best tell them.
The aim ocof m munity development is to stimulate self determination through self-help.
By self-help, members of a community can also provide themselves with amenities such as a schoolroom, better roads and so on which might not otherwise be available to them.
3.3 Two -Way Communication The contradictions in community development can only be resolved binyc o rporating in the planning process a strong vertical line of tcwomo-mwuany ic ation, and a clear hierarchy in which decisions of different degrees of generality can be made at different levels, in consultation with the people themselves at village level or with representatives at higher levels.
For example, sometimes urgent action is required.
There is an inevitable tension between the decentralized decision-making inherent in community development and the reconciliation of divergent local trends and interests in a national plan fdoerv e l opment.
NOUN 96 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 3.2.1 The Development Alternative The rural society is often based on age-grading providing both peer group support and a means by which the young may be inducted into the skills traditionally thought necessary for the adult.
Government ought not to allow infatuation with modernization to prevent it from using this indigenous youth service as a means for bringing about desirable forms of development in the villages.
There is every justification for giving special attention to the needs of rural youths.
They represent the majority of the population, the majority of the unemployed and the future of the country.
In doing this, the assistance of the indigenous leadership of the village communities, the chiefs and elders, should also be enlisted.
The youths should be trained in activities directly relevant to the villagers' own development aspirations and wher e feas ible in r oles which they can continue to perf or m within their communities after their training is completed.
Exercise What r ole do you think rur al youth can play in the organization and execution of community development projects.
4.0.
Conclusion Community development is distinguished f rom social wor k in the community by its concentration on the needs of communities r ather than on those of individual members or f amilies.
The aims of community development as ear lier indicated ar e two fold: first, to strengthen the sense of community and help member s to find common solutions to their problems, some of which might (perhaps with Government assistance) be tackled by self-help activities; and secondly, to encourage gr eater participation by members of the community in the making and implementation of decisions which af fect them.
5.0 Sum mary I n this unit, we have dealt with the subject of Rural Community and its Youth in development.
We argued that w ith mass unemployment among this young people, agriculture needs to be r evived to provide labour intensive employment within the rur al communities 6.0 Further Reading NOUN 97 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Warren W., Imper ialism and Capitalist Industr ializaNtioewn, R aft Review, 1981 Jennings A. etal (eds0, The Challenges of Development in the E ighties: Our Res ponse, Oxford, Perzamon, 1982 7.0 Tu tor- Marked Assignment Describes and explain the concept of "Self -Help" in Community development.
Unit 27 Development Aid Community and Rural Development Programme Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Aid Donors 3.2 The Failure of Development Aid 3.2.
RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 1 PCroongcrlaumsimone s 4.0 Summary 5.0 Further Readings 6.0 Tutor-M ar ked Assignments.
7.0 1.0 Introduction In this unit you will learn about the impact of foreign aid policies on Rural Development.
At the start of the IMF's 1988 Annual Conference held in West Berlin 40,000 anti-IMF demonstrators marched against the conference demanding fundamental changes to the Fund's investment and aid policies for the development countries.
Rather than relieving poverty in these countries, the IMF's programmes were attacked as being the very cause of this poverty.
NOUN 98 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - discuss the impact of foreign aid to socio-economic and political development in Nigeria with particular reference to rural sector development - meaningfully contribute to the debate whether foreign aid should be encouraged or discouraged as a facilitator of national development.
3.1 Aid Donors The major international agencies that distribute aid to developing countries include the United Nations, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and the Development Fund of the European Economic Community (EEC).
There are also various national bodies such as the US Agency for International Development (AID), the UK Overseas Development Administration, and the West German Ministry for Economic Co-operation Western aid programmes are selective in as much as most support those countries, which are friendly to Western interest.
Aid transfers are thus highly political.
3.2.
The Failure of Development Aid The continuing failure of official international aid to encourage the emergence of a self-sustaining growth in agricultural and industrial sectors geared to local needs in most developing countries, has led many to question the appropriateness of aid per se.
A number of problems with the current system of aid assistance have been identified as follows: a. since most of the aid is in the form of loans rather than direct grants poorer countries may find themselves getting into increasing debt.
b. a considerable proportion of any aid package is swallowed up in payments to technical experts, the field staff of the donor countries, or on the costly housing, transport, and diet arrangements made for them in the host country.
The technical experts typically receive tax-free salaries usually paid directly into their home country bank account as they have living and transport allowances to cover their needs while working in the host country.
Therefore, the salary is unlikely to be used to buy host country products, a potential source of demand that is sorely missed.
c. aid often increases dependency being loaned to a country on condition that it is used to purchase goods from the donor country.
This is known NOUN 99 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT as aid tying.
Almost 70% of British aid is loaned on these terms which means in effect that aid provides an important market for Bmraintiushfa c turers.
Aid therefore, creates more job and leads to the establishment of more industries in the donor countries than the aid-recipient countries.
d. aid beneficiaries in the developing countries tend to be urban centred- the bureaucrats, entrepreneurs, politicians, and industrial workers.
The poorest in the rural sectors those that one might think are supposed to benefit most from aid, especially are food aid, usually end up seeing very little or nothing of it.
The system of aid transfers, as already indicated, is very much dominated by the commercial and political interests of the donor countries.
3.2.1 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Programmes Many have argued that the problems with aid are connected with tmhies m anagement of funds or local corruption of bureaucrats who administer it in the recipient countries.
There is evidence of misdirection of funds and creaming- off of monies by the local political and land owning elites.
Many of the richer farmers corner the aid-inputs bribing local officials.
The loan capital is usually channelled through the Banks with the result that the rich farmers who are likely to have long-standing business connections with the Banks become the prime beneficiaries of the bank credit facilities.
The rural poor farmers who should have been principal beneficiary of the facility wtheerree fo re, ironically excluded.
There should therefore, be a RURAL COMMUNITY AND DprEoVgrEamLOmPeM thEaNt iTnc orporates the poorest rural peasantry into the local farming and business sector rather than as often happens excluding them.
Exercise IMF policies in the Third World countries have been described as the very cause of poverty rather than being the palliatives.
What is your opinion?
4.0 Conclusion There is very little evidence that recent world Bank Agricultural Projects and other aid programmes have benefited the rural dwellers or have even been intended to do so.
The benefits of the world Bank loans have accrued to the rich rather than to the poor.
Development aid have had very little impact on the development of the rural communities.
5.0 Summary NOUN 100 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT In this unit, we have dealt with development aid and its impact on rcuormalm u nities.
We examined the donors and the philosophy behind the aid.
We also found that the development aid is a failure so long as it has neglected or did very little to address the fundamental problems of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
6.0 Further Reading N. Long, An Introduction to the Sociology of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELPO.
P RMoEbNerTts ,L o Rnduoranl, 1 9 D97e v elopment and the Rural Economy in Niger ,M cmillan, London, 1981.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment To what extent has foreign aid been beneficiary to a rural farmers?
NOUN 101 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 28 The Theory and Practice of Community Development Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Definition of Community Development 3.2 The Academic Definition 3.2.1 Definitions Originating from Organization 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about the theory and practice of cdoemvemloupnmiteyn t by exploring the philosophy, the strategies, and the programmes that are associated with it.
Community development has become a subject of great intellectual curiosity, thus the literature in the subject matter is fast growing.
This is even more so as the subject cuts a cross disciplines like economics, sociology, history, anthropology and political Science as well as development studies.
NOUN 102 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - develop a good conceptual frame work of community development; and - describe in clear terms the practice of community development 3.1 Definition of Community Development While other concepts of development studies such as economic development, political development battle with the problem of precise definition fdoerv e l opment, community takes it for granted and concerns itself instead with what the precise definition of community should be.
This is based on the premise that one needs to know what the community is before one can develop it.
But even then, the interdisciplinary nature of community development has made this rather difficult, as each discipline tends to take a different approach to defining community.
However, community may simply be defined as a population living within legally established city limits.
The definitions of community development are many but they can be classified into two groups i.e.
those which originate from the academic circle, advanced in books and articles written on the subject; and those that originate from conferences and seminars.
We shall in the subsequent sections explore those groups.
3.2 The Academic Definitions The academic definitions focusing on the social and education values of community development have stressed the spontaneity and growth of initiatives, the independence of action and the emotional and psychological growth which these lead to as the benefits which community development bestow on the people who practice it.
The ultimate goal of cdoemvemloupnmiteyn t is to help evolve through a process of organized study, planning and action physical and social environment that is best suited to tmhaex imum growth, development and happiness of human beings as individuals and as productive members of their society.
3.2.1 Definition Originating from Organizations The definitions that come under this group have tended to emphasize the role of the government in community development.
Accordingly, they have presented community development as virgin soil for the extension of bureaucratic power.
The 1948 Cambridge conference on African administration had defined community development as a movement designed NOUN 103 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT to promote better living for the whole community with the active participation and if possible on the initiative of the community and where this is not forthcoming spontaneously by the use of techniques for arousing and stimulating it in order to secure its active and enthusiastic response to the movement.
In 1956, the UN Economic and Social Council came out with its own definition which regards Community development as the process by which the efforts of the people themselves are joined with those of tghoev e rnmental authorities to improve the economic, social and cultural conditions of the communities into the life of the nation and to enable them contribute to national progress.
These conference and seminar definitions are the ones most often adopted in developing countries.
The reason being that in these countries, community development start as institutionalized part of government machinery with the result that a Department or Ministry of Community development may exist for years without any community development activities going on at all.
Exercise Differentiate between community development and RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT.
4.0 Conclusion Community development as a strategy for implementing the conceptual formulations would be the mobilization of all the people affected for direct participation in solving their problem.
Community development is thus a problem-solving device, a decision - making process which comes close to the rational model.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with the conceptual definitions of community development, the philosophy, strategy and programmes associated with community development.
6.0 Further Reading Wayland J. Hayes, The Problems of Community Intelligence International Review of Community Development No 10, 1962 Jessie Bernard, Community Disorganization, Internal Encyclopedia of Social Sciences, Vol.
38x4 Macmillan, 1968.
7.0 Tutor- Marked Assignment NOUN 104 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT What is the difference between the academic definition of community development and that which originated from organizations (Conferences and Seminars)?
Unit 29 Rural Contribution to National Development Versus Rural Poverty Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The Rural Population 3.2 The Failure of Development Aid 3.2.1 The Rural Contribution to National Development 3.2.1 Rural Poverty 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about the contributions of the rural sector to national development as well as the state of rural poverty or rural neglect in spite of its economic fortunes to the nation.
The rural sector consists of about 80% of the total population of this country yet it suffers different forms of deprivation, hunger, disease, illiteracy and so forth.
NOUN 105 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - state the contributions of the rural sector to national development - appreciate the level of rural neglect and its socio-economic and political consequences on the nation.
3.1.
The Rural Population According to the 1963 census, Nigeria has a population of 55,663,821.
Owing to the controversy about the accuracy of that census, it is not possible to demarcate the urban and rural proportion of this population but in the 1952 census (which again was controversial), urban areas were defined as centers with 5,000 or more people, which means that some 81% of the Nigerian population could be regarded as rural.
Also the second National Development Plan, 1970 - 74, estimated that about 20% of the total population of Nigeria could be described as urban dwellers.
This means that the rural sceocntsoirs ts of about 80% of the population.
3.2 The Rural Contributions to National Development The rural sector of the Nigerian population is distinguished from the urban sector in terms of the respective volumes of agricultural and non-agricultural components of economic activities that take place in the two sectors.
The main economic activities in the rural areas revolve directly and indirectly around the exploitation and utilization of land.
It centers primarily ofanr m ing, animal husbandry, poultry, fishery, forestry, food processing and finally in order of importance, cottage industry.
It is estimated that agricultural activity occupies four-fifths of rural population.
During the 16- year period, 1955-70, the Nigerian economy performed relatively well under an agricultural structure that was predominantly peasant.
Agriculture employed within that period about 80% of the country's adult working population in one form or another.
Agriculture, which is the main occupation of the rural sector, made much greater contribution to the national income than industries and continued to maintain this lead up to late 1970s when there was oil boom.
3.2.1 Rural Poverty Despite the level of rural contributions to national development the rural areas have nothing to show for it.
There is very low level of public and private investment in the rural areas.
Thus the level of living of the rural people continue to be poor as S. A. Aluko humorously states, "all that the NOUN 106 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT local areas exist for is to live up, receive and dance for state governors and commissioners if and when they visit the local areas".
It must be mentioned that it is the rural areas that produce the raw materials and manpower for the industrial sector and the needed expansion in the provision of infrastructural facilities but yet neglected.
Exercise What in your opinion is the impact of rural neglect on the socioeconomic and political development of the country?
4.0 Conclusion It seems rather odd to talk of rural poverty in a country in which 80% of the population live in the rural areas and 90% of its annual income is generated in the rural areas, and in which its development efforts have been sustained very largely by the foreign exchange earnings from export commodities produced in the rural areas.
The rural sector also produces more than 80% of the country's total food requirement.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with the contributions of the rural sector to national development and argued that it is abnormal to talk of rural poverty in a country where 80% of its population are rural dwellers, 90% of its foreign exchange earnings come from exports of rural produce, and where 80% of its total food consumption is produced by the rural areas, etc, 6.0 Further Reading Michael Lipton, Why Poor People Stay Poor Urban Bias in World Development, England, 1989.
Ekwueme Okoli, National Conference on the New Local Government System in Nigeria UNN, 1980 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What is the contribution of rural economy to national development?
NOUN 107 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Unit 30 Development, Growth and Welfare Issues in RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT Table of Contents .
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Development 3.2 Growth 3.2.1 Welfare 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Further Readings 7.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments 1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about certain concepts, which are fundamental to the understanding and assessment of the phenomenon of RURAL COMMUNITY AND DThEeVseE iLnOclPuMdeE tNheT c. o ncepts of development, growth and welfare of the rural dwellers.
Millions of rural dwellers die every year from preventable diseases or starvation while many of those who survive remain malnourished and illiterate for the rest of their lives.
Even where a little progress had been made, large minorities still languish in absolute poverty and the rest are NOUN 108 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT caught in an underdevelopment trap from which there seems little chance of escaping.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - define and explain: a development b growth c welfare; and - suggest policies which you think governments should adopt so as to cope with the grievous social problems facing them.
3.1 Development The term development is often used as if it were synonymous with economic development or growth.
In this unit and in the context or RURAL COMMUNITY AND DwEe V E LusOeP M thEeN T , t erm "development" to mean "social development", a mbruocahd e r concept.
This excludes situations, sadly not uncommon, in which a country's gross national product (GNP) is increasing but little or none of it finds its way either into the hands of the poor or into socially desirable forms of public expenditure such as education, public health and hygiene, housing or family welfare.
The debate about development cannot avoid being concerned with value-laden issues like these.
To talk of developing countries therefore, is to imply that these advances are actually taking place, but, even using the narrow criterion of economic growth as the measure to development, the facts give the lie to this.
3.3 Growth There is reason to believe that certain patterns of economic growth actually widen the gap within a country between the rich and poor.
Acodnvseerqsuee n ces are particularly likely for the rural poor.
There is general agreement with the hypothesis that the initial effect of growth will be to increase inequality and that this trend would only be reversed when a certain minimum per capital level of GNP has been reached.
On this basis, the tide never would turn for the rural areas.
It is also argued that growth cnaenv e rtheless raise the incomes of the most deprived families even if it is at a slower rate than the average for a country as a whole, and therefore causes inequalities to increase.
However, suppose, that deliberate policies are adopted to reduce inequality, some argue that there then has to be a trade-off in growth for two main reasons.
First, that redistribution reduces the surplus available to the better-off for saving and therefore, investment.
Secondly, that NOUN 109 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT it reduces the reward for success and so weakens incentives for efforts.
There could also be a third factor.
Redistribution could take the form of directing the growth process itself in to channels which benefit the poor.
Thus the government could: a. increase linkage of the poor to the faster growing segments of the economy so as to increase the flow of indirect benefits; and b. provide much greater direct support to productive activities upon which the poor are heavily dependent and which have a potential for effective expansion.
Free- market economists like the neo-classicists would see this as clumsy interference with efficient allocation of resources through the price mechanism, bound to exact its economic toll.
However, here one may be quick to add that the success of the so-called "baby-tigers" (Taiwan and Korea) of the post second world war development stems not from adherence to free-market principles, but from government intervention to create a small- farm agriculture and labour-intensive export-led industrialization.
3.2.1 Welfare The charge that redistribution involves a significant trade-off against growth is leveled particularly against the social service, or welfare.
For instance, they are said to sap the independence and energy of recipients.
Where this does not simply call attention to the need for more intelligent methods of service delivery, it is a variation on the theme of incentives, which can have little meaning for the very poor.
There is also the argument that wexeplfeanrdei t ure is a luxury, and that only economically successful countries can afford it.
In line with this belief, donors of official aid are much more willing to provide finance for what they call productive investment.
Two schools of thought have emerged in opposition to the naive proposition.
These are: a. convergence theory b. the concept of human capital The general hypothesis of the convergence theorist is that social structure is related to the level of industrialization achieved by a country rather than its political ideology.
In this respect, welfare system would be correlated with the progress made in industrialization.
The concept of human capital on the other hand, advances the argument that welfare provisions actually facilitates economic development.
According to this view, which is in line with the "basic needs policy" better health and nutrition mean a more vigorous people; and education gives them the knowledge and skills they need in order to NOUN 110 BHM766 RURAL COMMUNITY AND DEVELOPMENT achieve growth.
Investment in human capital may therefore, prove to be even more profitable than that in more tangible assets.
It is however, a long-term policy needing time to produce its effects.
Exercise Why is a country's GNP often not a good indicator of its development?
4.0 Conclusion It is clear from the foregoing discussion that growth and welfare are not at all opposed to each other rather development, growth and welfare should all be seen as partners in progress.
Prosperity does enable a country to have better services.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have dealt with the controversial issues of development, growth and welfare.
We have demonstrated that development is a broader concept encompassing both growth and welfare.
We also argued that the optimism about the role of welfare expenditure in stimulating growth must be moderated by the recognition that a country's development is determined first and foremost by domestic economic policies and global factors calling for global structural solutions with the hard work and enterprise of its people playing only a part.
6.0 Further Reading Joseph S.K., "The cycle of Deprivation" in E. Butterworth etal (eds), Social Welfare in Modern Britain, Foutana, London, 1977.
E. C. Amucheazi, Readings in Social Science issues in National Development, Fourth Dimension Publishers, Lagos.
7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Write brief notes on each of the following: - development - growth - welfare NOUN 111
