ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE / TITLE: ARA383: English-Arabic Translation COURSE DEVELOPER/ WRITER: Dr Sarumi, Kahar Wahab School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
COURSE EDITOR: Professor Asif F. Ahmed PROGRAMME LEADER: Professor Asif F. Ahmed School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
COURSE COORDINATOR: Dr. Mustapha A.R.
School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
1 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja E-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria First Printed ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria 2 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] MODULE 1: CONCEPT, TYPES AND TECHNIQUES OF TRANSLATION Unit 1 : The Concept of Translation Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 The concept of translation 3.2 Understanding the need for translation 3.3 Difference between translation and interpretation 3.4 Importance of Translation.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 – Introduction Translation, according to Newmark (1981), is an art as well a skill and a science.
It rests on three aspects namely: the native and foreign cultures, the two languages, the writer and the translator respectively.
It is an indisputable fact that there is a pressing need today for availability of an adequate number of competent translators, as we live in an era in which advanced means of communication such as the electronic and print media (radio, television, internet and the press) have turned the world into a global village, and as a result, news of events around the terrestorial globe reach us just as soon as they happen or at most after few minutes or hours of their occurrence.
An attempt shall therefore, be made in this unit to examine the concept and importance of translation.
You would remember that the importance of translation was treated in the Arabic – English course material, here we shall give you a supplementary information to what you may have read in the Arabic – English course material.
2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to: • discuss the concept of translation • understand the need for translation; and • identify the difference between translation and interpreting.
• discuss the importance of translation.
• know the nexus between translation, cultures, worlds of thought and perception.
3 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] • understand that translation plainly reveals the complexities of language and of specific texts.
3.0 Main contents 3.1 The Concept of Translation It may be difficult to provide a comprehensive definition for the term, translation because theorists differ on the precise nature and the processes involved in translation.
However, most definitions of translation may be classified under one of two headings.
While the first is concerned with the process of translation, the second focuses on translation as a product, and describes what a good translation should be like.
Example of definitions that concentrate on translation as a process is that suggested by Catford (1965) and another by Hatim and Mason (1990).
Catford defines translation as "a process of substituting a text in one language for a text in another".
Thus, he considers translation as an operation performed on language, and so builds his definition on the concept of equivalence.
Like Catford, Hatim and Mason consider translation as "a communicative process which takes place within a social context".
They argue further that translation is a useful test case for examining the whole issue of the role of language in social life and creating a new act of communication of a previously existing one".
On the other hand, Nida and Taber (1969) and Newmark (1981) in their definitions, focus on translation as a product.
Nida and Taber define translation as "producing in the receptor language the closest natural equivalent of the source language message, first in terms of meaning and secondly, in terms of style".
Thus, they attach greater importance to the forms understood and accepted by the target audience for which a translation is designed, and also emphasize the importance of understanding the original text before constructing a text in the target language.
Newmark, in the same manner, defines translation as "a craft consisting in the attempt to replace a written message and/or a statement in one language by the same message and/or statement in another language".
Translation, he continues, is rendition of the meaning of a text into another language in the way that the author intended the text.
It would be observed that Newman, like Nida and Taber also stresses the importance of understanding the intention of the original text author before translating it into a target language.
Since the comprehension of the intention of the original text author is crucial for producing an accurate text in a target language, we subscribe, therefore, to the definitions here above among many others.
3.2 Understanding the need for Translation To facilitate effective communication among peoples of different cultures and languages, translation must take place from native to foreign languages and vice-versa in matters of 4 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] socialization, education, administration, diplomatic relations, religion, commerce and etcetera.
Furthermore, nearly all companies today use ordinary translators to decode all types of documents such as press releases, reports and other material relevant to their business.
Nevertheless, at some point these companies will need to interpret a document of a technical nature.
Using the same translation services for a technical paper that we use for general translations might cause a fundamental mistake.
Sometimes, the person we rely upon to provide the translation service may not have the requisite skills or training to undertake a technical translation.
This is because the technique of translation service is quite different from any other translation service.
The major differences are in the intensity of complication in the translation and the level of accuracy required.
It is therefore very necessary to understand both aspects when contracting out tasks and projects to translators.
3.3.
Difference between translation and interpreting The professions of translation and interpreting are notably different but the two overlap in some areas.
A translator interprets the written word and the result of his/her interpretation is usually in written form.
He/she has time to deliberate, conduct research, proof-read, revise, consult colleagues and submit his/her written translation to client.
An interpreter, on the other hand, interprets the spoken word and mostly does not have the extra time nor a second chance to revise the result of the interpretation.
Many translators, though, will have done some interpreting but this will probably have been secondary to written translation.
3.4.
The Importance of Translation The importance of translation can be brought to a sharp focus if we consider the fact that effective communication among different cultures can only be achieved through translation.
It is by way of translation that peoples from different cultural backgrounds are introduced to various languages and ways of thought.
Further, to train translators and interpreters, it is very necessary to understand the relationship between language and culture because "translation takes place in the context of the relations between two cultures, two worlds of thought and perception".
Newmark opines that there is a cultural value in translation".
Culture is also heavily indebted to translation for its intellectual development, and it is through translation that the complexities of language and of specific texts are clearly demonstrated.
In addition to that, good writing and bad writing are easily exposed in the process of translation.
Translation is an important source of diffusion of every kind of knowledge; it facilitates the understanding of development of every aspect of culture in other civilizations; and thus enriches people's knowledge and understanding of their own culture.
5 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Self Assessment Exercise Write a summary note on the concept of translation and discuss the bases for various perspectives.
Of what importance is translation in today’s world?
4.0 Conclusion From the foregoing, one can safely conclude that translation of one language to another is indispensable in today's world for educational, socio-economic and politico-religious development among peoples of different linguistic backgrounds.
It breaks the barriers of linguistic differences and "promotes harmonious interaction and mutual understanding".
Furthermore, the importance of translation also lies in the fact that translation has today become a major course of offer in most of the universities across the globe.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have been able to highlight the concept of translation, its significance in today's world and the perspectives of some translation theorists to the concept.
While some view it as a process, others see it as a product, yet others opine that translation is both a process and a product.
However, all emphasize the position of the source language and the target language as being vital.
The difference between translation and interpretation was also demarcated.
In addition to that, the unit explained the importance of translation in cultural relations and effective communication; just as it clearly demonstrate the role of translation in language studies, intellectual development, and knowledge diffusion; and in understanding cultural development in other civilizations.
We are also able to understand the significance of translation to calligraphy.
In the next unit, we shall look at the historical background of translation.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment - Explain the concept of translation and identify the need for it.
- Distinguish between translation and interpreting.
- Discuss the significance of translation to culture and civilization.
- Identify the connections between translation, language and calligraphy.
7.0 References / Further Readings Al-Ghussain, Reem Abdel Al Latif (2003) Areas of Cultural and Linguistic Difficulty in English – Arabic Translation.
PhD Thesis in the Department of 6 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Linguistics and English Language, University of Durham, UK.
Catford, J.
(1965) A Linguistic Theory of Translation.
Oxford University Press, United Kingdom.
Geoffrey Samuelsson-Brown (2004) A Practical Guide for Translators (4TH Edition) Multilingual Matters Ltd, Clevedon.
Hatim, B. and Mason, I.
(1990) Discourse and the Translator.
Longman.
United Kingdom.
Hatim, B.
(2001) Teaching and Researching Translation.
Applied linguistics in action series.
Longman, United Kingdom.
Newmark, P. (1981) Approaches to Translation.
Language and Teaching series, Pergamon, United Kingdom.
Nida, E. A. and Taber, C. R. (1969) The Theory and Practice of Translation.
Brill, Leiden Delisle, J.
(1988) Translation: An Interpretive Approach.
University of Ottawa Press.
Canada.
Newmark, P. (1988) A Textbook of Translation.
Prentice Hall, United Kingdom.
Newmark, P. (1991) About Translation.
Multilingual Matters, United Kingdom.
http://www.cssfx.net 7 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Unit 2: Historical Background of Translation Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1.
The Annals of Translation 3.2.
Historical Background of English – Arabic Translation 3.3.
Full Translation and Partial Translation.
3.4.
Total and Restricted Translation.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the preceding unit, an attempt was made to shed light on the concept of translation by reviewing some of the various definitions suggested by translation theorists.
We also drew a line bewteen translation and interpreting.
And we focused attention on the importance of translation - we advanced a number of points to substantiate the relevance of translation in many ways.
In this unit, we shall read history backwards to trace the starting point of translation and the eventual beginning of English – Arabic translation.
We will also consider some kinds of translation such as full and partial translation, as well as total and restricted translation.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the lesson in this unit, you should be able to: • tell the history of translation • know the several stages, which non-Arabic – Arabic translation passed through • pinpoint the origin of English – Arabic translation.
• enumerate some kinds of translations • differentiate between full and partial translation • explain what difference there is between total and restricted translation.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Annals of Translation Translation activity is as old as time.
There is no doubting the fact that every intellectual or scientific awakening has always been preceded by or begun with active translation.
In 8 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] the ancient times, strenuous translations from Greek language to Latin had been carried out following the decline of the Greek civilization and emergence of the Roman.
Europe remained under the darkness of the middle ages till the fall of Constantine and transfer of its treasures through the relics of the Greek and the Roman to the then great western nations.
Extensive translation exercise thus became active, rendering these antiques into such nascent European languages as English, French and Spanish, most of which developed out of Latin, and from elements of regional dialects or languages of varying impacts and power depending on region.
The annal of renaissance period began with those translation works stabilizing, digesting and assimilating the translated, and then impressing it on the shaping of European mentality.
3.2.
Historical Background of English – Arabic Translation Arab civilzation likewise, had in history experienced many great translations.
Between the 7th and the 8th centuries and beyond, the heritages of such early nations as Persia and Rome, that preceded the Arab nation, had been translated into Arabic via Sanskrit, Syriac and later directly through the Greek translation.
The Arabs, therefore, started learning foreign languages following stability of Islam in conquered regions, hence, they were able to render many alien heritages into Arabic.
The Abbasid period particularly witnessed a widespread of vivacious translation activities as Iraq was populated by a sizeable number of medical practitioners, philosophers and astrologers.
Translation during this era passed through several stages: it began by translating materials on Medicine, Astrology, Mathematics, Philosophy and Logic, and culminated in the translation of various books on sciences and literatures.
This activity eventually resulted in the diffussion of knowledge, development of thinking styles and growth of Islamic sects, whose methodology is based on dialectic.
All of these climaxed in the flourishing of Syntax and the evolution of Rhetoric.
It is however, pertinent to mention that the later translation experience, which started by the middle of the 19th century, when Rifa'at Tahtawi founded in Egypt the language academy for translation of European languages (English inclusive), was an upshot of those early experiences in translation.
Thenceforth, translation became a science having its own fundamental principles, after it had been an art relying on the competence and genius of a translator.
3.3.
Full Translation and Partial Translation There are several kinds of translation depending on perspectives of translation theorists and their classification.
Though, in the Arabic – English translation module, you have been taken through some types of translation including literal, idiomatic, interlinear and free translation.
These are indeed the most popular types nonetheless, in the present unit; you will be exposed to other types such as full and partial translation.
Catford (1965) shall be our reference point here as he succinctly distinguishes between these two kinds of translation, depending on the extent to which the source language text is submitted to 9 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] the translation process.
According to him, in a full translation, the entire text is subjected to the translation process and every part of the source text is replaced by target text material.
In partial translation, on the other hand, he observes that some parts of the source language text are left untranslated and they are simply rendered to and incorporated in the target text.
3.4.
Total Translation and Restricted Translation Catford (1965) also draws a line between total and restricted translations.
These have to do with the levels of language involved in translation.
Total translation, according to him, is "the replacement of source language grammar and lexis by equivalent target language grammar and lexis with consequential replacement of source language phonology by (non-equivalent) target language phonology".
Restricted translation, in contrast, means "the replacement of source language textual material by equivalent target language textual material at only one level".
It needs mentioning that most translation works are concerned with the later as using the former may pose a greater difficulty in translation process and output.
It is pertinent to mention here that, there exist other types of translation aside from the "Normal" translation, which is the well known, traditional lingual process of exchanging and adapting a text from one language to another.
The guidelines for normal translation are usually fulfilled by qualified translators, though sometimes, if the translation requires deeper and more special knowledge which can be provided only by professionals in a field, we prefer them to general translators.
These other types include ‘Certified Translation’ and ‘Localization’.
In cases, when we need to submit documents to authorities, we might need certified translation of financial reports and certificates.
In Nigeria for example, the simplest description of "Certified translation" is the translation made by departments of languages in various universities.
Others call it "Official translation".
Official translation is normal translation, which has been proofread and printed on official paper with a bilingual certification and official stamp.
Localizing, on the other hand, is a special type of translation.
In this type, the safeguarding of the global content, the form and the desired effect is often more important than the exact meaning of words.
It therefore requires different view and way of thinking than "Normal translation".
The translator's creativeness comes to play during localization, while it is not typical during "Normal" translation procedures.
Localization is often used in advertisement spots, in formulating slogans and for designing various digital contents.
Self Assessment Exercise: Trace the origin of Translation.
How significant is the Abbasid period to translation?
10 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] 4.0.
Conclusion Translation had been known since the ancient times in Greek and Latin languages.
Other languages such as French and Spanish had been rendered into English before being translated to Arabic.
Heritages of non-Arab nations like Persia and Rome had been translated via Syriac and Greek into Arabic between the 7th and the 8th centuries, and beyond.
Understanding the four kinds of translation elaborated in this unit has shown that translation types are diverse depending on the criteria used by translation theorist in categorization.
Bringing these other classifications here is just to acquaint students with other types.
Nevertheless, more could still be discovered in translation theory books.
5.0.
Summary We understand in this unit that translation is part of renaissance activity – the Abbasid period was a remarkable era of active translation.
The middle of the 19th century was a turning point in the annals of English – Arabic translation due to the founding of language academy in Egypt by Rifa'at Tahtawi.
In the just concluded lesson, you were also exposed to other types of translation including full, partial, total and restricted translation.
While full and partial translation lays bare the extent to which the source language text is submitted to the translation process, total and restricted translation reveals the degree to which grammar, lexis and phonology of the source language are replaced in the target language.
6.0.
Tutor marked Assignment How did English – Arabic translation evolve and what factors led to its development?
Explain each of the kinds of translation listed hereunder: 1.
Full translation 2.
Partial translation 3.
Total translation 4.
Restricted translation Distinguish between Certified Translation and Localized Translation.
7.0.
References/Further Readings Yusuf, Muhammad Hassan (2006) Kayfa Tutarjim (2nd Edition).
(NP), Cairo.
Abu Ghazalah, Talal (2007) Dalil Tadrib al-Mutarjimeen fi Tarjamah.
Sharkah Abu Ghazalah Lil Tarjamah wa Tawzee'in wal-Nashr.
11 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Hitti, Phillip K (1981) History of the Arabs (10th Edition).
The Macmillan Press Limited, London and Basingstoke.
Hourani, A.
(1991) A History of the Arab Peoples.
Faber and Faber, London.
Al-Ghussain, Reem Abdel Al Latif (2003) Areas of Cultural and Linguistic Difficulty in English – Arabic Translation.
Unpublished PhD Thesis in the Department of Linguistics and English Language, University of Durham, United Kingdom.
Catford, J.
(1965) A Linguistic Theory of Translation.
Oxford University Press, United Kingdom.
Abu Ghazalah, Talal (2007) Dalil Tadrib al-Mutarjimeen fi Tarjamah.
Sharkah Abu Ghazalah Lil Tarjamah wa Tawzee'in wal-Nashr.
Hatim B.
(1997) Communication across Cultures: Translation Theory and Text Linguistics.
University of Exeter Press, Exeter.
http://www.thetranslationagency.eu 12 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Unit 3: Techniques and Strategies for English-Arabic Translation Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Techniques and Strategies of English – Arabic translation.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 Introduction You already have idea about the concept of Translation and what differentiates it from interpreting.
And so far we have been majorly concerned with the concept of translation in the contents of the preceding lessons.
We also reviewed the history of translation and marked the genesis of English – Arabic translation.
Some kinds of translation were also mentioned.
In this unit, we shall discuss techniques of rendering meaning and message of English texts into Arabic.
It is relevant here to mention that the strategies used in translating English texts into Arabic are those same strategies you have been taught in the Arabic – English translation module.
They include transposition, modulation, equivalence and adoption, which are mostly used in indirect translation, where the skill of the translator is seriously engaged.
All you need do is just apply those techniques to any English texts you may want to transfer into Arabic.
Hence, here we shall just attempt to practically apply those strategies.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this lesson, students should be able to: • Know the techniques of translating English texts into Arabic.
• Recognize the technique that suits a particular text for translation.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Techniques and strategies of English - Arabic Translation Translation Techniques can broadly be divided into two: Direct Translation Techniques and Indirect Translation Techniques (Oblique).
Direct Translation Techniques are used when theoretical and structural elements of the source language can be transposed into the target language.
13 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Direct translation techniques include: • Borrowing • Calque • Literal Translation Borrowing Borrowing is the taking of words directly from one language into another without translation.
Many English words are "loaned" into other languages; for example software in the field of technology and funk in culture.
English also borrows numerous words from other languages; like abattoir and résumé, which were loaned from French; hamburger and kindergarten borrowed from German; and musk and sugar, which were loaned from Sanskrit.
Examples of borrowing from English into Arabic include Radio , Television ﻮﻳﺩﺍﺭ Computer Brandy Bank etc.
ﺯﺎﻔﻠﺗ ﺮﺗﻮﻴﺒﻤﻛ ﻱﺪﻧﺍﺮﺑ ﻚﻨﺒﻟﺍ Loaned words are often printed in italics to indicate that they are "foreign".
Calque A calque or loan translation is a phrase borrowed from another language and translated literally word-for-word.
It is often seen in specialized or internationalized fields such as quality assurance (assurance qualité taken from English).
Examples of calque that have been absorbed into English include standpoint and beer garden from German Standpunkt and Biergarten.
Some calques can become widely accepted in the target language (such as standpoint and beer garden).
The meaning of other calques can be rather incomprehensible for most people, especially when they have to do with specific vocations or subjects such as science and law.
For example Solución de compromiso is a Spanish legal term taken from the English compromise solution and although Spanish attorneys comprehend it, the meaning is not readily understood by the layman.
A fruitless calque can be exceedingly unnatural, and can cause unwanted humor, and is often interpreted as signifying lack of expertise of the translator in the target language.
Literal Translation This is word-for-word translation.
It can be used in some languages and not in others depending on the sentence structure.
Sometimes it works and sometimes it does not, because of differences in sentence structures of various languages.
And the fact that one sentence can be translated literally across languages does not necessarily mean that all sentences can be translated literally.
14 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Indirect (Oblique) Translation Oblique Translation Techniques are used when the structural or theoretical elements of the source language cannot be directly translated without changing meaning or disorganizing the syntactical and stylistics elements of the target language.
Indirect translation techniques include: • Equivalence or Reformulation • Transposition • Modulation • Adaptation • Compensation Equivalence/Reformulation Searching the Arabic language for the most similar and apposite phrase that is analogous in English language.
It often applies to translation of idioms, proverbs and figures of speech.
An example of searching equivalence in English – Arabic translation is: "Birds of a feather flock together."
A literal translation of this proverb may read thus: " " ﺕ ﺍﺫ ﺭﻮﻴﻄﹸ ﻟﺍ ً اعم َ whereas the corresponding meaning in Arabic is " ".
ﲑ ﻄ ﺗ ﺪﺣ ﺍﻭ ﺡﹴ ﺎﻨﺟ ﻊﻘﹶﺗ ﺎﻬﻟﺎﻜﺷ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻓ ﺭﻮﻴﱡﻄﻟﺍ ﻥﱠﺇﹺ Another example close to that is "Tell me who you go with and I'll tell you who you are", which if literally translated into Arabic would read: " " but the ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﻚ ﻟﹶ ﻝﹸ ﻮﻗﹸﺄﹶﺳ ﻭ ﻪﻌﻣ ﺐ ﻫﺬﹾﺗ ﻦ ﻣ ﻲﻟ ﻞﻗﹸ matching meaning in Arabic is in the saying: ".
"ﻱﺪﺘﻘﹾﻳ ﻥﺭﺎﻘﹶﳌﺎﺑﹺ ﻦ ﻳﺮﹺﻘﹶﻟﺍ ﻥﱠﺇﹺ One would observe that the process of reformulation is though creative but not always easy as translator would have to express an idea in a completely different manner.
Transposition Technique In the process of Transposition, parts of speech change their sequence when they are translated.
For example, “White House” (in English) when translated into Arabic using transposition becomes “National Open University of Nigeria” becomes ﺾ ﻴﺑﻷَ ﺍ ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﺍﹶ ﺔﹸﻌﻣﺎﺠﻟﹾﺍﹶ) .
It is in a sense a change of word class because of the fact that (ﺎﻳﲑﹺ ﺠﹺ ﻴﻨﻟ ﺔﹸﺣ ﻮﺘﻔﹾﳌﺍﹶ ﺔﹸﻴﻨﹺﻃﹶﻮﻟﹾﺍﹶ grammatical structures are often different in diverse languages.
This technique requires that the translator knows that it is possible to replace a word category in the target language without altering the meaning of the source language text, for example: the English “Hand written” (noun + participle) becomes in Arabic (passive ﺪﻴﻟﹾﺎﺑ ﺏ ﻮﺘﻜﹾ ﻣ participle + preposition and accusative noun).
15 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Modulation Technique This technique consists in using a phrase that is dissimilar in the source and target languages to express the same idea: “It’s okay” literally means but translates ﺓﹲﺪﻴﺟ ﻩﺬﻫ/ﺪﻴﺟ ﺍﺬﹶﻫ better as .
It changes the semantics and shifts viewpoint of the source language.
ﺱ ﺄﹾﺑ ﻻ Through the process of modulation, the translator generates a change in the judgment of the message without altering meaning and without generating a sense of inelegance in the reader of the target language text.
Other examples of modulation include “Safe Journey” literally translates as but translates better as .
Another one is ﺔﹲﻨﻴﻣﺃﹶ ﺔﹲﻠﹶﺣ ﺭﹺ ﺓﹲﺪﻴﻌﺳ ﹲﺔﻠﹶﺣ ﺭﹺ; ﺪﻤﺣ ﺃﹶ ﺩﻮﻌﻟﹶﺍ “Happy New Year” which literally translates as but is better translated into ﺭﻭﺮﺴ ﻣ ﺪﻳﺪﺟ ﺪﻴﻋ Arabic as .
ﻙ ﺭﺎﺒﻣ ﺪﻴﻋ This technique of changing the viewpoint in a message is what makes a reader say: "Yes, this is exactly how we say it in our language".
Adaptation This technique applies when something specific to one language culture is expressed in a totally different way that is appropriate to another language culture.
It is a shift in cultural environment.
It is used when the limit to translation has been reached, i.e.
when a simple translation would not work or it would produce confusion in the target language and culture.
Titles of books, movies, and characters often fit into this category.
Should we translate Barbecue in English as in Arabic?
ﺔﹲﺑﺩﺄﹾﻣ Compensation Compensation can be used when something cannot be translated, and the meaning that is lost is expressed elsewhere in the translated text.
According to Peter Fawcett, it is: "...making good in one part of the text something that could not be translated in another".
Examples that we can give here are pronouns between English and Arabic: English does not have plural for such pronoun of congregation as “you” and as such “you” would translate into Arabic as (for congregation of males) and (for congregation of ﻢ ﺘﻧﺃﹶ ﻦ ﺘﻧﺃﹶ females).
The same “you” would translate into Arabic as for a second person (male ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ )and for a second person (female).
These lost meanings are normally compensated ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ elsewhere in the target text through explanation.
Self-Assessment Exercise Define the concepts of Calque and Oblique as they relate to translation.
16 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] 4.0 Conclusion To produce a good translation requires mastery of various techniques and knowledge of the particular one that best suits the contents to be translated.
In-depth knowledge of cultures of both source and target languages is also a necessary condition to determine which method to employ in a particular case/situation.
5.0 Summary The focal point in this unit is the various techniques that are used in translating different contents.
They include Borrowing, Calque and Literal translation techniques in the case of Direct translation.
As for Indirect or Oblique translation, recommended methods are Reformulation, Transposition, Modulation, Adaptation and Compensation.
A few examples were cited to illustrate the techniques.
For detailed information about necessary steps involved in English – Arabic Translation, consult the module on Arabic - English translation.
The steps therein are adaptable and applicable to English – Arabic translation.
In the next unit, we shall consider the problems of English – Arabic translation.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Expatiate the areas of difference between Direct translation from Oblique translation techniques.
7.0 References/Further Readings Peter Fawcett (1997) Translation and Language.
St. Jerome, Manchester.
Al-Hour, A.
(1997) Lack of Linguistic Equivalence in Translation.
Unpublished M.A Thesis, American World University, USA.
Ander, G. (1998) Finding the right word: Translation and Language Teaching.
In Translation and Language Teaching.
Malmkejaer, K (ed.)
St. Jerome.
UK.
Aissi, L. (1987) An Analytical Study of the Process of Translation, with Special Reference to English/Arabic Translation.
Unpublished 17 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] PhD Thesis.
Salford University, UK.
18 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Unit 4: Problems of English-Arabic Translation Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Cultural problems of English – Arabic Translation 3.2 Linguistic problems of English – Arabic Translation 3.3 Qualities of a Translator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 – Introduction In the Arabic – English translation module, you have been intimated with general problems of translation.
In this unit, the lesson shall concentrate on difficulties encountered in English – Arabic translation, which majorly are cultural and linguistic.
Culture as a complex whole, includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, customs, and any other capabilities or lifestyle acquired by man as a member of society (Taylor 1958).
Culture plays a crucial role in shaping the correctness of linguistic units.
Further, cultural variables affect the level of understanding between various language communities (Kussmaul 1995).
Consequently, language is a central part of culture as the lexis and structure of a language derives its meaning from its culture.
Arabic as a language is linked with particular cultural and social norms quite different from those of other languages.
The effort in this unit shall be focused on examining problems associated with English-Arabic translation.
Qualities of a translator would also be highlighted.
2.0 – Objectives At the end of this lesson, students should be able to: • list some of the socio- cultural problems of English – Arabic translation • identify the causes of linguistic difficulties in English – Arabic translation • recognize the skill and qualities required of a good translator • improve his/her translation ability 19 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] 3.0.
Main Content 3.1.
Cultural Problems of English –Arabic Translation The cultural factor in translation is indisputable as no meaningful communication can take place unless the message transmitted through texts is well understood by the communicants.
But understanding can be achieved only if the information contained in language units is accompanied by background knowledge of facts referred to in the message.
People belonging to the same linguistic community are members of one culture.
They share in common many traditions, habits, and ways of life.
They also have common knowledge about the geography, history, and climate of their country, its political, economic, social and cultural institutions, as well as accepted morals and taboos of their society.
All these cultural identities are the basis of the communicants’ presumptions which enable them to produce and to decode messages in their linguistic form.
It is therefore understandable that in inter lingual communication or translation this common knowledge may be critically limited thereby inhibiting understanding and affecting translation output.
Researchers have observed that general problems of translation include lack of exact equivalent in the target language due to cultural difference, semantic differentiation, grammatical structure, dearth of vocabulary etc.
Isabel Alousque, while explaining the implication of cultural domains for translation observes that: “Words encoding cultural information are difficult to translate since they involve cultural knowledge and a cultural background.
Literal translation may not fully render the meaning of culture bound words because they do not have the same semantic range in the source and the target languages”.
These cultural problems could be divided into political, social, religious, material and ecological (Nida1964).
There are differences between Western and Arabic cultures, which may cause problem in English - Arabic translation.
Therefore, finding translation equivalents for cultural terms would require bridging the cultural gaps between English and Arabic cultures so as to meet readers' expectations.
3.2.
Linguistic Problems of English – Arabic Translation It is particularly necessary for English – Arabic translators to be conscious of the differences between English and Arabic linguistic systems, as differences between the two systems may cause problems in translation, and affect the quality of the Arabic translation (i.e.
the Arabic output).
Studies have identified morphology and syntax (such as adjectives, adverbials, prepositions, conjunctions etc) as some of the areas of linguistic problems in English – Arabic translation because both languages differ in morphological and syntactic systems.
Unlike Arabic, some English words may belong to more than one word class such as "fire", which can be both a noun and a verb.
On the other hand, some grammatical features which are expressed by morphology in Arabic such as passivation are expressed 20 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] in English by syntactic features.
One word in Arabic can frequently be a complete sentence in English.
For example, the Arabic word هُتفْ رَ ع "I know him" contains the verb, the subject and the object ـھ.
Further, the morphological endings of words can overturn the functions of nouns.
For example, in " "Zayd met 'Amr", Zayd is the subject, ﺍﺮﻤﻋ ﺪﻳﺯ ﻲ ﻘﻟﹶ" while in " " "Amr met Zayd" Amr is the subject.
ﺍﹰﺪﻳﺯ ﻭﺮﻤﻋ ﻲ ﻘﻟﹶ The syntax in the two sentences is the same (verb, subject and object) but the morphological difference reverses the functions of the two nouns.
3.3.
Qualities of a Translator Translation as an art and a science is a difficult task and requires constant practice to acquire expertise.
It demands sound knowledge of various branches of the source language as well as that of the target language.
The task of the translator goes beyond reliance on dictionary; rather he should be able to present the real and appropriate meaning in a language construction in vogue, so that he can express the ideas of the source language.
The flair, skill and experience that are required by a good translator are similar to the qualities that are needed by an ‘original’ writer; hence, writing and translating often go hand in hand.
Experienced members of the Translators Association have therefore produced a profile of a good translator to include the following: - the translator needs to have a strong interest in language and a feeling for it.
- s/he must have a good knowledge of the source language and of the regional culture and literature, as well as a sound knowledge of any special subject that is dealt with in the work that is being translated.
- the translator should understand the meaning of the source text and be able to present the meaning in the target language through proper grammar and a good writing style.
- s/he should have linguistic competence in both source language and target language so that s/he can analyze grammatical and lexical relationships in texts and deal with complex structures to determine the intended meaning.
- the translator should be familiar with other works of the original author.
- s/he must be an experienced and innovative writer in the target language and nearly will always be a native speaker of it.
- the translator should always be capable of switching between different styles in the language depending on subject of the work being translated.
- the translator should always aim at conveying the message of the original work and not just rendering accurate meaning of the words.
- s/he should be competent to produce a text that reads well, and at the same time echo the tone and style of the original work – as if though the original author were writing in the target language.
21 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Self Assessment Exercise - Mention some of the areas where linguistic problems may manifest in English – Arabic translation.
- Enumerate some of the qualities of a good translator.
4.0 Conclusion Translators must be sensitive to the fact that readers' expectations, their norms and values, are subjective to culture and that their understanding of texts is to a large extent determined by these expectations, norms and values.
Better understanding of Western culture is therefore important for translators to overcome cultural difficulties in English - Arabic translation.
In addition, they should understand the linguistic systems of both English and Arabic in order to avoid linguistic complexities in translation.
It was established in this lesson that failure of any translator to equip him/herself with the technical know-how of producing quality translation would always result in distortion of the meaning and ideas contained in the source language text.
5.0 Summary The lesson in this unit centers on problems of English – Arabic translation - they are mainly cultural and linguistic in nature.
Ways of avoiding the problems in translation were suggested.
They include better understanding of English and Arabic cultures and; sound knowledge of the linguistic systems of both languages.
The lesson also revolves round the qualities of a good translator.
The prime qualities include good knowledge of the source language, the target language and of regional culture and literature; knowledge of the special subject dealt with in the source language text; the translator should also be an innovative writer and must have the ability to switch between different styles in order to echo the tone and style of the original work.
6.0 Tutor marked Assignment - Discuss the major troubles of English – Arabic translation and suggest how they can be overcome.
- Discuss the major qualities of a good translator.
- How would you recognise a bad translation from a good one?
7.0 References/Further Readings Abu Ghazalah, Talal (2007) Dalil Tadrib al-Mutarjimeen fi Tarjamah.
Sharkah Abu Ghazalah Lil Tarjamah wa Tawzee'in wal-Nashr.
22 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Nida, E. (1964b) Linguistics and Ethnology in Translation Problems.
In Language and Culture and Society.
Dell, H.
(ed.).
Harper and Row, United Kingdom.
Kussmaul, P. (1995) Training the Translator.
Benjamins.
The Netherlands, Taylor, E. (1958) Primitive Culture: Research into the Development of Methodology, Religion, Art and Custom.
Mass, Gloucester.
Yusuf, Muhammad Hassan (2006) Kayfa Tutarjim (2nd Edition).
(NP), Cairo.
Aziz, Y.
(1982) Cultural Problems of English/Arabic Translation.
Babel International Journal of Translation.
V.28.
Geoffrey Samuelsson-Brown (2004) A Practical Guide for Translators (4TH Edition) Multilingual Matters Ltd. Clevedon.
Yusuf, Muhammad Hassan (2006) Kayfa Tutarjim (2nd Edition).
(NP), Cairo.
Alousque, Isabel Negro (2009) “Cultural Domains: Translation Problems” in Revista de Lingüística y Lenguas Aplicadas.
(Journal of Applied Linguistics and Languages) Volume 4.
Komissarov, V.N.
(1991) "Language and Culture in Translation: Competitors or Collaborators?"
in TTR : traduction, terminologie, rédaction, vol.
4, Number 1 23 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] MODULE 2: A GENERAL IDEA ABOUT ARABIC PROSE Unit 1 : A General Overview of Arabic Prose Contents 3.0 Introduction 4.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Arabic Prose Defined 3.5 Difference between Arabic Prose and Poetry 3.6 Kinds of Arabic Prose 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0.
Introduction We shall in this unit dwell on the meaning and essence of Arabic prose as one of the two main fields of Arabic literature.
The other field is poetry, and both are equally important as they represent the verbal platforms where scholars display their literary skills and insight.
These two springboards provide scholars with avenues where they represent their experiences whether real or imagined.
2.0.
Objectives Our target in this unit is to: • give a general outline of Arabic prose • to spot the difference between Arabic prose and poetry, and • to enumerate and discuss the various kinds of Arabic prose.
3.0.
Main Body 3.1.
Arabic Prose Defined 24 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Arabic Prose is an aspect of Arabic Literature.
It has two divisions: the first is the common prose which applies to language of conversation that has no literary essence except a few of it that may fall within the scope of literary piece such as maxims, aphorisms and parables.
The second type is the one whose authors employ artistic, rhetoric and adept language in its composition.
This is the type patronized and researched by literary critics for study, in order to analyze stages of events and characteristic features of each stage.
This type is majorly classified into artistic writing and oratory.
Some litterateurs have chosen to designate it artistic prose.
And it encompasses also story (short or long), novel, endorsed literary treatises as well as ornate historical writings.
3.2.
Difference between Arabic Prose and Poetry Despite the fact that some similarities occur between Arabic Prose and Poetry in the area of thematic functions, yet Arabic Prose differs from Arabic Poetry in the aspects of its composition.
Whereas some rules and regulations such as metres and rhyme (music) govern the composition of poetry in consonance with the standards set by Al-Khalil bin Ahmad Al- Farahidi, Prose is fundamentally free from the shackles of metres and rhyme; hence its composition is easier and allows for greater patronage of literati.
Furthermore, Arabic poem composers are at liberty to bend some grammatical rules but such manipulations may flaw work of prose writers and render it substandard.
3.3.
Kinds of Arabic Prose Majority of litterateurs have unanimously agreed that Arabic Prose may be divided into five different kinds namely: a.
ﻝﹸ ﺎﻘﳌﺍﹶ – A Treatise or An Article A treatise or an article is a definite idea that treats a topic of research in which a writer gathers his theories and arranges them with proofs so as to arrive at a particular result.
A treatise may be a subjective or an 25 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] objective one.
But brevity, clarity and conciseness are major characteristics of an article, and it usually centres on any issue of human life, be it political, social, historical, literary or scientific.
All of these different branches of a Treatise must however, be void of logical and philological errors.
The literary treatise is most challenging type to compose.
Two schools are mainly recognized in this art namely the conservative and the modernistic.
b.
ﺔﹸﺑﺎﻄﳋﹶ ﺍ – Elocution/Oratory The stronghold of this prosaic art is Logic and Rhetoric.
A skillful orator is one that knows how to induce and persuade a gathering of listeners by applying various means like reason and Logic to convince the audience about the appositeness of a particular view and the impropriety of other.
There are various kinds of oratory including political, military, social, religious and judicial oratories.
The design of an Oratory normally comprises of an introduction, the body (the real message) and the conclusion.
A good orator must take cognizance of the audience’s culture and level of civilization so that his/her speech is not misdirected.
c. ﺔﹸﻟﹶﺎﺳ ﺮﻟﺍ – A Letter/An Epistle In this kind of Arabic Prose, the litterateur - through writing – transmits and conveys his ideas, feelings and emotions to others.
It is a means of communicating in writing with persons at the other end, and it serves as interpreter of the writers’ intent, just as it helps to fulfill human needs from a distance, and to strengthen bond of relationship among them regardless of the distance between their different locations.
An eloquent writer of a letter is one who takes into account the situation and nature of relationship between him/her and the recipient.
Its sub-divisions include informal letters (ﺔﹸﻴﻧﹺﺍﻮﺧ ﻹِ ﺍ ﻞﹸ ﺋﺎﺳﺮﻟﺍ), secretarial writing ( ﻞﹸ ﺋﺎﺳﺮﻟﺍ ﺔﹸﻴﻧﹺﺍﻮﻳﺪﻟﺍ), and lengthy epistles (ﺔﹸﻟﹶﻮﻄﹶ ﳌﺍ ﻞﹸ ﺋﺎﺳ ﺮﻟﺍ).
d. ﺔﹸﺻ ﻮﺼ ﻗﹾﻷُ ﺍﻭ ﺔﹸﺼ ﻘﻟﺍ - The Story Story has been defined as a collection of imaginary happenings in the life of man, though the imagination in the story derives (with regard to its plots and characters) from factual life occurrences.
This division of 26 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] prose in Arabic literature is one of the means through which human experiences are depicted.
The story is known to serve as a means of entertainment and of teaching moral values to the young ones.
It is also employed as a means of correcting social malaises.
The Story may be sub-divided into long and short story.
Long story is different from the short story in that the characters of the latter are fewer compared to those of the former.
Further, the short story treats one particular idea or experience in a particular time and place setting.
The writer tries to be as meticulous as possible and reports the minutest detail.
The time setting of short story is also relatively short.
e. ﺔﹸﻴﺣ ﺮﺴ ﳌﺍﹶ – The Drama Drama is but a dramatized story for viewers with the aid of drama instruments and with concentration on conversation, dialogue and critical depiction of peculiar features of the drama characters.
The two primary branches of drama are Tragedy and Comedy.
Drama is one of the means of civilization which Napoleon Bonaparte brought along with him to Egypt in 1798 as this genre in literature was unknown amongst the Arab literati until the Napoleonic invasion of Egypt.
Drama was not known in Classical Arabic literature: the earliest written Arabic drama emerged in 1847 when Marun Naqqash in Lebanon dramatized “ﻞﹸ ﻴﺨ ﺒﻟﺍ” “the miser” in his residence.
He followed it up with another one entitled "ﺪﻴﺷ ﺮﻟﺍ ﻥﹶ ﻭﺭﺎﻫ ﺮﺼ ﻋ” “the era of Harun Rasheed” and later on in 1853 he dramatized "ﻂﹸ ﻴﻠﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺩﻮﺴ ﳊﹶ ﺍﹶ".
In 1870 Ya’qub Sannu’ followed the suit of Marun: His main contribution to drama was the introduction of women folk into drama instead of men playing all the roles, both Naqqash and Sannu’ had been motivated by the example of Italian opera and influenced by European drama, particularly French comedy.
Drama activities later moved to Egypt where the Opera House was built.
This eventually led to the proliferation of drama groups in the Arab world.
Self Assessment Exercise a.
Give a brief outline of the concept of Arabic Prose and distinguish between Arabic Prose and Poetry.
27 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] b.
Going by the contents of this unit, what differentiates an article from a letter?
4.0.
Conclusion The broad-spectrum of Arabic Prose shows that it is one of the two key literary domains of Arabic literature.
Poetry is the other domain and both occupy prominent positions in Arabic literature.
Though the two serve as the vocal podiums where scholars enjoy some freedom to exhibit their literary expertise, but prose is more accessible to a larger number of scholars due its easy composition: it is free from restrictions of form (metre and rhyme), which characterize poetry and determine the poetic tone.
Moreover, while poets have been granted poetic license to manipulate the linguistic and grammatical rules of Arabic language, prose writers do not enjoy this privilege.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have given you the general overview of Arabic prose by defining the concept of Arabic Prose.
We also identified the difference between Arabic Prose and Poetry as being basically in the structure.
Kinds of Arabic Prose were also examined.
They include Treatise ﻝﺎﻘﳌﺍ, Oratory ﺔﺑﺎﻄﳋﺍ , Epistle ﺔﻟﺎﺳﺮﻟﺍ , Story ﺔﺼ ﻘﻟﺍ (Long, Short and the Novel) and Drama ﺔﻴﺣﺮﺴﳌﺍ .
Each of these also has sub- divisions.
In the next unit, we will look at the origin of Novel in Arabic prose.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Enumerate and discuss the various kinds of Prose obtainable in Arabic literature.
7.0 Reference/Further Readings Al-Fakhuri, Hanna (1953) Tarikh al-Adab al-‘Arabi.
Al-Matba’a al – Bulisiyyah (n.p.).
Al-Hshim, J. et al (1966) Al-Mufid Fil Adab al-‘Arabi Vol.
I and II, 2ND Edition, Al- Maktab al-Tijari li-Tibaa’ah wa-Tawzee’in wa-Nashr, Beirut.
Al-Qimati, Ramadan Sa’d et al (1427 A.H) Al-Adab wa-Nusus wal-Balaghah wa-Naqd .Vol.11 2nd Edition, Dar al-Kutub al-Wataniyah, Benghazi.
28 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Annin A.
(1983) Al-Arud wal-Qafiyah 3rd Edition, Jamiah Muhammad bn Saud, Saudi Arabia.
Badawi, M.M.
(1987) Modern Arabic Drama in Egypt.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cowan J.M.
(1966) Arabic – English Dictionary.
Modern Language Service, India.
Daif, Sawqi, (n.d.) Al-Adab al-‘Arabi al-Mu’asir fi Misr.
Dar al-Ma’arif, Cairo.
Maqbul Sa’d Hussein et al (1990) Al-Adab wa- Nusus wal-Balaghah Vol.1 Dar Iqra Li Tiba’a wa-Tarjamah wa-Nashr, Tripoli.
Oladosu, A.
A.
(1996) Illusion versus Reality.
M. A. Dissertation, Department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Shadhili H. et al (1981) Al-Balaghah wan-Naqd 3rd Edition, Wizaratul Maarif, Saudi Arabia.
Taymur, Mahmud (n.d.) Diraasaat fil Adab wal-Masrah.
Maktabatul Aadaab, (n.p.).
29 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Unit 2: Novelism in Arabic Literature Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Definition of Novel 3.2 Origin of Novel in Arabic 3.2.1 Emergence of the First Original Novel in Arabic 3.3 Kinds of Arabic Novel 3.4 Scope of Arabic Novel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summmary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the previous unit, we presented you with a general idea about the concept of Arabic prose, its various classifications and what distinguishes prose from poetry.
In this unit however, we shall proceed to examine al-Riwayah, the Arabic Novel, its origin and scope.
This genre in Arabic literature was unpopular until the modern times.
2.0 Objectives This unit aims to achieve the following objectives: • to delineate the essence of Novel • to track the beginning of Novelism in Arabic Literature • to categorize the kinds of Arabic Novel and to 30 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] • Recognize the scope of Arabic Novel.
3.0 Main Body 3.1 Definition of Novel Ar-Riwayah ﺔﻳﺍﻭﺮﻟﺍ, the Arabic word for Novel is a derivative of the trilateral root verb rawa ﻯﻭﺭ , which means to relate , recite, transmit or rehearse a story, a poem or a tradition.
The word has been used to refer to different categories of fiction in Arabic: stories of historical romance were called riwayaat, such as those of Antar, Majnun Layla and Hayy ibn Yaqzan.
Literary scholars and historians have used the term interchangeably to refer to different categories of story, be it short or long, especially in the first half of the 19th century when European fictional stories were first translated into Arabic.
However, the term riwayah has commonly been recognized and used to mean a novel or sometimes an acted story.
Shadhili and others using form, theme and technique as parameters, define riwayah as follows: “The Novel is the most renowned variety of stories from the "ﺔﻳﺍﻭﺮﻟﺍ" perspective of its length…it represents a particular era and a milieu, its events are intricately interwoven and multifarious, it affords its writer the opportunity to analyze his characters from behind its various scenes and opinions.” Focusing on stylistic approach to the genre and its features, Umar, Ali Mustapha says thus: “The Novel is an expression of a collection of incidents which is narrated in sequence of time devoid of confusion, the writer therefore mentions Wednesday before Thursday; one of its important features is that it awakens the desire of the reader to know what the future portends, or that which lies in the days ahead”.
3.2 Origin of Novel in Arabic Literature The origin of Novel in Arabic literature is traceable to the surfacing of historical romances as a form of narrative.
Popular historical romances such as Sirat Antar, Saif ibn dhi-Yazan and Qissah bani Hilal existed in the Arab world, but all have been observed to be fictional stories of individuals.
A number of other stories which have been regarded as “philosophical” and “quasi-scientific” in nature also existed between the 5th and 6th centuries.
They include the Risalatul al-Ghufran of Al-Ma’arri (d.449A.H.
), Al-Insan wal- 31 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Hayawan and Hayy bin Yaqzan of bin Tufail (d.581.
A. H.).
But all have been proved to be of no literary contribution to the art of story writing: “they are rather philosophical expositions in a story form”.
The eventual close and enduring contact between the Arabs and the West was the real facilitator of the appearance of a truly new genre of story writing in Arabic and novel to be specific.
The coming of Napoleon Bonaparte to Egypt in 1798 – as we mentioned in the previous unit – was the foundation for literary renaissance in Egypt and indeed in the Arab world as a whole.
Muhammad ‘Ali who took over from Bonaparte successfully continued the good work of the latter.
He, in 1826, sent some Arab students to France to learn about the European heritage.
He also established a number of schools including Madrasatul Alsun.
These efforts resulted in the academic and literary regeneration in Egypt starting from the 19th century to the 20th century.
Literary scholars have thus recognized the evolution of this new genre, ar-Riwayah, the Novel, in Arabic literature as one of the earliest impacts of the renaissance efforts.
The art of translation played a crucial role in the emergence of Arabic Novel.
It was obvious that some western stories were translated into Arabic.
And with exception of a few translations, it was only from 1950’s upward that western fiction was translated and published in Arabic.
Factors responsible for delay in the publishing of western fictions in Arabic include but are not limited to the fact that: - Printing in Arabic was at its developmental stage, with insufficient number of printing machine and experts to master the new art of fiction.
- Non-official magazine or newspaper (agent for publicizing fiction in the West) did not appear in Arabic until the 1960s.
- Non-availability of competent translators among the Arabs by then.
Despite all these deterring factors, three new popular genres were eventually introduced into Arabic from western literature via translation.
They are the short story, the drama and the novel.
It is pertinent to mention that the first to appear after drama was historical novels.
Novels written by Jurji Zaydan fall within this category though they were not perfect looking at them from literary perspective.
3.2.1.
Emergence of the First Original Novel in Arabic It is true that Syrian and Lebanese literary scholars had written “novels” in Arabic but their works have been regarded by critics of fiction as being of little 32 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] standard, hence were not considered true Arabic Novel.
Haywood, in his appraisal of those “novels” remarked thus: “the shackles of high flown classical language were being thrown off, and these novels were readable, but not of the first rank”.
If the above statement is anything to go by, it is a pointer to the fact that novels written by Arabs between 1865 and 1913 did not fulfill the standards of a genuine Arabic novel.
However, vast-majority of scholars have favored Muhammad Hussein Haykal of Egypt with the view that his Zainab, written in 1914, is the first original novel in Arabic.
Albert Hourani, Gibb, Khemiri and Kampffneyer, Schoonover are among those who uphold this view.
The standard of the novel has been the major characteristic that qualifies it as the first true Arabic novel.
Gibb, while commenting on its standard observes that “Zaynab broke away decisively in language, style, subject and treatment from anything that had gone before it”.
3.3 Kinds of Arabic Novel Given the fact that Arabic Novel originated from Western literature, it is bound to have many types as there exist different kinds of novel in the Western sense too.
Various scholars have classified the Arabic Novel: while Umar Mustapha identified three types, Abu Sa’d categorized it into six or seven types, yet Shadhili and others, using the content of a novel as index, recognize five major types of Arabic Novel.
Here we shall adopt the categorization by Shadhili and his group as follows: a.
The Historical Novel ﺔﹸﻴﳜ ﺭﹺﺎﺘﻟﺍ ﺔﻳﺍﻭﺮﻟﺍ This may be sub-divided into two namely: ancient historical novel, which includes the historical romances of the primordial, pre-Islamic and the Islamic eras of the Arab peoples, stories of the Jahiliyah period, alfu laylah wa laylah and those contained in the Quran fall within this category.
The other sub-division includes such stories as ones written by Jurji Zaydan and the "Rhadopis of Nubia ﺲ ﻴﺑﹺﻭﺩﺍﺭ" by Najib Mahfuz.
b.
The Adventure Novel ﺓﹸﺮﻣﺎﻐﳌﺍ ﺔﹸﻳﺍﻭﺮﻟﺍ This is a novel that has adventure, an exciting task involving risk and physical danger, as its main theme.
c. The Political Novel ﺔﹸﻴﺳ ﺎﻴﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺔﻳﺍﻭﺮﻟﺍ This type of fiction deals with political affairs.
It is often used to provide commentary on political events, systems and theories.
Political fictional works are often used to "directly criticize an existing society or... present an alternative, sometimes fantastic reality”.
33 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] d. The Emotional Novel ﺔﹸﻴﻔﻃ ﺎﻌﻟﺍ ﺔﻳﺍﻭﺮﻟﺍ An emotional novel is one that transports the reader into the minds of the characters within.
The reader by this means feels emotional empathy with the characters of the story and so becomes excited.
e. The Sociological Novel ﺔﹸﻴﻋﺎﻤﺘﺟ ﻻﺍ ﺔﻳﺍﻭﺮﻟﺍ A sociological novel is one that shows the influence of economic and social conditions on characters and events with an eye towards social reform.
Some of the Arabic novels of the modern period fall in this category.
Examples novels with sociological focus are Zaynab written by Muhammad Husain Haykal, al-Ayyam of Taha Husain, Awdatur-Ruh of Tawfiq al-Hakim and at-Tariq of Najib Mahfuz.
3.4 Scope of Arabic Novel From the foregoing exposition, it is apparent that the scope of Arabic Novel is not limited to any field of human endeavor or experience.
Rather, it embraces all the ideological basics of novel which include the Traditional (Classical), the Romantic and the Realistic; hence it is as miscellaneous as the varied nature of the universe and its dwellers.
Nonetheless, a common theme in the modern Arabic novel is the study of family life with palpable reverberations with the wider family of the Arab world.
Many of the novels often treat the politics and conflicts of the region with war frequently “acting as background to small scale family dramas”.
The works of Najib Mahfuz represent life in Egypt, and his Cairo Trilogy, “Palace Walk ﻦﹺ ﻳﺮﺼ ﻘﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻴﺑ” (1956), “Palace of Desire ﻕﹺ ﻮ ﺸ ﻟﺍ ﺮﺼ ﻗﹶ” (1957) and “Sugar Street ﺔﹸﻳﺮﹺﻜﹶ ﺴ ﻟﺍ” (1957), all describing the struggles of a modern Egyptian family across three generations, won him in 1988 a Nobel Prize for literature.
Mahfuz was the first Arab writer to win the prize.
Self Assessment Exercise - Explain the meaning of the word “Novel” as it appertains to Arabic Literature.
- Examine the origin of Arabic Novel.
4.0 Conclusion Novelism in Arabic literature owes its origin to the final and permanent contact between the Arabs and Western culture.
This was made possible by the military expedition of Napoleon Bonaparte and his men to Egypt in the year 1798.
They 34 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] brought along with them means of civilization and advancement.
Their occupation of Egypt in the year in question put a final stop to decades of literary docility which the Arabs had long suffered following their subjugation by the Tartars.
Muhammed ‘Ali who took over from Bonaparte built on the foundations of the latter.
And one of the first impacts of the literary renaissance in Egypt and the Arab world in general was the evolution of Drama and the Novel in Arabic literature.
The Novel, Zaynab written by Najib Mahfuz has however been adjudged as the first original Arabic Novel.
5.0 Summary The lesson in this unit investigated the definition of Novel, and explored the origin of Novelism in Arabic literature.
It also probed into the evolution of the first original novel in Arabic, pinpointed the first true Arabic novel and then examined the scope and various kinds of Arabic Novel.
The next lesson shall feature the short story and the modern Arabic short story in particular.
6.0 Tutor marked Assignment Identify the scope and types of Arabic Novel, laying particular emphasis on Sociological novel.
7.0 References / Further Readings Abdel-Meguid, Abdul ‘Aziz (1956) The Modern Arabic Short Story: Its Emergence Development and Form, Al-Ma’aaref Press, Cairo.
Badawi, M.M.
(1987) Modern Arabic Drama in Egypt.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Badawi, M.M.
(ed.)
(1992) "Modern Arabic Literature", Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Cowan J.M.
(1966) Arabic – English Dictionary.
Modern Language Service, India.
Daif, Sawqi, (n.d.) Al-Adab al-‘Arabi al-Mu’asir fi Misr.
Dar al-Ma’arif, Cairo.
35 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Gibb, H.A.R.
(1968) “Studies in Contemporary Arabic Literature: The Egyptian Novel” in Studies on the Civilzation of Islam.
Stanford J.S.
et al (eds.)
Boston.
Hourani, A.
(1962) Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age.
Oxford University Press,London.
Khemiri et al (1930) Learners in Contemporary Arabic Literature.
Berlin.
Maqbul Sa’d Hussein et al (1990) Al-Adab wa- Nusus wal-Balaghah Vol.1 Dar Iqra Li Tiba’a wa-Tarjamah wa-Nashr, Tripoli.
Oladosu, A.
A.
(1996) Illusion versus Reality.
M. A. Dissertation, Department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Shadhili H. et al (1981) Al-Balaghah wan-Naqd 3rd Edition, Wizaratul Maarif, Saudi Arabia.
Schoonover, (1955) “Contemporary Egyptian Authors II, The Muslim World”.
Vol.XLV, NO.
2.
Taymur, Mahmud (n.d.) Diraasaat fil Adab wal-Masrah.
Maktabatul Aadaab, (n.p.).
Tijani, I.O.
(1998) “Modern Arabic Novel: Its Origin and the Enigma of the First True Novel” in Arabic in Sulaimaniyyat Journal, Vol.1, No.1 Ososa, Ijebu.
36 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Unit 3 : A Historical Background of Short-story Writing Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Emergence of Short Story in the 19th Century 3.2 Short Story Writing among the Arabs in the Classical Times 3.3 Modern Arabic Short Story 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction ‘Uqsusah’ ﺔﹲﺻ ﻮﺼﻗﹾﺃﹸ (plural aqaasees ﺺ ﻴﺻ ﺎﻗﺃﹶ), is usually used to denote short story.
The Arabic word is derived from the trilateral root verb ‘qassa’, technically ﺺ ﻗﹶ meaning to relate, narrate or tell a story.
But ‘qissa qaseera ﺓﲑﺼﻗ ﺔﺼ ﻗ’ is also used, ‘qaseera ةﲑﺼﻗ’ meaning short.
In the modern sense, the Short story is a phrase used to refer to a new literary genre that developed in the last part of the 19th century and reached maturation only in the early parts of the 20th century.
It normally deals with a single aspect of life or an issue surrounding a particular event or emotional state of being.
The theme of short story should be capable of analyzing the event and it should not treat a long span of time.
37 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] The short story is a kind of prose fiction, typically more compressed and passionate than the novel and the novelette (the short novel).
Defining it classically, scholars have maintained that one should be able to read it in one sitting.
Others, in their definition of the genre opine that the maximum word count of the short story should be between 1,000 to 9,000 words.
In modern-day usage, the term short story usually denotes a work of fiction no longer than 20,000 words and no shorter than 1,000.
Stories of less than 1,000 words however are called flash fiction.
The modern short story has been described as a condensed prose narrative intended to elicit a curious and unified emotional response from reader.
The short story is known to serve as: - a means of entertainment during the times of leisure; - of teaching moral values to the young ones; - It is also employed as a means of correcting social malaises.
2.
0 Objectives This unit intends to achieve the following purposes: - To review the evolution of the short story genre in the 1 9th century - To consider the nature of short story writing among the Arabs of the classical times - To study the origin and development of modern Arabic short story 3.
0 Main Body 3.1 Emergence of Short Story in the 19th Century Scholars have viewed the short story genre as a discovery of the 19th century because prior to this time, it was not generally regarded as a different literary form - the reason why some look at it as an exceptionally modern genre.
But the fact remains that the short prose fiction is nearly as old as language itself.
From primeval times man has enjoyed various types of short narratives such as jests, anecdotes, short allegorical romances, moralizing fairy tales, short myths, and abridged historical legends.
However, none of these constitutes a short story as the 19th and 20th centuries have defined the phrase, “but they do make up a large part of the milieu from which the modern short story emerged”.
The modern short story emerged almost at the same time in Germany, the United States, France, and Russia: E.T.A.
Hoffman and H.V.
Kleist in Germany; Nathaniel Hawthorne and Edgar Allen Poe in the United States; Prosper Merimee in France; Nikolai Gogol and Anton Chekhov in France.
All had written standard short story by the early 19th century.
The short story genre had also, by that 38 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] century, been known in the United Kingdom: popular writers include Sir Walter Scott and Charles Dickens.
3.2 Short story writing among the Arabs of the Classical Times Arab literary history was never poor in fiction writing.
The collection of narratives by Wahb bn Munabbah, which was preserved in Kitabu – teejan fi Muluk Himyar "ﺭﺎﻴﻤﺣ ﻙﻮﻠﻣ ﰲ ﻥﺎﺠﻴﺗ ﺏﺎﺘﻛ” is a major source of fictional tales and legends by the Arabs.
The battle legends called "ﺏﹺ ﺮﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﻡﺎﻳﺃﹶ" are prior forms of Arabian stories.
Also, the short narrative or truthful anecdotes called ﺭﺎﺒﺧ ﻷَ ﺍ is a pure Arabic genre.
The Arab innovative writers in the classical and post-classical epochs used several methods in diversifying fiction writing techniques, such diverse methods of writing fiction are obvious in "ﺔﹲﻨﻣﺩﻭ ﺔﹲﻠﹶﻴﻠﻛﹶ " (Arabic translation of Indian fables), "ﻒ ﻟﹾﺃﹶ "ﺔﹲﻠﹶﻴﻟﹶﻭ ﺔﻠﹶﻴﻟﹶ (A Thousand and One Night) and "ﺕﺎﻣﺎﻘﳌﺍ" (The Assemblies).
Nearly all literary scholars have chosen the Maqamah as the nub of the novel, the drama and the short story in Arabic.
But considering the fact that Maqamah pays a particular attention to the coherence of each chapter, hence, it comes closer to the form of the short story.
3.3.
Modern Arabic Short Story In the classical Arabic fiction, rhymed prose and rhetorical devices were used.
It was replete with wonderful anecdotes as a way of driving home a point or portraying a character.
This is based on the conventional technique of writing fiction of varying lengths including the short story.
But these stories are deficient in the psychological insight, meticulous and developed characterization which the modern fiction requires.
The growth and development of the modern Arabic short story owes a great deal to the influence of European literature.
European literary figures like Guy De Maupassant, Emile Zola and Balzac have great impact on the evolution and maturation of the modern Arabic short story.
At the initial stage, thousands of French, Russian, German and American short stories were either translated or adapted by Arab writers.
As from the year 1870 when Salim al-Bustani published his first story, "ﻡﹴﺍﺭ ﲑﹺ ﻏﹶ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻴﻣﺭ" in “al-Jinnan” magazine the short story become widely produced.
Al-Bustani’s story represented a transition from old narrative 39 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] structure in terms of simple language and restraint from rhetorical devices and difficult words.
Furthermore, the Cairo magazine, “al-Diyah ﺀﺎﻴﻀ ﻟﺍ” from its inception in 1897, published one story in every issue.
As a result, thousands of short stories appeared in Egypt and Lebanon between 1870 and 1914 regularly in newspapers and magazines.
Syrian writers also published their short stories in “al-Jinnan” magazine of Lebanon and gradually interest in writing short story developed across the Arab world.
This led to the appearance in Tunis of another magazine called “qasas ﺺ ﺼ ﻗﹶ” in 1967 which also published many short stories.
Early short story writers among the Arabs include Mustafa Lufti al-Manfaluti (1876-1924) in Egypt, Khaleel Jibran (1882-1931) and Mikhail Nuayma in America.
Al-Manfaluti’s collections of short stories include "ﺕﺍﱪﻌﻟﺍ” (Tears, 1915).
Jibran is credited with his short stories collections of "ﺝﻭﺮﳌﺍ ﺲﺋﺍﺮﻋ" (Brides of Meadow, 1906) and "ﺓﺩﺮﻤﺘﳌﺍ ﺡﺍﻭﺭﻷﺍ" (Rebellious Souls, 1908).
As for Mikhail Nuayma, his short story, "ﺓﺪﻳﺪﳉﺍ ﺎﻬﺘﻨﺳ" “Her new year, 1914” is noteworthy.
Muhammad Taymur (1892 – 1921) who is generally regarded as the pioneer of the new genre in Egypt is believed to have evolved the artistic structure for the Arabic short story.
He published his story fil-Qitar (In the train) in 1917, and some of his other stories including "ﻥﻮﻴﻌﻟﺍ ﻩﺍﺮﺗ ﺎﻣ" (What the eyes see) appeared in “assufur” magazine in 1922.
Other pioneers of Arabic short story in the modern times include Khaleel Bydas of Palestine, Labeebah Hashim of Lebanon and Mahmud Ahmad Sayyid of Iraq.
New school of writers eventually emerged in Egypt by the beginning of the 20th century, and this aided the maturation of the Arabic short story.
Mahmud Taymur (1894 – 1973), Mahmud Tahir Lashin (1894 – 1954), Yahya Haqqy (1905 – 1993) and Hussein Fawzy (1908 – 1988) were the leaders of this school.
And in 1925 they produced the weekly journal tagged “al-Fajr”.
Mahmud Taymur, the younger brother of Muhammad Taymur was the most prolific short story writer of his time – He in six years published five collections of stories among which is "ﺔﻌﲨ ﺦﻴﺸﻟﺍ" (1925).
It is however pertinent to note that whereas European short story writers - from whom the modern Arabic short story was borrowed – were romantic in their themes and styles, early Egyptian short story writers were realistic both in style and theme.
Additionally, whereas the short story genre was readily welcomed in the European literary circles as a step forward in literature, it was on the contrary 40 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] greeted with mockery and contempt by most literary scholars in the Arab world at its beginning.
Nevertheless, Arabic short story writers in the modern times have also been threading the romantic paths in their productions.
Self Assessment Exercise - Define the short story as a concept and review its origin in European literature.
- What differentiates classical Arabic narratives from modern Arabic short story?
4.0 Conclusion One may safely conclude from the foregoing lines that the short story genre is a 19th century discovery of the Westerners.
It emerged almost simultaneously in Germany, the United States, France and Russia.
The Arabs in the 20th century burrowed it through translation and adaptation of Western fictions.
And the appearance of various journals and magazines in the Arab world aided its widespread.
The modern Arabic short story was initially realistic in theme and style but later with the evolution of a radical school it also became romantic in content and structure.
5.0 Summary We have been able to, in this unit, studied the growth and development of the short story in the West.
We related it to the appearance of the genre in Arabic literature and found that some kinds of narratives existed in the classical Arabic prose but were not properly developed as to merit being called short story.
The modern Arabic short story therefore is a “baby” of the intellectual contact between the Arabs and the Westerners.
It reached its maturation in the 20th century.
6.0 Tutor marked Assignment Discuss the evolution and maturation of modern Arabic short story identifying factors that aided its efflorescence.
7.0 References / Further Readings Short Story in Jacob E. Safra, (1998) The New Encyclopaedia Britannica, 15th edition, Micropaedia volume 10, Chicago.
Magill, Frank, (ed.)
(1997) Short Story Writers.
Salem Press: Pasadena, California.
41 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Hart, James (ed.)
(n.d.) Oxford Companion to American Literature, Oxford University Press.
Salma Khadra Jayyasi, (2005) ‘Modern Arabic Fiction’.
Columbia University Press: Columbia.
Al-Shanty, Muhammad Saalih (2003) ‘Al-Adabul ‘Arabiy al- Hadeeth’ – Haail, Saudi Arabia Oladosu, A.
A.
(1996) Illusion versus Reality.
M. A. Dissertation, Department of Arabic and Islamic Studies, University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Sainudeen, M. (2008) “Development of Arabic Short Story” Seminar Paper, Department of Arabic, University of Kerala, Indian.
Taymur, Mahmud (n.d.) Diraasaat fil Adab wal-Masrah.
Maktabatul Aadaab, (n.p.).
http://www.cummingsstudyguides.net 42 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Unit 4: Characteristics of a Short Story Contents: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body – Characteristics of the Short Story 3.1 The Narrative 3.2 The Character 3.3 The Plot 3.4 The Setting 3.5 The Central Thought or Idea (The Theme) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction A short story, as we noted in the previous unit, is a piece of prose fiction which can be read at a single sitting.
It ought to combine factual description with poetic impression just as it should present a fused impression of temper, tone, colour, and effect.
It often depicts a decisive moment of life.
In this unit, we shall consider the characteristics of a short story.
2.0 Objectives 43 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Our objectives in this unit are to: - expose the students to the elements which a short story is supposed to contain.
- explain how these components integrate to form a meaningful and purposeful short story.
- show how these essentials can be put to effective use in the writing of a short story, using greatest economy of means and utmost emphasis.
3.0 Main Body 3.1 The Narrative This is a group of logically and sequentially arranged actions and events surrounding a general subject-matter.
These events normally depict characters of the story and expose the conflicts between them.
Unity of actions and events is achieved only when the writer provides answers to questions that may be agitating mind of reader, some of which include how, where, when and why did the events and actions surrounding the theme occur.
The writer could present the story from the viewpoint of a narrator having full or partial knowledge of the scenarios and characters involved.
This is termed the omniscient point of view as the narrator knows all or part of the thoughts, motives and feelings of each character.
He could also write the story without a narrator, thus relying on the conversations/dialogues between the various characters of the story and results of conflicts among them.
The story could also be told with a stream of consciousness whereby the reader feels as if he/she is inside the head of one character and knows all his thoughts, dreams and reactions.
The readers’ understanding of the story’s message is often influenced by the author’s choice of narrative perspective.
3.2 The Character There are two meanings for the word character: one is the person in a work of fiction.
The other is the characteristics of a person.
Persons in a work of fiction like the short story are referred to as Antagonist and Protagonist.
Characters of the short story are normally few, but one is always central and often undergoes a change or some kind of development as a result of events.
This is called the protagonist.
The opposer of the major character is called the antagonist.
The Characteristics of a Person – For a story to look real to the reader, its characters must appear real.
Characterization therefore, is the information the 44 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] author supplies the reader about the characters themselves.
Characters are persuasive if they are: steady, motivated, and life-like.
The author can reveal the characters in a short story through indirect methods such as: 1- Physical description of the characters.
2- The characters’ thoughts, feelings, words and dreams.
3- What others say about him/her and how they react to him/her.
4- The actions of the characters.
3.3 The Plot The plot is how the author arranges events and actions to develop his central theme; it is the sequence of events in a story or play.
The plot is a premeditated, logical progression of events having an opening, middle, and an ending.
The short story usually has one plot therefore making it possible to be read in one sitting.
The plot is set out using most of the following ways: - A short story normally starts with an opening situation.
- The plot is developed by a complication of issues.
- There at times may be a false resolution where the character believes he has resolved the problem, a further complication then follows.
- And the story ends with a final resolution which often contains a twirl or an unexpected facet.
Additionally, plot is the systematic series of events which make up the short story.
Each tie in the procession helps to create suspense and to solve a problem.
The protagonist is presented with a problematic situation or conflict which he must resolve.
The largest part of the story will deal with the protagonist’s struggle to resolve this problem.
The conflict can exist within the main character himself (internal conflict) or it may happen between the protagonist and outside forces (external conflict).
The point where the conflict is resolved is the climax of the story.
3.4 The Setting 45 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] This is the background against which the story is set.
It is the natural milieu within which events and actions of story characters proceed.
It involves the time and location in which a story takes place.
Several aspects of setting should be considered when examining how the background contributes meaningfully to a story.
These include: - Place – the geographical location where the action of the story is taking place.
- Time – When the story is taking place (historical period, time of day, year, etc).
Auxiliary setting includes the weather and social conditions, as well as the mood created at the beginning of the story.
The mood can be brilliant and cheery or gloomy and terrifying.
The level of explanation with which setting is portrayed depends upon a number of considerations, all of which the intelligent writer keeps in mind.
Perhaps the first consideration is the importance of the setting in relation to the other essential components in the story such as the plot and the character.
Another consideration for the meticulous writer is the probable acquaintance with his setting.
If the setting is one that is perhaps familiar to most of his readers, the writer needs to describe it in detail; he may presuppose that the details he selects will present his readers with that gratification of recognition which is one of the special values of familiar material.
A time and place setting that is remote from most readers would definitely, create a problem in conveying the central idea of the story.
3.5 The Central Idea or Theme This is the controlling idea or the central insight in a fictional writing as the short story.
It is the author’s underlying meaning or main idea that he is trying to put across.
The theme may be the author’s thoughts about a topic or view of human nature.
The subject of the short story usually indicates what the writer is saying and he may employ various figures of speech to emphasize his theme, such as: symbol, allusion, simile, metaphor, hyperbole, or irony.
The author normally does not proffer solution to the problem in a short story, but rather tries to reveal the negative and positives sides of taking a particular stand.
Some authors however, may decide to literally mention the central theme through the speech of one character or another, but most writers often conceal it, leaving it to the discretion of reader.
The theme gives a fundamental meaning to a literary piece.
Usually, it is inferred from the other elements in the short story and often 46 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] comes to fore through conflict(s) experienced by the main character, (the protagonist).
Modern short story writers often rely on the current life happenings in societies to derive themes of their stories.
Thus, they depict daily life affairs as they see and perceive them.
This explains why most of their stories generally treat socio-economic and political aspects of life.
Self Assessment Exercise Of what significance is characterization and character in a story piece?
Distinguish between drama and narrative.
4.0 Conclusion The lesson in this unit has brought to our sharp focus, the fact that in designing a short story, some components have to be systematically incorporated.
These include all the elements of the short story as enumerated and expatiated in the preceding lines.
However, characterization, plot and the fundamental subject matter are very crucial in writing a wonderful short story.
A short story without a fascinating focal theme and captivating narrative style shall be found boring and tiresome.
5.0 Summary This unit has been able to study the essential ingredients of a short story, which include the narrative style of the author, characterization, plot, central theme and the background against which the story is set.
It has however, been observed that modern short story writers often tend to base their narratives on their own experience, and in so doing they focus much more attention on the less stunning aspects of life.
This usually results in revealing the subtleties of the human mind and behavior.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment How do plot, setting and theme contribute to successful writing of a short story?
Explain what narration is in relation to author’s point of view.
Draw a line between novel and short story.
7.0 Reference/Further Readings 47 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Millett, Fred Benjamin, (1950) Reading Fiction: A Method of Analysis with Selections for Study.
Harper, New York.
Freund, Philip, (1965) The Art of Reading the Novel.
Collier Books, New York.
May, Charles E. (1976) Short Story Theories.
Ohio University Press, Athens.
Boynton, Robert.
(1978) Introduction to the Short Story.
Hayden Book Co Rochelle Park, New Jersey.
Brooks, Cleanth et al (1960) The Scope of Fiction.
Appleton Century Crofts: New York.
MODULE 3: TRANSLATION OF SELECT SHORT STORIES FROM “A FOREST OF FLOWERS” Unit 1: A Short Biography of the Author Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body 3.1 Ken Saro-Wiwa in Few Lines 3.2 A Review of “A Forest of Flowers” 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction You would remember that translation and adaptation played a decisive role in the emergence of modern Arabic novel and short stories: narratives of different languages were deciphered into Arabic before the Arabs eventually launched true Arabic novel and short story.
Before proceeding to translate some select short stories, it would not be out of place for us to give a short biographical account of Ken Saro-wiwa, author of “A Forest of Flowers”, an anthology of short stories from which we have extracted some stories for translation and appreciation.
2.0 Objectives On completion of this unit students should be able to: 48 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] - Know the position of Ken Saro-wiwa in Nigerian literary circle and his contribution to Nigerian literature.
- Identify the place of Ken Saro-wiwa on the global literary scene.
- Have adequate information about “A Forest of Flowers”, a collection of short stories by Ken Saro-wiwa.
3.0 Main Body 3.1 Ken Saro-Wiwa in Few Lines Kenule "Ken" Beeson Saro-Wiwa, born on October 10, 1941, was a Nigerian author, television producer, environmental activist, and winner of the Right Livelihood Award and the Goldman Environmental Prize.
Saro-Wiwa was a member of the Ogoni people, an ethnic minority in Nigeria whose homeland, Ogoniland, in the Niger Delta has been targeted for crude oil extraction since the 1950s and which has suffered extreme and fortuitous environmental damage from decades of unsystematic petroleum waste removal.
Initially as spokesperson, and then as President, of the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People (MOSOP), Saro-Wiwa led a nonviolent campaign against environmental degradation of the land and waters of Ogoniland by the operations of the multinational petroleum industry, especially Shell.
He was also an outspoken critic of the Nigerian government, which he viewed as reluctant to enforce environmental regulations on the foreign petroleum companies operating in the area.
At the peak of his non-violent campaign, Saro-Wiwa was arrested, quickly tried by a special military tribunal.
He was found guilty and hanged in 1995 by the military government of General Sani Abacha, all on charges widely viewed as entirely politically motivated and completely groundless.
His execution provoked international outrage and resulted in Nigeria's suspension from the Commonwealth of Nations for over three years.
His literary contributions Ken Saro-wiwa is credited with the publication of a number of literary works including the following: - In the Shadow of a Saint: A Son’s Journey to understand His Father’s Legacy.
(Memoirs).
- A Month and a Day: A Detention Diary (Journal).
- Sozaboy: A Novel in Rotten English (Fiction).
- A Forest of Flowers (Short stories).
49 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] His best known novel, Sozaboy, tells the story of a naive village boy recruited to the army during the Nigerian Civil War of 1967 to 1970; it informs also about the political patronage and corruption in Nigeria's military regime of the time.
His war diaries, On a Darkling Plain, document Saro-Wiwa's experience during the war.
Saro-Wiwa was also a successful businessman and television producer.
His satirical television series, Basi & Company, is purported to have been one of the most watched soap operas in Africa.
During the 1980s Saro-Wiwa concentrated largely on his writing, journalism and television production.
His intellectual work was interrupted in 1987 when he re- entered the political scene on appointment by then Head of State, General Ibrahim Badamasi Babangida, to aid the country's transition to democracy.
But Ken soon resigned because he felt Babangida's supposed plans for a return to democracy were insincere.
In his satirical piece, Africa Kills Her Sun first published in 1989, Ken foreshadowed his execution in a submissive, sorrowful mood.
This came to pass few years later, precisely on November 10, 1995 when he was hanged by the then military rule.
Ken Saro-Wiwa in Popular Culture and Academic Circles In recognition of the role of Ken Saro-Wiwa in the development of African literature and culture, many cultural bands as well as members of the academia have dedicated their works to the memory of this great Nigerian author, television producer and environmental activist: The Finnish band Ultra Bra dedicated their song "Ken Saro-Wiwa on kuollut" (Ken Saro-Wiwa is dead) to the remembrance of Ken Saro-Wiwa.
The Italian band Il Teatro degli Orrori devoted their song "A sangue freddo" (In cold blood), to the memory of Ken Saro-Wiwa.
An academic book on trade, health and human rights has also been dedicated to Ken Saro- Wiwa.
In the same vein, the folk duo Magpie included the song "Saro-Wiwa" on their album "Give Light," crediting it as Words and Music by Terry Leonino and Ken Saro-Wiwa.
It includes lines from Saro-Wiwa's poem “Dance”.
Ken Saro Wiwa's extermination is quoted and used as an inspiration for Beverley Naidoo's 2000 novel “The Other Side of Truth”.
Another novel, “Eclipse”, which is based on the events in Nigeria, was published by Richard North Patterson in 2009 to celebrate Ken Saro-Wiwa and his movement.
Additionally, Guitarist and composer, Robin Flower and musical partner, Libby Mc Claren included Saro-Wiwa as an example of a cultural "Angel of Change" on 50 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] a 2003 recording of the same name.
Hip Hop duo Reflection Eternal: Talib Kweli & HiTek, in their 2010 album, “Revolutions Per Minute”, describe in their song "Ballad Of The Black Gold" the activities of Saro-Wiwa and his group as nonviolent, and therefore deserve commendation.
3.2 “A Forest of Flowers”: A Short Review “A Forest of Flowers” is a collection of nineteen short stories divided into two parts.
The first deals with the happenings in the backwater village of Dukana, where fallacy, dishonesty, and ignorance often have tragic consequences.
The second part transports us to the city, where we find these same common human flaws rampant and thriving.
In the book, Ken Saro-Wiwa is unrepentantly criticizes the government, the church, and fellow Nigerians.
The stories show the bad sides of mankind.
In a figurative style, Saro-Wiwa touches on many issues ranging from adultery to violent ethnic clash to public lethargy.
But from within this ocean of gloominess comes a sporadic story about an immaculate soul, ready and determined to fight the current.
Each story occupies an average of eight pages, and is quick to the point.
They stimulate a wide range of emotions.
Some stories cause laughter while some provoke anger.
And others are very pitiful.
They can be easily read, with a very limited use of “pidgin” English, which may necessitate consulting the glossary.
But despite the obscure nature of many of the stories, “A Forest of Flowers” contains heart-touching stories.
Some of the titles featuring in “A Forest of Flowers” include the following: - Home, Sweet home - A Family Affair - The Overhaul - A Death in Town - Robert and the Dog - Love Song of a Woman - A Caring Man - A Legend on Our Street.
51 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Self Assessment Exercise Write a short biographical account on Ken Saro-Wiwa.
4.0 Conclusion Ken Saro-Wiwa was a celebrated Nigerian writer, television producer and political activist, who as a result of his campaign for the rights of his people, the Ogoni, was arrested, imprisoned, tried and hanged in November 1995 by the Nigerian military dictatorship headed by Late General Sanni Abacha.
“A Forest of Flowers” is one of the fictional writings of Saro-Wiwa in which he embraces with passion various issues ranging from the socio-political, economic, and cultural to feminism, themes of alliance, conflict between the individual conscience and society at large.
5.0 Summary This unit presented us with an abridged biographical note on Ken Saro-Wiwa, as a prologue to a condensed evaluation of one of his fictive works, “A Forest of Flowers”.
Accordingly, his life and contribution to the African literature were examined.
The study nonetheless, found that Ken Saro-Wiwa was not only a Nigerian intellectual and environmental activist, but was also a literary figure of international reputation.
6.0 Tutor marked Assignment Give a literary description of “A Forest of Flowers” written by Ken Saro-Wiwa.
7.0 References / Further Readings Saro-Wiwa, Ken, (1986) “A Forest of Flowers” Saros International Publishers: Port Harcourt.
Boyle, Catherine, (2009) "Portrait: Ken Saro-Wiwa".
The Times News Corporation: London.
Theodore, MacDonald, (2006) Health, Trade and Human Rights.
Radcliffe Publishing: Ashland, Ohio.
http://www.amazon.ca/Forest-Flowers-Longman-African-Writers 52 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Unit 2: Translation of “A Family Affair” 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body: “A Family Affair” translated into Arabic.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction 53 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] This unit will present us with an Arabic translation of one story from Saro Wiwa’s stories collection, “A Forest of Flowers”.
The story is a seven-page narrative entitled “A Family Affair”, and it is the fourth story in the first division of the collection.
It is a sociological narrative based on greed and iniquitous search for wealth.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the lesson in this unit, students should be able to: - render some English passages into Arabic - draw out some of the derivable lessons from the translated story - improve their use of Arabic Grammar and Morphology - develop their Arabic sentence constructions 3.0 Main Body: “A Family Affair” (The Original Version) When one morning Dabo, one of Dukana’s most successful fishermen, instead of heading for the creeks, suddenly burst out into song, there was consternation in town.
Every man is entitled to his private enjoyment, and anyone who chooses to may entertain his friends.
Certain times are apt and proper.
Such as when the harvest is over and the hardworking and hardy men of Dukana take time off to enjoy their wealth such as it is, in leisurely and manly pursuits: in song and dance, in chats in the playground, in revels in bedrooms far from the rumour-mongers and gossips.
But, when a man of dignity and substance, having arranged his affairs properly, and given orders to his subordinates to meet him early at dawn so they can set out on a trip; when such a man suddenly forgets himself and greets his staff and friends with lewd songs, well, Dukana does not laugh.
That morning, Dukana was not amused.
Ripples of worry gradually spread around town and drew everyone to Dabo’s house.
It was like Duzia to trivialize matters as soon as he got there.
‘I say the man does have a powerful voice.
He’s been in the wrong profession all along,’ laughed he as soon as he found opportunity.
54 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ‘Cha, cha, you flabby footed son-of-a-bitch, give your tongue a rest.
This is no joking matter,’ Terr Kole chastised him.
‘Who’s joking?
I say the man has my type of chest, and I’m not joking,’ Duzia replied.
Nor was Dabo joking.
Because he soon started dancing and you could not have faulted his nimble feet and the rhythmic swaying of his body.
‘I should say this is something different,’ muttered Duzia, as the import of the event began to register on his mind.
‘Something different, indeed,’ replied Terr Kole, ‘You do hide your brain among your flailing toes some of the time, I should say.’ ‘I believe you, Terr Kole,’ Duzia said.
‘You are certainly right this time.’ ‘So you should learn to shut your trap some of the time.’ ‘I’ll try to, Terr Kole.
If only I had the legs and could dance like our friend there, I’m sure I should talk less.’ ‘Oh, you’re quite incorrigible,’ said Terr Kole.
And he moved away.
Dabo sang and danced.
And then he started removing his clothes, peeling them off his body one by one until he was completely naked.
Dabo had gone mad.
Plain mad.
The news ran through Dukana like fire in a dry wind, leaving everyone who heard it dumbstruck.
And the story was told how members of his family did everything in their power to calm him down, but he would not be controlled.
Even after the family had him thoroughly bound hand and foot with ropes, he still sang blissfully.
Such an unmitigated disaster was bound to invoke bright ideas in Dukana.
And now they poured forth by the score.
Some said he should be taken to a church so they could pray for him and cast out the devil that was tormenting him.
Not one of the regular churches where they only prayed to God and sang.
But a real church where members saw visions and healed the sick.
Others said Oyeoku the powerful juju should be consulted.
He was the only one who could restore the man to his normal senses.
And for all anyone knew, he might be the one who had brought this visitation on Dabo.
Some, in the sanctuary of their living rooms, said they were not surprised.
For a man did not make the wealth which was Dabo’s by just working hard.
You had to have sold your soul to the devil to earn that much money.
It began to be said that Dabo had even murdered a young girl years back and offered her as a sacrifice to Sarogua, the rain- maker and ancestral spirit of Dukana, so that he could be the richest man in town.
And when you sell yourself to the devil what do you expect?
Dabo had been a living lie.
After making his pact with the forces of darkness, he had turned to the church and no man was a better son of the church.
But he was going to be caught some day, wasn’t he?
The chicken had to return home to roost.
Money was a good thing, no doubt, but if in its acquisition you did certain untoward things, why, you had to bear the punishment when it came, as it was such to do.
55 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] So the whispers went, until it became the common talk away from the ears of members of Dabo’s family.
All the latter heard were words of sympathy, of advice as to where the eminent man could be cured in a matter of days.
The Holy Spiritual Church of Mount Zion was suggested and thence Dabo was taken.
After a month, he continued to sing and dance; not all the prayers said and the sacrifice made or the fees paid could cure Dabo.
Then it was said that the Brotherhood of the Cross and Star whose membership extended from Calabar to London and America and God knows where else in the world would be sure to drive away the millions of devils who had conspired to drive Dabo to dance and song.
Accordingly, he was taken across the river to the headquarters of the Brotherhood.
They poured holy water on him; they anointed him with holy cream; they fed him on holy bread; they manacled him head and foot to the foot of his bamboo bed; they saw visions on his behalf; they prayed for the salvation of his soul.
Yet Dabo continued to sing and dance.
And when the Holy Spirit ordered that all his earthly goods be sold and the proceeds given to the church because in one of the visions it had appeared that his great wealth was the scourge of the man, the family duly complied.
They dug into the grass mattress on his bed; they dug the floor of his bedroom; they dug the soil in his yam barn, and as was suspected, found a bag of money there.
They sent all proceeds to the Brotherhood.
Still Dabo sang and danced from morning to night.
So the family decided that the Brotherhood was not the right place for him.
Now there was in Ko, a town famous for its powers, a man, a doctor who advertised himself on a painted notice board.
He was very famous because even the government had given him a certificate with a long number on it.
The notice on the board said so.
Those who could read, and there were not very many of them, had said that his number was very long, beginning with several naught; government must have known of his many abilities otherwise they would not have given him such a tremendous and impressive number.
It was said that his notice board proclaimed him to be a doctor who owned a herbal healing home, in which Veedee could be cured; madness could be cured; infertility could be cured.
This native doctor’s potions were the mortal enemy of witchcraft and necromancy, of snake and dog bites, of bee and scorpion stings.
In short, he was the one to whom all could turn when everything else in heaven and earth had failed.
Dabo’s family heard of the doctor in Ko rather late in the day.
But they went to him as soon as they heard of him and placed Dabo in his powerful hands.
And he beat Dabo night and day with a leather belt, leaving wicked marks on the man’s back and bottom.
The devil had to be beaten out of the madman.
It was the only way of curing madness.
And now instead of singing and dancing, Dabo let out frightful and horrendous 56 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] howls as of a beast in pain.
With a shaven head, cicatrices around his wrists and ankles and now deep lacerations on his back, Dabo was a terrible sight.
One day, he bolted from the doctor’s famed herbal healing home and found his way, nobody knows how, back to Dukana.
And to his empty house.
He no longer danced and sang.
He went around in the nude begging for food and water.
Once each day, precisely at noon, he would yell out the words ‘You are all liars, all.’ He was the town’s only beggar.
And he was a shame to his family.
A walking scandal.
They discussed him often in subdued tones far from the prying eyes, the sniffing noses and the flapping ears of the lights of Dukana.
And came to an unspoken and menacing agreement; ‘One day shall be one day.’ As the days passed into months and months grew into years, Dabo became a familiar sight in Dukana.
Strange to say, he would sometimes recognize a relation or an old friend and greet them normally as in the old days.
Such occasions, though rare, went to show that there was somewhere in his madness, a lucidity which could break through his brain as the sun sometimes breaks through rain-bearing clouds.
In Dukana, there is a proverb which states that it’s an unfortunate man who feels like easing himself on a rainy day.
For, among us, the bush does not only hold the terrors and beauties of nature, it has been designated a toilet.
A rainy day is a terrible day therefore on which to answer the call of nature.
Even if one can find a banana leaf to give protection from the falling rain, even if one can wade through the muddy, running water and arrive in the bush, the wet branches, the wet undergrowth, the wet leaves hold further discomforts.
Therefore a rainy day is a day to stay indoors, and refuse to answer the call of nature.
On one particularly rainy day, when the roofs of the skies were open and the gods were pouring the waters by the bucketful into Dukana, the beggar could not do his usual rounds.
Nor did he feel the urge of nature.
Or did he?
Because he felt asleep in his empty house.
There is another saying which everyone in Dukana knows well.
‘If you don’t know death, look upon sleep.’ So the beggar slept.
His relatives, however, believed him to be dead.
An ululating female carried the news through the length and breadth of Dukana.
When a mad beggar dies, it is not much news, and nobody really cares.
Some even have a sigh of relief.
For it is a well-known fact that should a pregnant woman see a mad beggar first thing in the morning, or should she hate the beggar and refuse to feed him or give him money, she is likely to give birth to a child who will look like the beggar or grow up to be an imbecile.
But it being criminal not to mourn a departed one and a 57 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] relative at that, the family raised a loud cry for the benefit of the listening public of Dukana.
In the midst of the noise and fuss the beggar woke up from sleep.
The beggar was confounded to find himself the centre of attention.
Never since he could remember had so many of his relatives taken an interest in him.
He threw them a weak greeting.
No one answered him.
He repeated the greeting.
Again, no one answered him.
He repeated the greeting a second time.
‘You are dead, so shut up,’ one of the relatives whispered hoarsely.
‘I’m not dead,’ the beggar replied.
‘I was only sleeping.’ ‘Sleeping.
Huh!
What’s the difference between sleep and death?
You are dead.’ ‘You are dead.
Brothers, help me carry him away.’ ‘But I’m not dead yet.’ ‘You will die today.
You died this afternoon.’ ‘God, I’m not dead.
I’m not dead yet.
I don’t want to die,’ the beggar whined like a dog.
The brothers joined hands and heaved Dabo from his seat.
They wrapped him in a raffia mat and picking up machetes, hoes and an axe, moved in the direction of the bush.
Rain poured down heavily.
From time to time lightning streaked through the dark sky.
The relatives waded resolutely through the running stream of rain, firmly holding their precious bundle.
And Dukana, fearful as ever of the numbing rain, sat indoors oblivious of everything.
Eventually, the party arrived in the depths of the forest.
The silence was deep.
The thick foliage of the trees shut out the rain.
The dead leaves dampened by rain lay soggy and silent underfoot.
The birds had all, it seemed, gone to sleep.
In the eerie, weird silence the party set down their miserable bundle.
The relatives dug a hasty grave, not deep, very narrow.
From within the bundle, a voice could be heard.
‘I am not yet dead, oh God.’ ‘Then you must die today, you eyesore, you disgrace of the family.
You must die today.’ ‘I’m not dead yet, oh God, I’m not dead yet.’ The relatives were surprised at the amazing clarity of the man.
Was he not mad?
How was he able to distinguish between life and death?
Could even madness know the difference between these two?
Each asked himself the question.
Each resolved within himself to bury the answer with the mad beggar.
The grave was dug.
From the confines of the enveloping dirty mat, the voice could still be heard.
They picked up the bundle roughly and tying it firmly with cord cut from the forest, lowered it into the shallow grave.
The voice persisted ever so faintly, ever so insistently, even as they covered the grave with the wet earth and huge logs of wood.
Then when they heard no more sounds, when they felt sure their troubles had been buried deep in the bowels of the earth, they looked at each other, turned upon their heels and picked their silent way through the secretive forest back to Dukana.
58 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] “A Family Affair” (Arabic Translation) ﻱﻭﹺ ﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ﹲﻥﺄﹾﺷ ﺕ ﺍﺫ ﺔﺤ ﻴﺒﹺﺻ ﰲ ﺕ ﺍﲑﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻪﺠﹺ ﺘّﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﻝﹶ ﺪ ﺑﻭ ،ﺎﻧﺎﻛﹶﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﰲ ﲔ ﺤ ﺟﹺ ﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﲔ ﻛ ﺎﻤ ﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺪ ﺣ ﺃﹶ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛ .ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺮﻋ ﺫﹸ ﺙﹶ ﺪ ﺤ ﻓﹶ ،ﺪ ﺸ ﻨﻳ ﺀٍﺎﻨﻐﺑﹺ ﺓﹰﺄﺠ ﻓﹸ ﻉ ﺪ ﺻ ،ﻡﹴﻮﻳ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛﻭ .ﻪﺋﺎﻗﺪ ﺻ ﺃﹶ ﺔﻴﻠﺴ ﺗ ﻖ ﺣ ﻪﻟﹶ ،ﻚﻟﺫ ﺀَﺎﺷ ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻱ ﺃﹶﻭ ،ﺹ ﺎﺧ ﻊﹴ ﺘﻤ ﺘﻟ ﻞﹲ ﻫﺆﻣ ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ،ﺎﹰﻌﺒﻃﹶ ﻭ ﺀُﺎﻳﻮﹺﻗﹾﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﹶ ﻭﺪ ﻬﹺﺘﺠ ﻤﻟﹸﺍ ﻝﹸ ﺎﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺬﹸ ﺧ ﺄﹾﻳ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ،ﺩﺎﺼﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻢﹺ ﺳ ﻮ ﻣ ﺔﻳﺎﻬﻧﹺ ﻞﹶ ﺜﹾﻣ ،ﺎﹰﺒﺳ ﺎﻨﻣﻭ ﻚ ﻟﺬﹶ ﻟ ﺎﹰﻤﺋﻼﹶ ﻣ ﺕ ﺎﻗﻭﻷَ ﺍ ﰲ ﺡﹴ ﺍﺮﻓﹾﺄﹶﺑﹺﻭ ،ﺐﹺ ﻌﻠﹾﳌﺍ ﰲ ﺓﺮﺛﹶﺮﺜﹶﺑﹺﻭ ،ﺺﹴ ﻗﹾﺭﻭ ﺀٍﺎﻨﻐﺑﹺ ﻥﹶ ﻮ ﻠﱠﺴ ﺘﻳ :ﻍﹺ ﺍﺮﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻗﹾﻭ ﰲ ﻢ ﻬﹺﺋﺍﺮﺛﹶ ﺔﻌﺘﻤ ﻟﻭ ﺔﺣﺍﺮﻠﻟ ﺖ ﻗﻮﻟﺍ ﺪ ﻌﺑ ،ﺔﻧﺎﻜﻣ ﺍﹶﺫ ،ﺍﹰﺰﻳﺰﹺﻋ ﻼﹰ ﺟ ﺭ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﺙﹶ ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﺫﹶﺇﹺ ،ﻦ ﻜ ﻟﹶ .ﻦ ﻳﺭﹺﺎﺛﺮﺛﹶﻭ ﺭﹺﺎﺒﺧ ﻷَ ﺍ ﻦ ﻴﻌﻴﺸ ﻣ ﻦﹺ ﻋ ﺍﺪ ﻴﻌﺑ ،ﻡﹺﻮ ﻨﻟﺍ ﻑ ﺮﻏﹸ ﺍﻮﺟﺮﺨ ﻳ ﻰﺘﺣ ﻲﻧﹺﺎﺜﹼﻟﺍ ﻡﹺﻮﻴﻟﹾﺍ ﺓﹶﺮﻜﹾ ﺑ ﻪﻌﻣ ﺍﻮﻌﻤ ﺘﺠ ﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻳﺭﹺﻮﻣﺄﹾﻣ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺮﹺﻣﺍﻭﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺭﹺﺍﺪ ﺻ ﺇﹺ ﺪ ﻌﺑﻭ ،ﺍﹰﺪﻴﺟ ﻩﺭﹺﻮﻣﺃﹸ ﺐﹺ ﻴﺗﺮﺗ ،ﺔﻘﹶﺳ ﺎﻓ ﺔﻴﻨﹺﻏﹾ ﺄﹸﺑﹺ ﻪﺋﹶﺎﻗﺪ ﺻ ﺃﹶﻭ ﻪﻴﻔﻇﱠ ﻮﻣ ﺎﻴﺣ ﻭ ،ﺓﹰﺄﹶﺠ ﻓﹸ ﻪﺴ ﻔﹾﻧ ﻲ ﺴِ ﻧ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻞﹶ ﺜﹾﻣ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﺙﹶ ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ؛ﺔﻠﹶﺣ ﺭﹺ ﰲ .ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﻞﹺ ﻫ ﺄﹶﻟ ﻚ ﺤ ﻀ ﻟﺍ ﺙﹸ ﺪ ﺤ ﻳ ﺎﻤ ﻣ ﺲ ﻴﻟﹶ ﺮﻣﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻥﹼ ﺇﹺ ،ﺔﹰﻘﹶﻴﻘﺣ ﻉ ﺮﺳ ﺄﹶﻓﹶ ،ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺎﹰﻴﳚﹺ ﺭﺪ ﺗ ﻖ ﻠﹶﻘﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻉ ﺎﺷ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ،ﲔ ﺠﹺ ﻬﹺﺘﺒﻣ ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﻞﹸ ﻫ ﺃ ﻦ ﻜﹸ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ،ﻡﹴﻮﻳ ﺕ ﺍﺫ ﺔﺤ ﻴﺒﹺﺻ ﰲ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻝﹶ ﻮﻗﺃﹶ ﻲﻧﹺّﺇﹺ" .ﻥ ﺎﻜﳌﺍ ﰲ ﺮﻀ ﺣ ﺎﻣ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻋﺮﺴ ﻓﹶ ،ﺔﹰﻬﻓﺎﺗ ﺭﻮﻣﻷُ ﺍ ﻞﹶ ﻌﺟ ﺎﻳﺯﹺﻭﺩ ﻥﱠ ﺄﹶﻛﻭ .ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺖ ﻴﺑ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻞﱡ ﻛﹸ .ﻚﻟﺬﻟ ﺔﹰﺻ ﺮﻓﹸ ﺪ ﺟ ﻭ ﺎﻣ ﺭﻮ ﻓﹶ ﻚ ﺤ ﺿ ﺪﻗﻭ "،ﻥ ﺎﻣﺰﻟﺍ ﺬﹸ ﻨﻣ ﺔﺌﹶﻃ ﺎﺧ ﺔﻨﻬ ﻣ ﻲﻓ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛ ﺪ ﻘﹶﻟﹶ .ﻱﻮﹺﻗﹶ ﺕ ﻮ ﺻ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻠﻟ ﺭﺎﺗ ﻪﺒﻧ ﺪ ﻗﹶﻭ "،ﻚ ﺤ ﻀ ﻣ ﺮﹴﻣﺄﹶﺑﹺ ﺲﻴﻟ ﺍﺬﻫ .ﺖ ﻜﹸ ﺳ ﺍﹸ ،(ﻡﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﻲ ﻐﺑ) ﺐﹴ ﻠﹾﻛﹶ ُﻦﺑﺍ ،ﻞﹸ ﻫﺮﺘﻣ ،ﻦ ﻫ ﺍﻭ ﺎﻳ ﺖ ﻧﺃ ،ﺎﺷ ﺎﺷ" .ﻝﻮﻛﹸ .ﺎﻳﺯﹺﻭﺩ ﺩﺭ "،ﺡ ﺰﻣﺃﹶ ﺖ ﺴ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﻱ ﺭﹺﺪ ﺻ ﺕ ﻮ ﺻ ﻞﹶ ﺜﹾﻣ ﺎﹰﻳﺭﹺﺪ ﺻ ﺎﹰﺗﻮ ﺻ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻠﻟ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ﻝﹸ ﻮﻗﹸﺃﹶ ﻲﻧﺇﹺ ؟ﺡ ﺰﻤ ﻳ ﻦ ﻣ ﻪﻣﺪ ﻗﹶ ﺔﻛﹶ ﺮﺣ ﺔﹶﻔﱠﺧ ﺐ ﻴﻌﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻚ ﻧﹺﺎﻜﻣﺈﺑﹺ ﺲ ﻴﻠﹶﻓﹶ ،ﻞﹴ ﻴﻠﻗﹶ ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺺ ﻗﹸﺮﻳ ﺃﹶﺪ ﺑ ﻪﻧﺄﹶﻟ .ﺎﹰﻀﻳﺃﹶ ﺡ ﺰﻤ ﻳ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﻦﻜﻳ ﱂﻭ .ﻲ ﻋ ﺎﻘﻳﺈﻟﺍ ﻩﺪ ﺴ ﺟ ﻞﹶ ﻳﺎﻤﺗﻭ 59 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﻲﻓ ﺖ ﺒﺜﹾﺗ ﺔﹸﺛﹶﺩﺎﺤﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺃﹶﺪﺑ ﺎﻣﺪﻨﻋ ،ﺎﻳﺯﹺﻭﺩ ﻢ ﻬﻤ ﻫ ،"(ﻒ ﻠﺘﺨ ﻣ) ﺐ ﻳﺮﹺﻏﹶ ﺀٌﻲ ﺷ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ﻝﹶ ﻮﻗﹸﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻲ ﻟ ﻲﻐﺒﻨﻳ" .ﻪﺒﹺﻠﹾﻗﹶ ﺯﺎﺟ ،ﻦﹺ ﻴﺘﻄﹶ ﺒﺨ ﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻚ ﻴﻣﺪ ﻗﹶ ﻲ ﻓ ﻚ ﺨ ﻣ ﻲ ﻔﺨ ﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻚﻟ ﺯﻮﺠ ﻳ ﺎﹰﻧﺎﻴﺣ ﺃﹶ" .ﻝﻮﻛ ﺭﺎﺗ ﺩﺭ "،ﺍﹰﺪ ﺟﹺ ﺐ ﻳﺮﹺﻏﹶ ﺀٌﻲ ﺷ " ".ﺍﺬﻫ ﻝﹶ ﻮﻗﹸﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻟ ".ﺖ ﻗﹾﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﰲ ﻖ ﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹰ" .ﺎﻳﺯﹺﻭ ﺩ ﻝﹶ ﺎﻗ "،ﻝﻮﻛ ﺭﺎﺗ ﺎﻳ ،ﻚ ﻗﹸﺪ ﺻ ﺃﹸ ﻲﻧﺇﹺ ".ﻥ ﺎﻴﺣ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺾﹺ ﻌﺑ ﰲ ﺖ ﻜﹸ ﺴ ﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻚﻟ ﻲﻐﺒﻨﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺫﹶﺇﹺ" ﻲ ﻟ ﻲ ﻐﺒﻨﻳ ،ﺪﻴﻛ ﺃﹶ ،ﻙ ﺎﻨﻫ ﺎﻨﻘﻳﺪ ﺼ ﻛﹶ ﺺ ﻗﹾﺮﻟﺍ ﻊ ﻴﻄ ﺘﺳ ﺃﹶﻭ ،ﻞﹸ ﺟ ﺭ ﺃﹶ ﻱﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻡﺍﺩ ﺎﻣ ،ﻝﻮﻛﹸ ﺭﺎﺗ ﺎﻳ ،ﻚﻟﺫ ﻝﹸ ﻭﹺﺎﺣﺄﹸﺳ " ".ﻡﹺﻼﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺭﺎﺼﺘﺧ ﻻﺍ .ﻑ ﺮﺼ ﻧﺍ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﻝﻮﻛ ﺭﺎﺗ ﻝﺎﻗ "،ﺢ ﻠﺼ ﻳ ﻻ ﻦ ﻤ ﻣ ﺖﻧﺃ ،ﺎﻫ" ،ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﻦ ﻨﺠ ﺗ ﺪﻗﻭ ،ﺎﹰﻧﺎﻳﺮﻋ ﻲ ﻘﺑ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺮﺧ ﺁ ﻮﻠﹾﺗ ﺍﹰﺪﺣﺍﻭ ﻩﺪ ﺴ ﺟ ﻦﻋ ﻪﺑﺎﻴﺛ ﻊ ﻠﹶﺨ ﻳ ﺃﹶﺪ ﺑ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺺ ﻗﹶﺭﻭ ﻰﻨﻏﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﻞﹶ ﻌﺟ ﺎﻤ ﻣ ،ﺔﻴﺳ ﺎﻗ ﺔﻔﹶﺻ ﺎﻋ ﻲﻓ ﺭﹴﺎﻧ ﻯﻭﺪ ﻌﻛﹶ ﺎﻧﺎﻛﹶ ﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﰲ ﻪﻧﹺﻮﻨﺟ ﺮﺒﺧ ﻉ ﺎﺷﻭ .ﺎﹰﺤﺿ ﺍﻭ ﺎﹰﻧﻮﻨﺟ ﰲ ﺎﻣ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﺍﻮﻠﹸﻌﻓﹶ ﻢ ﻬﻧﺃﹶ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ﻪﺗﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ﺀِﺎﻀﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺔﻟﹶﻭﺎﺤﻣ ﻦ ﻋ ﺔﹸﺼ ﻘﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﺼ ﻗﹸ ﺪﻗﻭ .ﻻﹰ ﻮﻫﺬﹾ ﻣ ﺮﹺﺒﺨ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﻊ ﻤ ﺳ ﻲﻨﹺّﻐﻳ ﺮﻤ ﺘﺳ ﺍ ، ﻼﹰ ﺟﺭﹺﻭ ﺍﹰﺪﻳ ﻝﹴ ﺎﺒﺤ ﺑﹺ ﻩﻮﻘﹸﺛﹶﻭ ﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﻰﺘﺣ ﻭ .ﺔﻟﹶﻭﺎﺤﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﱡﻞﻛﹸ ﺖ ﻠﹶﺸ ﻓﹶ ﻦﻜﻟ ،ﻪﺘﺣ ﺍﺭﺈﹺﻟ ﻢ ﻬﹺﻌﺳ ﻭ .ﺍﹰﺭﻭﺮﺴ ﻣ ﻪﺘﻴﺑ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻀ ﻴﻔﻳ ﺱ ﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺃﹶﺪ ﺒﻓﹶ ،ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﰲ ﺓﹰﺮﻴﻧ ﺍﹰﺭﺎﹶﻜﻓﹾﺃﹶ ﺏ ﺬ ﺠ ﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﺑ ﻻ ،ﺔﻌﺟﹺ ﺎﻔﻟﹾﺍ ﺔﺒﻴﺼ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻩﺬ ﻫ ﻞﹸ ﺜﹾﻣﻭ ،ﻪﺑﺬّ ﻌﻳ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﻦ ﺠﹺ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺩﺮﻄﹶ ﻟﻭ ﺀٍﺎﻋ ﺪ ﻟ ﺔﺴ ﻴﻨﹺﻛﹶ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻪﺑﹺ ﺍﻮﺒﻫ ﺬﹾ ﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻢﻬﻀ ﻌﺑ ﺡ ﺮﺘﻗﹾﺍ ﺪﻗﻭ .
(ﺎﺟ ﺍﻮﻓﹾﺃﹶ) ﺕ ﺍﺮﺸ ﻋ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺽ ﻭﺮﻔﹾﻣ ﻞﺑ ،ﺐ ﺴ ﺤ ﻓﹶ ﻰﻨﻐﺗﻭ ﺎﻬﻴﻓ ﻰﻋ ﺪ ﺗ ﱵﻟﺍ ﺔﻓﹶﻭﺮﻌﳌﺍ ﺲﹺ ﺋﺎﻨﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻯﺪ ﺣ ﺇﹺ ﺔﹸﻴﻨﹺﻌﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺔﹸﺴ ﻴﻨﹺﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﺴ ﻴﻟﹶﻭ ﺓﹸﺭﺎﺸﺘﺳ ﺍ ﺐ ﺠﹺ ﻳ ﺮﺧﺁ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﻝﺎﻗﻭ .ﻰﺿ ﺮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺉ ﺮﹺﺒﺗﻭ ﻯﺅﺭ ﺎﻬﺘﻋ ﺎﻤﺟ ﻯﺮﺗ ﺔﹰﻴﻘﻴﻘﺣ ﺔﹰﺴ ﻴﻨﹺﻛﹶ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻜﺗ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ﻰﺘﺣ ﻭ ،ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﻞﹶ ﻘﹾﻋ ﺓﹶﺩﺎﻌﺘﺳ ﺍ ﻊ ﻴﻄ ﺘﺴ ﻳ ﺪ ﻴﺣ ﻮﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻫ ﺎﻜﻟﺍ ﻮﻫ ﻪﻧﻷ ،ﺓﻮﻗﹸ ﻱﺫ ﻦﹴ ﻫ ﺎﻛ ﻞﹴ ﺟ ﺭ ،ﻮﻛﹸ ﻭﺄﹶﻴﻳﻭ ﺃﹶ .ﺔﺛﹶﺭﹺﺎﻜﻟﹾﺍ ﻩﺬ ﻬﺑﹺ ﺍﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺏ ﺎﺻﺃﹶ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﻮﻫ (ﻮﻛﹸ ﻭﺄﹶﻴﻳﻭ ﺃﹶ ﻱ ﺃﹶ) ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻇﹶ ﻢ ﻬﻀ ﻌﺑ 60 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻞﹴ ﺟ ﺭ ﻱ ﺃ ﻥ ﺎﻜﻣﺈﹺﺑﹺ ﺲ ﻴﻟﹶ ﻪﻧﺄﹶﻟ ،ﺏﹴ ﺍﺮﻐﺘﺳ ﺍ ﻱ ﺄﹶﻟ ﻉ ﺪ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﺮﻣﻷَ ﺍ ﻥﹼ ﺇ ﻝﹶ ﺎﻗ ،ﻢ ﻬﹺﻓﺮﻏﹸ ﻡﹺﺮﺣ ﻲﻓ ﻢ ﻬﻀ ﻌﺑﻭ ﺓﺮﺜﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻩﺬ ﻬﺑﹺ ﺓﹶﻭﺮﺜﱠﻟﺍ ﻊ ﻤ ﺠ ﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻳﺮﹺﻳ ﻦ ﻣ ﻞﱢ ﻜﹸ ﻟ ﺪ ﺑ ﻼﻓ ،ﺐ ﺴ ﺤ ﻓﹶ ﺩﺎﺟ ﻞﹴ ﻤ ﻌﺑﹺ ﺍﻮ ﺑﺍﺩ ﺓﻭﺮﺛﹶ ﻞﹶ ﺜﹾﻣ ﺓﹰﻭﺮﺛﹶ ﺐ ﺴِ ﻜﹾ ﻳ ﺔﹰﻴﺤ ﺿ ﺃﹸ ﺎﻬﻣﺪّ ﻗﹶﻭ ﺕ ﺍﻮﻨﺳ ﻞﹶ ﺒﻗﹶ ﺓﹰﺎﺘﻓﹶ ﻞﹶ ﺘﻗﹶ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ﻮ ﺑﺍﺩ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻟﹸﻮﻘﹸﻳ ﺱ ﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺃﹶﺪ ﺒﻓﹶ .ﻥ ﺎﻄﻴﺸ ﻠﻟ ﻪﺴ ﻔﹾﻧ ﻊ ﻴﺒﹺﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺍﺫﹶﺇﹺﻭ .ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ ﻞﹴ ﺟ ﺭ ﻰﻨﻏﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻮﻫ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻜﹸ ﻴﻟ ،ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺒﻟ ﺔﻴﻔﻠﹶﺳ ﺔﻴﻧﹺﺎﺣﻭ ﺭﻭ ،ﺮﹺﻄﹶ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹺ ﺰﹺﻨﻣ ،ﻪﻟﹶﺇ ،ﺍﻮﻏﹸﻭ ﺭﺎﺴ ﻟ ﻯﻮﻗﹸ ﻊ ﻣ ﺎﹰﻗﺎﺜﻴﻣ ﺬﹶ ﺨ ﺗﺍ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻌﺑ .ﺎﹰﻴﺣ ﺔﹰﻓﹶﺍﺮﺧ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﻥﺎﻛ ﺪﻘﻓ ؟ﻊ ﻗﱠﻮﺘﺗ ﺍﺫﺎﻤﻓﹶ ،ﻥ ﺎﻄﻴﺸ ﻠﻟ ﻚ ﺴ ﻔﹾﻧ ﺖ ﻌﺑﹺ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ﺎﻣﻮ ﻳ ﻩﺮﺋﺍﺮﺳ ﻰﻠﹶﺒﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﺪ ﺑ ﻻ ﻦﻜ ﻟﹶ .ﺔﻋ ﺎﻤﺠﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻞﹴ ﺟ ﺭ ﻡﻮﻗﹾﺃﹶ ﻮﻫ ﺭﺎﺻﻭ ﺔﺴ ﻴﻨﹺﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻊ ﺟ ﺭ ،ﺔﻴﻧﹺﺎﻤﻠﹾﻇﹸ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ﺍﹶﺫﺇ ،ﻦﻜﻟ ،ﻚ ﺷ ﻻ ،ﺪﻴﺟ ﺀٌﻲ ﺷ ﻝﹸ ﺎﳌﺍ .ﻯﻭﺄﹾﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺥ ﻭﺮﻔﹶﻟﺍ ﻊ ﺟﹺ ﺮﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﺪ ﺑ ﻻ ؟ﻚﻟﺬﻛ ﺲ ﻴﻟﹶﺃﹶ ،ﺎﻣ .ﻪﻋ ﻮﻗﹸﻭ ﻦ ﻣ ﻊ ﻧﹺﺎﻣ ﻻ ﺫﹾﺇﹺ ،ﺀَﺎﺟ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﺏ ﺍﺬﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹶ ﻤّ ﺤ ﺘﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻚ ﻴﻠﹶﻋ ،ﻪﻌﻤ ﺟ ﰲ ﺓﹰﺩﺮﻤ ﺘﻣ ﺀَﺎﻴﺷ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻠﹾﻌﻓﹶ ﻢ ﻠﹶﻓﹶ ،ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺓﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ﺀِﺎﻀﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻊﹺ ﻣﺎﺴﻣ ﻦ ﻋ ﺍﹰﺪﻴﻌﺑ ،ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺒﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺍﹰﺮﺗﺍﻮﺘﻣ ﱪ ﳋﺍ ﺭﺎﺻ ﻰﺘﺣ ،ﺕ ﺎﺴﻤ ﻬﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻋ ﺎﺷ ﺍﺬﹶ ﻜﻫ ﻭ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺭﹺﻮﻬﺸ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻬﺑﹺ ﺐ ﻫ ﺬﹾ ﻳ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﻥ ﺎﻜﳌﺎﺑﹺ ﺢﹺ ﺼ ﻨﻟﺍﻭ ،ﻒ ﻃﹸ ﺎﻌﺘﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺎﻤﻠﻛﹶ ﲑ ﻏ (ﺱﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ) ﺍﻮﻌﻤ ﺴ ﻳ ،ﻥﹾ ﻮﻳﺍﺯ ﺖ ﻧﻭﺎﻣ ﺎﻬﻜﹸ ﻠﻤ ﺗ ﱵﻟﺍ ﺔﹶﺳﺪ ﻘﹶﳌﺍ ﺔﹶﻴﻧﹺﺎﺣﻭﺮﻟﺍ ﺔﹶﺴ ﻴﻨﹺﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻢ ﻬﻀ ﻌﺑ ﺡ ﺮﺘﻗﹾﺍ ﺪﻗﻭ .ﻡﹴﺎﻳّﺃ ﻝﹺ ﻼﹶ ﺧ ﻦ ﻣ ﻰﻔﹶﺸ ﻳ ﱵﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺍﺮﺟ ﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﻲﺣ ﺎﺿﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﺔﹸﻴﻋ ﺩﻷَ ﺎﻓ ؛ﺺ ﻗﹸﺮﻳﻭ ﻲﻨﻐﻳ (ﻮﺑﺍﺩ) ﺮﻤ ﺘﺳ ﺍ ،ﺮﹴﻬ ﺷ ﺓﺪ ﻣ ﺪ ﻌﺑﻭ .ﺍﻮﺗ ﺎﻬﻴﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻪﺑ ﺍﻮﺒﻫ ﺬﹶ ﻓﹶ .ﺍﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺀِﺎﻔﺷ ﰲ ﻊ ﻔﹶﻨﺗ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ،ﺖ ﻣﺪ ﻗﹸ ﻥﹾ ﺪ ﻨﻟﹶ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺮﺑﻻﺎﻛ ﻦ ﻣ ﺎﻬﺘﻳﻮﹺﻀ ﻋ ﺪ ﺘﻤ ﺗ ﱵﻟﺍ ﺔﹶﻴﻤ ﺠ ﻨّﻟﺍﻭ ﺔﹶﻴﺒﹺﻴﻠﺼ ﻟﺍ ﺔﹶﻴﻨﹺﻳﺪ ﻟﺍ ﺔﹶﻴﻌﻤ ﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﹼ ﺇﹺ ﻞﹶ ﻴﻗ ،ﲔﹴ ﺣ ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ﻩﻮ ﺴ ﻣﻭ ﻮ ﺑﺍﺩ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺍﻭﺮﻣﺂﺗ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ﻦﻳﺬﻟﺍ ﻦﻴﻃ ﺎﻴﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻴﻳﹺﻼﻣ ﺩﺮﻄﹾ ﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻊ ﻴﻄ ﺘﺴ ﺗ ،ﻢﹺ ﻟﹶﺎﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﻯﺮﺧ ﺃﹸ ﺩﻼﺑﹺﻭ ﺎﻜﻳﺮﹺﻣﺃﹶﻭ ،ﺲﹺ ﻴﺋﺮﻟﺍ ﺔﻴﻌﻤ ﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺲﹺ ﻠﺠ ﻣ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺮﹺﺤ ﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﺀَﺍﺭﻭ ﺎﻣ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻩﻭﺮﻔﱠﺳ ،ﻚﻟﺫ ﺐﹺ ﺟﹺ ﻮﲟﻭ .ﻲﻨﻐﻳﻭ ﺺ ﻗﹸﺮﻴﻓﹶ ،ﻥ ﻮﻨﺠ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﻞﹺ ﺟﺭﹺ ﱃﺇﹺ ﻼﹰ ﺟﺭﹺﻭ ﺎﹰﺳﺃﺭ ﻩﻭﺪ ﻴﻗﹶ ؛ﺱﹴ ﺪ ﻘﹶﻣ ﺰﹴﺒﺨ ﺑﹺ ﻩﻮﻤ ﻌﻃﹾ ﺃﹶ ؛ﺱﹴ ﺪ ﻘﹶﻣ ﻦﹴ ﻫ ﺪ ﺑﹺ ﻩﻮﺤ ﺴ ﻣ ؛ﺎﹰﺳﺪ ﻘﹶﻣ ﺀًﺎﻣ ﻪﻴﻠﹶﻋ ﺍﻮ ﺒﺼ ﻓﹶ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺮّﻤ ﺘﺳ ﺍ ،ﻚﻟﺫ ﻞﱢ ﻛ ﻊﻣﻭ .ﻪﺣ ﻭ ﺭ ﺹﹺ ﻼﺨ ﻟ ﺔﹰﻴﻋ ﺩﺃﹶ ﺍﻮﻣﺪ ﻗﹶ ؛ﻪﻨﻋ ﺔﹰﺑﺎﻴﻧﹺ ﺕ ﺎﻳﺅ ﺭ ﻯﺃﹶﺭ ؛ﻲﻧﹺﺍﺭﺰﻴﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻩﺮﹺﻳﺮﹺﺳ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺎﻬﺗﺍﺪﺋﺎﻋ ﺀِﺍﺪﻫ ﺇﹺ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﻪﺗﺎﻜﻠﹶﺘﻤ ﻣﻭ ﻪﺘﻌﺘﻣﺃﹶﻭ ﻪﻌﺋﺎﻀﺑ ﻊﹺ ﻴﺒﺑﹺ ﺔﹸﺳ ﺪ ﻘﹶﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺡ ﻭﺮﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺮﻣﺃﹶ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻭ .ﺺ ﻗﹸﺮﻳﻭ ﻲﻨﹺّﻐﻳ ﺓﹸﺮﺳ ﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻘﹶﻓﹶﺍﻭ ﺪﻗﻭ ،ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺀِﻼﺑ ﺐ ﺒﺳ ﻲ ﻫ ﺓﹶﺮﻴﺒﹺﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﺗﺍﻭﺮﺛﹶ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﺎﻬﺗﺎﻳﺅ ﺭ ﻯﺪ ﺣ ﺇﹺ ﰲ ﺕ ﺃﹶﺭ ﺎﻬﻧﺄﹶﻟ ،ﺔﺴ ﻴﻨﹺﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ 61 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﺏﹺ ﺍﺮﺗ ﻲﻓ ﺍﻭﺮﻔﹶﺣ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ؛ﻪﺘﻓﹶﺮﻏﹸ ﺽﹺ ﺭ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻓ ﺍﻭﺮﻔﹶﺣ ﻭ ؛ﻩﺮﹺﻳﺮﹺﺳ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺐﹺ ﺷ ﻮﺸ ﻌﻤ ﻟﹾﺍﹶ ﻪﺷ ﺍﺮﻓ ﰲ ﺍﻭﺮﻔﹶﺤ ﻓﹶ ،ﻚﻟﺫ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺔﻠﹶﻴﺼ ﺤ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﺍﻮﻠﹸﺳ ﺭ ﺄﹶﻓﹶ ،ﺱﹺ ﻮﻠﹸﻔﹸﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺔﹰﺌﻴﻠﻣ ﺔﹰﺒﻴﻘﺣ ﺎﻬﻴﻓ ﺍﻭﺪ ﺟ ﻭ ،ﺍﻮﻌﻗﹶّﻮﺗ ﺎﻤﻛﹶ ﻭ ،ﻞﹺ ﻘﹾﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﺪ ﻴﺼ ﺣ ﻉﹺ ﺩﻮ ﺘﺴ ﻣ ﺓﹸﺮﺳﻷُ ﺍ ﺕ ﺭﺮّﻘﹶﻓﹶ ،ﺀِﺎﺴﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺡﹺ ﺎﺒﺼ ﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺺﹺ ﻗﺮﻟﺍﻭ ﻲﻨﹺّﻐﺘﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﻊ ﻨﻤ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻚﻟﺫ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻻﱠ ﺇﹺ ،ﺔﻴﻨﹺﻳﺪ ﻟﺍ ﺔﻴﻌﻤ ﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ .ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺀﺎﻔﹶﺸ ﻟ ﺎﹰﺒﺳ ﺎﻨﻣ ﺎﹰﻧﺎﻜﻣ ﺖ ﺴ ﻴﻟﹶ ﺔﹶﻴﻨﹺﻳﺪ ﻟﺍ ﺔﹶﻴﻌﻤ ﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻥﺎﻛﻭ .ﺔﻧﻮﻫﺪ ﻣ ﺔﺣ ﻮ ﻟﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻪﺴ ﻔﹾﻧ ﻕ ﻮﺴ ﻳ ﺭﻮﺘﻛﺩ ﻞﹲ ﺟﺭ ،ﺎﻫﺍﻮﻘﹸﻟ ﺓﺭﻮﻬﺸ ﻣ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ،ﻮ ﻛﹶ ﰲ ﻙﺎﻨﻫ ،ﻥﹶ ﻵﺍﻭ .ﻚﻟﺫ ﺪ ﻛﱢ ﺆﻳ ﺔﺣ ﻮ ﻠﱠﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻥﹸ ﻼﻋ ﻹِ ﺍﻭ ،ﻞﹲ ﻳﻮﹺﻃﹶ ﻢﻗﹾﺭ ﺎﻬﻴﻠﹶﻋ ﺓﹰﺩﺎﻬﺷ ﻪﺘﻄﹶ ﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺪﻗ ﺔﹶﻣﻮﻜﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺄﻟ ﺍﹰﺭﻮﻬﺸﻣ ﻼﹰ ﺟ ﺭ ﺎﻤ ﻣ ؛ﺓﺪ ﻳﺪ ﻋ ﺕ ﺍﺮﻔﹾﺼ ﺑﹺ ﻢ ﻗﹾﺮﻟﺍ ﺃﹸﺪ ﺒﻳﻭ ،ﺍﹰﺪ ﺟﹺ ﻞﹲ ﻳﻮﻃ ﻪﻤ ﻗﺭ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ﺍﻮﻟﹸﺎﻗ - ﻢ ﻬﹺﺘﻠﱠﻗ ﻊ ﻣ - ﺓﹶﺀَﺍﺮﻘﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻌﻴﻄ ﺘﺴ ﻳ ﻦﻳﺬﻟﺍﻭ ﻞﹶ ﻴﻗ ﺪ ﻗﹶﻭ .ﻒ ﻃ ﺍﻮﻌﻠﹾﻟ ﻙ ﺮﺤ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﲑ ﺒﻜﹶ ﻟﺍ ﻢ ﻗﺮﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻞﹶ ﺜﻣ ﻪﺘﻄﹶ ﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺎﻣ ﻻﹼ ﺇﹺﻭ ،ﻪﺗﺍﺭﺪ ﻘﹸﺑﹺ ﺖ ﻓﹶﺮﺘﻋ ﺍ ﺔﹶﻣﻮﻜﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻛﱢ ﺆﻳ ﻰﻔﹶﺸﺗﻭ ؛ﺔﻴﻠﺳ ﺎﻨﺘّﻟﺍ ﺽﹺ ﺍﺮﻣﻷَ ﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻰﻔﹶﺸﺗ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ،ﺐﹺ ﻳﺪ ﻨﺘّﻟﺍ ﺔﹶﺒﺸ ﻌﻣ ﻚ ﻠﻤ ﻳ ﺍﹰﺭﻮﺘﻛﺩ ﻪﻧﹺﻮ ﻜﹶ ﺑﹺ ﻦ ﻠﻌﺗ ﻪﺘﺣ ﻮ ﻟﹶ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ﺓﺫﹶﻮﻌﺸ ﻠﻟ ﻞﹲ ﺗﺎﻗ ﻭﺪ ﻋ ﻲ ﻫ ﺭﹺﻮﺘﻛﹾ ﺪ ﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﺕ ﺎﻧﺎﻜﻤ ﻓﹶ .ﻢﹺ ﻘﹾﻌﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺎﻬﻴﻓ ﻰﻔﹶﺸﺗ ﺎﻤﻛ ؛ﻥ ﻮﻨﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺎﹰﻀﻳﺃ ﻦ ﻣ ﻞﹸ ﺟﺮﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻥﺎﻛ ،ﺭﹺﺎﺼﺘﺧ ﻹﺎﺑﻭ .ﺏﹺ ﺮﻘﹾﻌﻟﺍﻭ ﻞﹺ ﺤ ﻨّﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺎﻌﺴ ﻠﹶﻟﻭ ﺐﹺ ﻠﹾﻜﻟﺍﻭ ﻥ ﺎﺒﻌﺜﹸﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺎﻏﺪ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﺔﻓﹶﺍﺮﻌﻟﺍﻭ .ﻡﹺﺎﻈﻌﻟﺍ ﺭﹺﻮﻣﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺔﻟﹶﻭﺎﺤﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﱡﻞﻛﹸ ﺖ ﻠﹶﺸ ﻓﹶ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﻪﻴﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻊ ﺟ ﺮﻳ ﺍﻮﻠﹸﻌﺟ ﻭ ﻪﺑﹺ ﺍﻮﻌﻤ ﺳ ﺎﻣ ﺭﻮﻓﹶ ﻪﻴﻟﺇﹺ ﺍﻮﻋﺮﺴ ﺗ ﻦﻜﻟ ،ﻡﹺﻮﻴﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺍﹰﺮﺧ ﺄﹶﺘﻣ ﻮ ﻛﹶ ﺓﺪﻠﺑ ﰲ ﺭﹺﻮﺘﻛﺪ ﻟﺎﺑ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺓﹸﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ﺖ ﻌﻤ ﺳ ﺮﹺﻬ ﻇﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺔﺜﹶﻴﺒﹺﺧ ﺕ ﺎﻤﺳ ﻭ ﻙ ﺮﺘﻳ ﲑﹴ ﺒﹺﻛﹶ ﻱﺪ ﻠﹾﺟﹺ ﻡﹴﺍﺰﺤ ﺑﹺ ﺀَﺎﺴﻣ ﺡ ﺎﺒﺻ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺏ ﺮﹺﻀ ﻳ ﺃﺪﺒﻓﹶ ،ﻪﺘﺒﻗﹶﺍﺮﻣ ﺖ ﺤ ﺗ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ،ﻥ ﻮﻨﺠ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﹶ ﻫ ﺪ ﺴ ﺟ ﻦ ﻣ ﺝ ﺮﺨﻳ ﻰﺘﺣ ﻥﹸ ﺎﹶﻄﻴﺸ ﻟﺍ ﺏ ﺮﻀ ﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺽﹺ ﻭﺮﻔﹾﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻤ ﻓﹶ .ﻪﺗﺰﻴﺠﹺ ﻋ ﻭ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺔﺒﻋ ﺮﻣ ﺀٍﺍﻮﻌﺑﹺ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺥ ﺮﺻ ،ﺺﹺ ﻗﹾﺮﻟﺍﻭ ﻲﻨﻐﺘﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻝﹶ ﺪ ﺑ ،ﻥﻵﺍﻭ .ﻥ ﻮﻨﳉﹸ ﺍ ﺝﹺ ﻼﻌﻟ ﺪ ﻴﺣ ﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﻖ ﻳﺮﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﻮﻫ ﺍﺬﻬﻓ ،ﻩﺮﹺﻬﻇﹶ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺔﻘﹶﻴﻤ ﻋ ﺕ ﺎﻗﺰﻣﻭ ﻪﻠﺣ ﺎﻛﹶ ﻭ ﻪﻴﻤ ﺼ ﻌﻣ ﻝﹶ ﻮ ﺣ ﺕ ﺎﺑﺪ ﻧﻭ ،ﻖﹴ ﻠﱠﺤ ﻣ ﺱﹴ ﺃﹾﺭ ﻊ ﻣﻭ .ﺔﻤ ﻟﱢﺄﹶﺘﻣ ﺔﺑﺍﺪ ﻛﹶ ﺔﻔﻴﺨ ﻣ ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻱ ﺃﹶ ﺭﹺﺪﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﺎﻬﻨﻣ ﺮﻓﹶﻭ ﺓﺮﻴﻬﹺﺸ ﻟﺍ ﺔﺒﺸ ﻌﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺦﻠﹶﺴ ﻧﺍ ،ﻡﹴﻮﻳ ﺕ ﺍﺫﻭ .ﺎﹰﺒﻴﻫ ﺭ ﺍﹰﺮﻈﹶ ﻨﻣ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﻥﺎﻛ ﺪ ﻌﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻥﹶ ﻵﺍﻭ .ﻍﹺ ﺭﹺﺎﻔﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﺘﻴﺑ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﻭ ،ﺎﹶﻧﺎﻛﹶ ﺩ ﺓﺪﻠﹾﺑ ﱃﺇﹺ ﺍﹰﺪﺋﺎﻋ ﻪﻘﹶﻳﺮﹺﻃﹶ ﺬﹶ ﺧ ﺃﹶ ﻰﺘﺣ ﻚﻟﺫ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻉ ﺎﻄﺘﺳ ﺍ ﻒ ﻴﻛﹶ ،ﻂ ﺒﻀ ﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺭﹺﺎﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﻲﻓﻭ ،ﻡﹴﻮﻳ ﻞﱢ ﻛﹸ ﻲﻓ ﺓﹰﺮﻣﻭ .ﺀِﺎﻤ ﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﻡﹺﺎﻌﻄﱠ ﻠﻟ ﻝﹸ ﻮﺴ ﺘﻳ ﺎﹰﻧﺎﻳﺮﻋ ﻝﹸ ﻮّﺠ ﺘﻳ ﺃﹶﺪ ﺑ ﻞﹾ ﺑ ،ﻲﻨﻐﻳﻭ ﺺ ﻗﹸﺮﻳ 62 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﺔﹰﺤ ﻴﻀ ﻓﹶﻭ ،ﻪﺗﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺍﹰﺭﺎﻋ ،ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺪ ﻴﺣ ﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹸ ﻮﹺّﺴ ﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻮﻫ ﻥﺎﻜﻓ .
"ﻥﹶ ﻮﺑﺫﺎﻛ ﻢ ﻜﹸ ﱡﻠﻛﹸ " ﺕ ﺎﻤﻠﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﺥ ﺮﺼ ﻳ ﺎﻧﺎﻛﹶ ﺩ ﻞﹺ ﻫ ﺃﹶ ﻥ ﺍﺫﺁﻭ ﺔﺒﻗﱢﺮﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻑ ﻮﻧﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍﻭ ،ﺔﺼ ﺤ ﻔﹶﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻴﻋ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻋ ﺍﹰﺪﻴﻌﺑ ﺍﹰﺮﺳ ﺱ ﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﻪﻨﻋ ﺙﹸ ﺪ ﺤ ﺘﻳ ،ﻻﹰ ﻮﺠ ﺘﻣ .
"ﻪﻴﻠﹶﻋ ﻲﻀ ﻘﹾﻧ ﻡﻮ ﻳ ﻲﺗﺄﹾﻴﺳ " ؛ﻩﺩﺎﻔﹶﻣ ﺎﹰﻳﺮﹺﺳ ﺍﹰﺮﻴﻄ ﺧ ﺍﹰﺭﺍﺮﻗﹶ ﻪﻴﻠﹶﻋ ﺍﻭﺬﹸ ﺨ ﺗّﺍ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺔﻓﹶﺎﻔﱠﳋﹶ ﺍ .ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﻲ ﻓ ﺍﹰﺩﻮﻌﺘﻣ ﺍﹰﺮﻈﹶ ﻨﻣ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺭﺎﺻ ،ﺕ ﺍﻮﻨﺳ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺮﻬﺷ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻣﺪ ﻘﹶﺗﻭ ،ﺮﹴﻬﺷ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻡﺎﻳﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻣﺪ ﻘﹶﺗ ﺎﻤ ﻛﹶ ﻭ ﻡﹺﺎﻳﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺓﺩﺎﻌﻟﹾﺎﻛ ﻢ ﻬﹺﻴﻴﹺّﺤ ﻳﻭ ﱘﹴ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ﻖﹴ ﻳﺪ ﺻ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ﺐﹴ ﻳﺮﹺﻗﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻑ ﺮﻌﺘﻳ ،ﺎﹰﻧﺎﻴﺣ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻧﺇﹺ ﻝﹶ ﺎﻘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺐﹺ ﻳﺮﹺﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣﻭ ،ﻪﻧﹺﻮﻨﺟ ﻲ ﻓ ﻮﹺﺤ ﺼ ﻟﺍ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﻙ ﺎﻨﻫ ﻥﹶّ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺖ ﻟﱠﺩ ،ﺓﹰﺭﺩﺎﻧ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﻥﹾ ﺇﹺﻭ ،ﺕ ﺎﺒﺳ ﺎﻨﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻞﹶ ﺜﹾﻣﻭ .ﺔﻴﺿ ﺎﻤﻟﹾﺍ .ﺮﹺﻄﹶ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺍﺫ ﺐﹺ ﺤ ﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺮﺒﻋ ﺲ ﻤ ﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻕ ﺮﹺﺘﺨ ﺗ ﺎﻤﻛﹶ ﻪﻠﻘﹾﻋ ﻲﻓ ﻕ ﺮﹺﺘﺨ ﻳ ﻮﹴﺤ ﺻ ﰲ (ﻁ ﻮﻐﺘﻠﻟ) ﺀِﻼﳋﹶ ﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺏﹺ ﺎﻫ ﺬﱠ ﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺮﻌﺸ ﻳ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﻮﻫ ﺲ ﻴﻌﺘﻟﺍ ﻞﹶ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ﻝﹸ ﻮﻘﻳ ﻞﹲ ﺜﹶﻣ ﻙ ﺎﻨﻫ ،ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﻲﻓﻭ ؛ﺐ ﺴ ﺤ ﻓﹶ ﺔﻌﻴﺒﹺﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ ﺕ ﻻﺎﻤﺟ ﻪﻴﻓ ﺖ ﻋ ﺩﻭﺃﹸ ﺎﹰﻌﺿ ﻮ ﻣ ﻻﹶ ﻭ ،ﺎﹰﺒﻋ ﺮﻣ ﺎﹰﻔﻴﺨ ﻣ ﺎﹰﻧﺎﻜﹶ ﻣ ﺖ ﺴ ﻴﻟﹶ ﺔﹶﺑﺎﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺄﹶﻟ ،ﺮﹴﻄ ﻤ ﻣ ﻡﹴﻮﻳ ﺯﹴﻮ ﻣ ﻕﹺ ﺍﺭﻭ ﺃﹶ ﺩﻮﺟ ﻭ ﻦ ﻜﹶ ﻣﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺇﹺﻭ ﻰﺘﺣ ،ﻁ ﻮﻐﺘﻠﻟ ﻝﹲ ﻮﻬﻣ ﻡﻮﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺫﹶﺇﹺ ﺮﻄ ﻤ ﳌﺍ ﻡﻮﻴﻟﹾﺎﻓﹶ .ﺎﹰﻔﻴﻨﹺﻛﹶ ﺎﹰﻀﻳﺃﹶ ﺖ ﺼ ﺼ ﺧ ﺪﻗ ﻞﹾ ﺑ ﻲﻓ ﻝﹺ ﻮﺻ ﻮﻠﹾﻟ ﺔﻳﺭﹺﺎﺠﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻴﻌﻟﺍ ﰲﻭ ﺮﹺﻜ ﻌﻟﺍ ﲔﹺ ﻄﱢ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺽ ﻮ ﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻜﹶ ﻣﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺇﹺﻭ ﻰﺘﺣ ،ﻝﹺ ﺯﹺﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺮﹺﻄﹶ ﳌﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺮﹺﺘّﺴ ﺘﻠﻟ ،ﻚ ﻟﺬﹶ ﻟ .ﻖﹺ ﻴﻀ ﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺍﹰﺪﻳﺰﹺﻣ ﺐ ﺒﺴ ﺗ ﺔﹶﺒﻃﱠ ﺮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍﹶ ﻕ ﺍﺭﻭ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﺔﹶﻠﹶﻠﱠﺒﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺍﺮﻴﺠ ﺸ ﻟﺍﻭ ﺔﹶﺒﻃﱠ ﺮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻉ ﻭﺮﻔﹸﻟﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺈﹺﻓﹶ ،ﺔﺑﺎﻐﻟﹾﺍ .ﺔﺑﺎﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﺀِﻼﹶ ﺧ ﰲ ﻁ ﻮﻐﺘﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻉﹺ ﺎﻨﺘﻣﺎﻠﹾﻟﻭ ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹶ ﺧ ﺍﺩ ﺀِﺎﻘﹶﺒﻠﹾﻟ ﻡﻮ ﻳ ﺮﻄ ﻤ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻡﻮ ﻴﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺈﹺﻓ (ﺍﹰﺮﻳﺰﹺﻏﹶ ) ﻮﹺﻟﹾﺪ ﻟﺍ ﺊﹶ ﻠﹾﻣ ﺮﹺﻄﹶ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹸ ﺰﹺﻨﺗ ﺔﹸﻬﻟﻵﺍﻭ ،ﻩﺎﻴﻤ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﺕ ﺍﻭﺎﻤﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺏ ﺍﻮﺑﺃﹶ ﺖ ﺤ ﺘﻔﹶﺗ ﺎﻣﺪﻨﻋ ،ﺮﹴﻄﻤﻣ ﻡﹴﻮﻳ ﺕ ﺍﺫ ﰲﻭ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ﻭ ،ﻁ ﻮﻐﺘﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺮﻌﺸ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﻪﺗﺩﺎﻌﻛﹶ ﻝﹺ ﻮﺴ ﺘﻠﻟ ﺝﹺ ﻭﺮﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ (ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﻱ ﺃﹶ) ﻝﹸ ﻮﺴ ﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻜﱠ ﻤ ﺘﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ،ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﰲ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ" ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﻪﻴﻓ ﻝﹸ ﺎﻘﻳ ،ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﻞﹺ ﻫ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺭﻮﻬﺸ ﻣ ﺮﺧ ﺁ ﻞﹲ ﺜﹶﻣ ﻙ ﺎﻨﻫﻭ .ﻍﹺ ﺭﹺﺎﻔﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﺘﻴﺑ ﰲ ﺎﹰﻤﺋﺎﻧ ﻊ ﻗﹶﻭ ﻪﻧﺄﹶﻟ ؟ﻚ ﻟﺬﹶ ﺑﹺ ﺮﻌﺷ ﺪﻗ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﻩﺅﺎﺑﺮﹺﻗﹾﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻈﹶ ﻓﹶ .
(ﻥﹸ ﻮﻨﺠ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹸ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﻱ ﺃﹶ) ﻝﹸ ﻮﹺّﺴ ﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻡﺎﻧ ﺪﻗﻭ ".ﻡﻮﻨﻟﺍ ﺮﹺﺒﹺﺘﻋ ﺍ ،ﺕ ﻮﳌﺍ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻌﺗ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ .ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﺽﹺ ﺮﻋ ﻭ ﻝﹺ ﻮﻃﹸ ﻲﻓ ﻪﺗﻮ ﻣ ﺮﺒﺧ ﺮﺸ ﻨﺗ ﺔﹲﻳﻭﹺﺎﻌﻣ ﺓﹲﺃﹶﺮﻣﺍ ﺖ ﺒﻫ ﺬﹶ ﻓﹶ ،ﺕ ﺎﻣ ﺱﹺ ﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ﻰﺘﺣ ،ﻪﻋ ﺎﻤﺳ ﻦ ﻣ ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻱ ﺃﹶ ﻝﹸ ﺎﺒﻳ ﻻ ﺫﺇﹺ ،ﺔﺸ ﻫ ﺩ ﻱ ﺃﹶ ﺙﹸ ﺪ ﺤ ﻳ ﻻ ﻥ ﻮﻨﺠ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﻮ ﻣ ﺮﺒﺧ ﻭ ﺍﺫﺇ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ،ﺡﹺ ﺎﺒﺼ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺀٍﻲ ﺷ ﻝﹶ ﻭﺃﹶ ﺎﹰﻧﻮﻨﺠ ﻣ ﻰﻠﹶﺒﺣ ﺓﹲﺃﹶﺮﻣﺍ ﺕ ﺃﹶﺭ ﺍﺫﹶﺇﹺ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﻡﹺﻮﻠﹸﻌﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣﻭ .ﺞﹺ ﻳﺮﹺﻔﹾﺘﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺎﹰﻋﻮ ﻧ ﻪﺗﻮ ﻣ ﺪ ﻌﻳ 63 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﺎﹰﻨﺑﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﺒﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺓﹸﺃﹶﺮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺪ ﻠﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻝﹲ ﺎﻤﺘﺣ ﺍ ﻪﻴﻓ ،ﻕﹴ ﺪ ﺼ ﺗ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ﻡﹴﺎﻌﻃﹾ ﺈﺑﹺ ﻪﻴﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻥ ﺎﺴﺣ ﺈﻟﺍﹾ ﻦ ﻣ ﺖ ﻌﻨﺘﻣﺍﻭ ﻪﺘﻳﺅ ﺭ ﺖ ﻫ ﺮﹺﻛﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﺎﹰﻋﻮﻧ ﺖ ﻴﳌﺍ ﺡﹺ ﻮﻧ ﻦﻣ ﻉ ﺎﻨﺘﻣﻻﺍ ﻥﹼ ﺃﹶ ﺎﻤﺑﹺﻭ .ﺎﹰﻘﻤ ﺣ ﺃﹶ ﺩﻮﻟﻮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺮﺒﻜﹾ ﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ﻝﹶ ﻮﺴ ﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻨﺠ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﺒﹺﺸ ﻳ ﻊ ﻤ ﺴﻳ ﻰﺘﺣ ﻪﺗﺎﻓﻭ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻥ ﻮﻨﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﺓﹸﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ﺖ ﺣ ﺎﻧ ﻚﻟﺬﻟ ،ﺀِﺎﺑﺮﹺﻗﹾﻷَ ﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺖ ﻴﳌﺍ ﻥﺎﻛ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﺎﻤﻴﺳ ﻻ ،ﻡﹺﺍﺮﺟ ﻹِ ﺍ .ﺩﺎﻗﺮﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻨﺍ ﻆﹶ ﻘﹶﻴﺘﺳ ﺍ ،ﺔﺟ ﺮﻬ ﺒﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﺀِﺎﺿﻮ ﻀ ﻟﺍ ﺀَﺎﻨﺛﹾﺃﹶﻭ .ﻪﺗﻮ ﻤ ﺑﹺ ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﻞﹸ ﻫ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻫﺎﻴّﺤ ﻓﹶ ،ﻲﺿ ﺎﳌﺍ ﰲ ﻪﺑﹺ ﻥﻮﻤ ﺘﻬ ﻳ ﺍﻮﻧﻮﻜﹸ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻪﺋﹶﺎﺑﺮﹺﻗﺃ ﻥﹼ ﺄﻟ ،ﺱﹺ ﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﻩﺎﺒﺘﻧﺍ ﺐ ﺒﺳ ﻪﺴ ﻔﹾﻧ ﺪ ﺠﹺ ﻴﻟ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻨﺍ ﻞﹶ ﻫ ﺬﹶ ﻧﺍ ﺥ ﺮﺼ ﻓﹶ ،ﺔﹰﻴﻧﹺﺎﺛ ﺓﹰﺮﻣ ﺎﻫ ﺭﺮّﻛﹶ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﺪﺣ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻴﻠﻋ ﺩﺮﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﺔﹶﻴّﺤ ﺘﻟﺍ ﺭﺮّﻛﹶ ﻭ ،ﻩﻮﺒﻴﺠﹺ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻢﻬﻧّﺃﹶ ﲑ ﻏﹶ ،ﺓﹰﺩﺭﹺﺎﺑ ﺔﹰﻴّﺤ ﺗ ،ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺖ ﻣﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ" ،ﻪﻟﻮﻘﹶﺑﹺ ﻞﹸ ﺋﺎﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻨﺍ ﺩﺮﻓﹶ .
"ﺖ ﻜﹸ ﺳ ﺍﹸ ،ﺖ ﻴﻣ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ" ﻼﹰ ﺋﺎﻗ ﻪﺗﻮ ﺻ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺄﹶﺑﹺ ﺀﺎﺑﺮﻗﻷﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺪﺣ ﺍﻭ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ؟ﺕ ﻮ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﻡﹺﻮﻨﻟﺍ ﲔﺑ ﻕ ﺭﹺﺎﻔﻟﺍ ﺎﻣﻭ !ﺎﻫ ،ﺎﹰﻤﺋﺎﻧ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ " ﻢﻬﻨﻣ ﺪﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻝﺎﻗ ﻢ ﺛﹸ .
"ﻂﹾ ﻘﹶﻓﹶ ﺎﹰﻤﺋﺎﻧ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﻞﹾ ﺑ ".ﺖ ﻴﻣ .ﻲ ﻜ ﺒﻳ ﺃﹶﺪﺑﻭ "ﺎﹰﺘﻴﻣ ﺖ ﺴ ﻟﹶ" ،ﻒ ﻴﻌﺿ ﺕ ﻮ ﺼ ﺑﹺ ﻥﻮﻨﺍ ﻝﺎﻗ ".ﻪﻨﻓﹶﺪ ﻧ ﻲ ﻜﹶ ﻟ ﻪﻠﻤ ﺣ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻲﻧﹺﻭﺪ ﻋ ﺎﺳ ،ﺓﹲﻮﺧ ﺇﹺ ﺎﻳ ،ﺖ ﻴﻣ ﺖ ﻧﺃ" ،ﻢﻬﻨﻣ ﺮﺧ ﺁ ﻝﺎﻗ ﺐﹺ ﻠﹾﻜﻟﹾﺎﻛ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻨﺍ ﻯﻮﻋ ".ﺭﺎﻬﻨﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﺖ ﻣ ﺪﻗﻭ ،ﻡﻮﻴﻟﺍ ﺕ ﻮﻤﺘﺳ " :ﺍﻮﻟﺎﻗ ".ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺖ ﻣﺃ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻦﻜﻟ" ،ﻥﹸ ﻮﻨﺍ ﻝﺎﻗ .ﻥﹶ ﻵﺍ ﺕ ﻮﻣﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻳﺭﺃﹸ ﻻ .ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺖ ﻣﺃ ﱂ ،ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺖ ﻣﺃ ﱂ ،ﷲﺍ ﺎﻳ :ﻼﹰ ﺋﺎﻗ ﺵﹴ ﺎﻜﻨﻣﻭ ﺕ ﺎﻓﺰﻌﻣ ﺍﻭﺬﹸ ﺧﺃﹶ ﰒﹼ ﻲﻓﺍﺭ ﺮﹴﻴﺼ ﺤ ﺑﹺ ﻩﻭﺮﺛﱠﺩﻭ ،ﻪﺴِ ﻠﺠ ﻣ ﻦﻣ ﻮﺑﺍﺩ ﺍﻮﻌﻓﹶﺭﻭ ﻢ ﻬﻳﺪﻳﺃﹶ ﺓﹸﻮﺧﻹﺍ ﻊ ﻤﺟ ﺀِﺎﻤﺴ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﻕ ﺮﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻊ ﻤ ﻟﹶ ﺮﹴﺧﺂﻟ ﻦﹴ ﻴﺣ ﻦ ﻣﻭ ،ﺍﹰﺮﻳﺰﹺﻏﹶ ﺍﹰﺮﻄﻣ ﺀُﺎﻤﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺮﻄﹶ ﻣﺃﹶ .ﺔﺑﺎﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻮﺤﻧ ﺍﻮﻬﺟ ﻮﺗﻭ ،ﺱﹴ ﺄﹾﻓﹶﻭ ﻦﹴ ﻴﺣ ﰲ ،ﺓﺪ ﺸ ﺑﹺ ﺾﹴ ﻌﺑ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻢ ﻬﻀ ﻌﺑ ﻚ ﺳ ﺎﻤﺘﻳ ،ﺮﹺﻄﳌﺍ ﻞﹺ ﺣ ﻭ ﻝﹶ ﻼﺧ ﻡﹴﺰﻌﺑﹺ ﺍﻮﺿ ﺎﺧ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺀُﺎﺑﺮﻗﺃﻭ ،ﺔﻤ ﺗﺎﻘﻟﺍ .ﺭﹺﺪّ ﺨ ﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺮﹺﻄﳌﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﲔ ﻔﺋﺎﺧ ،ﺀٍﻲ ﺷ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﻥﹶ ﻮ ﺳ ﺎﻨﺘﻳ ﻢ ﻬﹺﺗﻮﻴﺑ ﰲ ﺎﻧﺎﻛﺩ ﺓﺪﻠﹾﺑ ﻞﹸ ﻫ ﺃﹶ ﻲ ﻘﺑ ﻦ ﻣ ﺔﻔﹶﻴﺜﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺭﹺﺎﺠﺷ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻕ ﺍﺭﻭ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻌﻨﻣ ﺪ ﻗﹶﻭ .ﻖﹴ ﻴﻤ ﻋ ﻥ ﻮﻜﺳ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ﺔﺑﺎﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻖﹺ ﻤ ﻋ ﰲ ﺔﹸﻋ ﺎﻤﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻠﹶﺻ ﻭ ،ﺍﹰﲑﺧﺃﹶ ﻥﱠ ﺄﹶﻛﹶ ﻭ .ﻖﹴ ﻴﻤ ﻋ ﺖ ﻤ ﺻ ﰲ ،ﺮﹺﻄﹶ ﳌﺎﺑ ﺔﹰﻠﹶّﺘﺒﻣ ﺔﹸﺴ ﺑﹺﺎﻴﻟﹾﺍ ﻕ ﺍﺭﻭ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺻﻭ ،ﺔﻋ ﺎﻤﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺮﹺﻄﳌﺍ ﺕ ﺍﺮﻄﹾ ﻗﹶ ﻝﹺ ﻮﺻﻭ .ﺔﹸﺴ ﺋﺎﺒﻟﺍ ﺔﹸﻋﺎﻤ ﺠﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻔﹶﻗﹶﻭ ،ﻒ ﻴﺨ ﻣ ﺐﹴ ﻳﺮﹺﻏﹶ ﻥ ﻮﻜﺳ ﰲﻭ .ﺩﻮﻗﺮّﻠﻟ ﺎﻬﺸ ﻋ ﱃﺇ ﺕ ﺩﺎﻋ ﺪﻗ ﺭﻮﻴﱡﻄﻟﺍ 64 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ".ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺖ ﻣﺃ ﱂ ،ﷲﺍ ﺎﻳ" :ﻝﻮﻘﹸﻳ ﺔﻋﺎﻤﳉﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺕ ﻮ ﺻ ﻊ ﻤ ﺳ ﻭ ،ﺎﹰﻘﻴﺿ ﻼﹰ ﺤ ﺿ ﺍﹰﺮﺒﻗﹶ ﺀُﺎﺑﺮﹺﻗﹾﻷَ ﺍ ﺮﻔﹶﺣ ﺔﻋﺮﺴ ﻟﺎﺑﻭ ﻻ .ﺓﺮﺳ ﻷُ ﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺭﺎﻋﻭ ﺔﹲﺤﻴﻀ ﻓﹶ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ،ﻡﻮ ﻴﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﻮﻤ ﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﺑ ﻻ ،ﺍﹰﺫﺇﹺ" :ﻝﹸ ﻮﻘﻳ ﺔﻋﺎﻤﳉﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺕ ﻮﺻ ﻪﻴﻠﻋ ﺩﺮﻓﹶ ".ﻡﻮ ﻴﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﻮﻤ ﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﺑ ".ﺪﻌﺑ ﺖﻣﺃ ﱂ ،ﷲُ ﺍ ﺎﻳ ،ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺖ ﻣﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ" :ﻥﹸ ﻮﻨﺍ ﻝﺎﻗ ﻒ ﻴﻛﹶ ﻭ ؟ﻥﹸ ﻮﻨﺠ ﻣ ﻮﻫ ﺲ ﻴﻟﹶﺃﹶ ،ﻢﻬﻨﻣ ﺪ ﺣﺍﻭ ﻞﱡ ﻛﹸ ﻝﹶ ﺀَﺎﺴﺘﻓﹶ ،ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻡﹺﻼﻛﹶ ﺡ ﻮﺿ ﻭ ﺀَﺎﺑﺮﹺﻗﹾﻷَ ﺍ ﺶ ﻫ ﺩﺃﹶ ﰲ ﺪ ﺣﺍﻭ ﻞﱡ ﻛﹸ ﺭﺮّﻗﹶ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ؟ﻦﹺ ﻳﺬﹶ ﻫ ﲔﺑ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻨﺍ ﻕ ﺮﹺّﻔﹶﻳ ﻥﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻜ ﻤﻳ ﻞﹾ ﻫﻭ ؟ﺕ ﻮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﺓﺎﻴﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻴﺑ ﻕ ﺮﻔﹶﻳ ﻥﺃ ﻉ ﺎﻄﺘﺳ ﺍ .ﻞﹺ ﺋﺎﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻥ ﻮﻨﺍ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻊﻣ ﺏ ﺍﻮﳉﹶ ﺍ ﺮﺒﻘﹾﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻪﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﻦ ﻜ ﻟﹶ ،ﻥ ﻮﻨﺍ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺕ ﻮﺻ - ﻉﹴ ﺎﻄﻘﻧﺍ ﻼﺑﹺ - ﻊ ﻤ ﺳ ،ﻲﻄﱢ ﻐﻤﻟﹸﺍ ﺭﹺﺬ ﻘﹶﻟﺍ ﺮﹺﻴﺼ ﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹺ ﺧ ﺍﺩ ﻦ ﻣﻭ ،ﱪ ﻘﻟﺍ ﺮﻔﺣ ﻦﹺ ﻜﻟ .ﻲﺤ ﻄﹾ ﺳ ﺮﹴﺒﻗﹶ ﻲﻓ ﻩﻮﻌﺿ ﻭ ﰒﱠ ،ﺔﺑﺎﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻩﻮﻌﻄﹶ ﺘﻗﹾﺍ ﻞﹴ ﺒﺤ ﺑﹺ ﻩﻮﻄﹸ ﺑﺭﻭ ﺓﻮﺴ ﻘﹶﺑﹺ "ﺖ ﻴﳌﺍ" ﺖ ﻠﹶﻤ ﺣ ﺔﹶﻋﺎﻤﳉﺍ .ﺓﲑﺒﹺﻛﹶ ﺕ ﺎﺒﻄﹶ ﺣ ﻊﹺ ﻄﹶ ﻗﻭ ﻞﹴ ﻠﱠﺒﻣ ﺏﹴ ﺍﺮﺘﺑﹺ ﺮﺒﻘﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﻮﻄﱠ ﻏﹶ ﺎﻤﻛ ﻒ ﻌﻀ ﺑﹺ ﺕ ﻮﺼ ﻟﺍ ﺮّﻤ ﺘﺳ ﺍ ﻢ ﻬﻀ ﻌﺑ ﺮﻈﹶ ﻧ ،ﺽﹺ ﺭ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺀِﺎﺸﺣ ﺃﹶ ﰲ ﻢﻬﻠﹶﻛ ﺎﺸﻣ ﺍﻮﻨﻓﹶﺩ ﺪﻗ ﻢ ﻬﻧّﺃﹶﻭ ،ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺕ ﻮ ﺻ ﺕ ﻮﻜﹸ ﺳ ﻦ ﻣ ﺍﻭﺪ ﻛﱠ ﺄﹶﺗ ﺎﻣ ﺪ ﻌﺑﻭ .ﺎﻧﺎﻛﹶ ﺩ ﺓﺪ ﻠﹾﺑ ﱃﺇﹺ ﻦ ﻳﺪ ﺋﺎﻋ ﺔﻴّﻔﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺔﺑﺎﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹶ ﻼﺧ ﺍﻮ ﺸ ﻣ ،ﻥ ﻮﻜﹸ ﺴ ﺑﹺﻭ ،ﻢ ﻬﹺﻣﺍﺪ ﻗﹾﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺍﻮﻓﹸﺮﺼ ﻧﺍ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﺾﹴ ﻌﺑ ﱃﺇ Self Assessment Exercise Identify the following elements in the story translated above: - The narrative style - The characters and - The setting 4.0 Conclusion The above passage is a translation of the story, “A Family Affair”.
It was observed in the original version of the story that the author, in constructing the story, combined between idiomatic and figurative expressions, hence making the story sound very fictitious and literary even in its Arabic version.
5.0 Summary 65 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] This unit was able to introduce to students one of Saro-Wiwa’s stories, “A Family Affair”; it proceeded by recognizing the objectives of the unit; and later presented an Arabic translation of the story.
Lessons derivable from the story include the following: - Moderation is necessary in the search for wealth - Patience is virtuous - Good reputation is better than silver and gold - Health is wealth - Wealth acquired from dubious means never lasts.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Translate the first paragraph of “A Family Affair” into Arabic using your own construction.
7.0 References/Further Readings Saro-Wiwa, Ken, (1986) “A Forest of Flowers” Saros International Publishers: Port Harcourt.
Wehr, Hans (1960) A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, Macdonald & Evans Ltd: London.
Hornby, A.S (2010) Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English, 8th Edition, Oxford University Press: Oxford.
66 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Unit 3: Translation of “Robert and the Dog” 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body: Translation of “Robert and the Dog” 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The previous unit showed the effort to make out an Arabic translation of a story from Saro-Wiwa’s anthology of stories entitled “A Forest of Flowers”.
In this unit too, we shall attempt a rendition, into English, of another story from the same collection.
However, what is important for students is to study how some words and expressions are selected in the target language to replace lexis of the first language in order to convey the intended meaning of the author.
2.0 Objectives On completion of this unit, students should be able to: - Identify the technique (s) applied in translating the story.
- Recognize how Arabic words are used in different contents to convey various meanings.
- Derive new lessons from the story.
3.0 Main Body: “Robert and the Dog” (The Original Version) Robert’s new employer was a young medical doctor just returned from abroad.
He was cheerful, exuberant and polite.
It was obvious to Robert that he had not been in the country for a long time.
Because he did not once lose his temper, he did not shout at Robert, he called him by his first name and always asked him about his wife, children and other members of his family.
Robert, accustomed to moving from household to 67 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] household, thought he had at last found fulfillment.
The more so as the young doctor appeared to be a bachelor.
Stewards, including Robert, prefer to serve a bachelor.
Because every bachelor is as wax in the hands of his steward.
The later determines what is to be spent on grocery, how much found is to be served at meat times, what is to be done with the remnants of food.
In short, he holds the bachelor’s life in his hands.
And hat is tremendous power.
Robert quickly settled into his new situation and took full control of the house.
Experience had taught him never to occupy the servants quarters which were attached to a situation rather messy.
So it was that Robert’s family lived in the filth and quagmire of Ajegunle which the wags termed The Jungle.
In his one bedroom apartment in The Jungle, Robert was king.
And he always repaired there nightly to exercise his authority over his wife and six children.
The experience he had gained in running his household helped him a great deal in organising the life of every new employer.
Robert was particularly happy in his new situation because the young man was carefree and happy.
There was, as has been said, no wife breathing down.
Robert’s neck and limiting his abundant authority.
There were no children whose nappies and numerous clothes had to be washed.
He did not have to cook several meals a day.
The young man ate but once a day, except for the cup of coffee and toast early in the morning.
Trouble began when the young man announced after six months that his wife was about to join him.
Robert’s face fell visibly at the announcement.
But he did not worry very much at the expected curtailment of his wide powers.
Who knew, the lady might not be an ogre after all.
Which is precisely what happened in the event.
The lady was as young and cheerful as her husband.
She too, took an interest in Robert.
She was European and excited about the first visit to Africa.
She appeared pleased to have Robert’s assistance.
She spent the day asking Robert about African food, watching Robert at work in the kitchen and lending a helping hand where possible.
She made sure Robert stopped work early so that he could get home to his family and did not make a fuss if Robert turned up late some odd mornings.
And she got Robert paid every fortnight.
She even offered to go and visit his wife and family in The Jungle.
Roberts carefully and politely turned down her offer.
He could not imagine her picking her neat way through the filth and squalor of The Jungle to the hovel which was his home.
Maybe, he thought, if she once knew where he lived and sampled the mess that was his home, her regard for him would diminish and he might lose his job.
Yet the young lady extended every consideration to him.
Robert began to feel like a human being, and he felt extremely grateful to his new employers.
68 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] The only source of worry in the new situation was the dog.
For the young lady had arrived with a dog, called Bingo.
And Robert watched with absolute amazement and great incredulity as the lady spoke tenderly to the dog.
As she ensured that he was well fed with tinned food and milk and meat and bones.
And she held the dog lovingly in her arms, brushed his hair and tended him carefully.
The dog appeared as important to the lady as her husband and, indeed, Robert thought, in the order of things, the dog was more important than himself.
Try as hard as he could, he could not dismiss from his mind the fact that the dog was doing better than himself.
And he detested this state of affairs.
He could understand a stray, mangy dog with flies around its ears being beaten and chased away from the dwellings of men.
He could understand a dog wandering around rubbish heaps in search of sustenance.
But a dog who slept on the settee, a dog who was fed tinned food on a plate, a dog who was brushed and cleaned, a dog who drank good tinned milk, was entirely beyond his comprehension.
On one occasion, the lady took the dog to a doctor.
And that was the straw that broke the camel’s back.
All that day, Robert felt his stomach turn.
And when he got home in the evening and saw his children with distended stomachs gamboling in the filth which simmered in a swollen stream at his door, and watched them hungrily swallow small balls of ‘eba’, he asked himself, ‘Who born dog?’ And all of a sudden he developed a pathological hatred for Bingo the dog, his master’s dog.
All night long, he saw in the eye of his mind, the dog cuddled in the warmth of the settee which he would have to clean and brush in the morning.
And he asked himself again and again ‘Who born dog?’ The object of Robert’s hatred was totally oblivious of the feelings which he bred in the cook-steward.
He reveled in the love of his master and mistress.
He ate his food with relish and wagged his tail in contended gratitude.
He loved and served the lady, doing as he was bid.
And he wagged his tail contentedly at Robert.
He slept in the day and kept watch over his owners at night.
But each wag of his tail was like so many pin- pricks in the heart of Robert who secretly vowed to ‘show’ the dog some day.
That day duly arrived and much sooner than Robert and expected.
The young doctor announced to him that they would be going away on holiday for six weeks.
He wanted Robert to take care of the house.
As they would not be traveling with the dog, he would be most delighted if Robert would be kind enough to take care of Bingo.
They were going to leave enough tinned food and milk for Bingo and some money so Robert could purchase bones to supplement his food.
He hoped Robert did not mind.
Not in the least, Robert replied.
But in his innermost heart, he knew he had found the opportunity he wanted.
After the departure of the couple, Robert, true to his training, obeyed his master’s orders to the letter.
On the first and second days.
On the third day, watching the dog lap his milk from a plate, a voice spoke to Robert.
‘Who born dog?’ 69 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] And to this ponderous question, Robert could find no other answer than ‘Dog’.
And the anger in him welled.
He looked at the dog, and the dog looked at him, wagging his tail.
Well may you wag your tail, Robert thought, but I can tell you, I’m not going to waste my life taking care of you.
He gathered up all the tins of dog food, all the tins of milk, tethered the dog to the settee and walked off, out of the house and the job he had loved to do.
He gave the milk and dog food to his children when he got home.
And the dog died.
Arabic Translation of “Robert and the Dog” ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﺕ ﺭ ﺎﺑﻭ ﺭ .ﺎﹰﻔﻴﻄ ﻟﹶ ﺎﹰﺒﻳﺩﺃﹶ ﺎﹰﻗﺰﹺﻧ ﺎﹰﺷﻮﺸ ﺑ ﻥﺎﻛﻭ .ﺔﺑﺮﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﺩﻼﺑﹺ ﻦ ﻣ ﺍﹰﺪﻳﺪ ﺟ ﺩﺎﻋ ﺎﹰﺒﻴﺒﹺﻃﹶ ﺎﹰﺑﺎﺷ ﺪ ﻳﺪﳉﺍ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭ ﺭ ﻒ ﻇﱢ ﻮﻣ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛ ﺕ ﺭ ﺎﺑﻭ ﺭ ﺪ ﺿ ﻂﱞ ﻗ ﻞﹾ ﻌﻔﹶﻨﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻪﻧﺄﻟ ،ﺔﻠﹶﻳﻮﹺﻃﹶ ﺓﺪ ﻤ ﻟ ﺩﻼﺒﹺﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻋ ﺏ ﺎﻏ ﺪﻗ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻪﻔﹶﻇﱢ ﻮﻣ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﺕ ﺭ ﺎﺑﻭ ﺮﻟ ﺢ ﺿ ﺍﻭﻭ ﻪﺗﺮﺳﺃﹸ ﻝﹺ ﺍﻮﺣ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻋ ﻪﻟﹸﺄﹶﺴ ﻳﻭ ،ﻝﹺ ﻭﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﻤ ﺳ ﺎﺑﹺ ﻪﻳﺩﺎﻨﻳ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛﻭ ،ﺕ ﺭ ﺎﺑﻭ ﺭ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺢ ﻴﺼ ﻳ ﻦ ﻜﹸ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ﻝﹴ ﺎﻌﻔﻧﺍ ﺀَﻮ ﺳ ﺮﹴﺧ ﺁ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻝﹴ ﺰﹺﻨﻣ ﻦ ﻣ ﻝﹺ ﺎﻘﺘﻧﺎﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺩﻮﻌﺗ ﺪﻗ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﺕﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭﻭ .ﻪﺗﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ﺀِﺎﻀﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺔﻴّﻘﺑﻭ ﺩﻻﻭ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﺝﹺ ﻭ ﺰﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ .ﺏ ﺰﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺐ ﻴﺒﹺﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ ﺏ ﺎﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻟﹶ ﺍﺪ ﺑ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺎﻤﻴﺳ ﻻ ،ﺍﹰﺮﻴﺧ ﺃﹶ ﺏ ﻮﻠﹸﻄﹾ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻑ ﺪ ﻬﻟﹾﺍ ﻖ ﻘﱠﺣ ﺪﻗ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻇﹶ ،ﻞﹺ ﻤ ﻌﻠﹾﻟ ﰲ ﻚﻟﺫ) ،ﻪﻣﺩﺎﺧ ﻱﺪ ﻳﺃﹶ ﰲ ﻊﹺ ﻤ ﺸ ﻟﺎﻛﹶ ﺏﹴ ﺰﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﻥﱠ ﺄﹶﻟ ﺏﹺ ﺰﻋ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺔﹶﻣﺪ ﺧ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻠﹸﻀ ﻔﹶﻳ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻢﻬﻴﻓ ﺎﲟ ﻡﺪ ﺨ ﻟﹾﺍﻭ ،ﺔﻟﹶﺎﻘﺒﹺﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻖﻔﹶﻨﻳ ﻢ ﻛﹶ ﺩﺪ ﺤ ﻳ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﻮﻫ ﻡﺩﺎﺨﻟﹾﺎﻓﹶ :(ﺏﹺ ﺰﻋ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺎﻬﺑﹺ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻌﺘّﻤ ﺘﻳ ﱵﻟﺍ ﺔﻟﹶﻮﻬﺴ ﻟﺍﻭ ﺔﻧﻭﺮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﲑ ﺑﹺﺪ ﺗ ﻩﺪ ﻴﺑﹺ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ،ﺭﹺﺎﺼﺘﺧ ﺎﺑﹺﻭ .ﻡﹺﺎﻌﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ ﺕ ﻼﻀ ﻔﹶﺑﹺ ﻞﹸ ﻌﻔﹾﻳ ﺍﺫ ﺎﻣﻭ ،ﺔﺒﺟ ﻭ ﻞﱢ ﻛﹸ ﺪﻨﻋ ﻡﺪ ﻘﻳ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﻡﹺﺎﻌﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ ﺭﺍﺪﻘﹾﻣﻭ .ﺓﹲﺮﻴﺒﹺﻛﹶ ﺔﹲﻄﹶ ﻠﹾﺳ ﻚﻟﺫﻭ ،ﺏﹺ ﺰﻋ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺔﺸﻴﻌﻣﻭ ﺓﺎﻴﺣ ﻻﹼ ﺃﹶ ﺔﹸﺑﺮﹺﺠ ﺘﻟﺍ ﻪﺘﻤ ﻠﱠﻋ ﺪﻗﻭ .ﺎﹰﻴﻠﻛﹸ ﻝﹺ ﺰﻨﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺮﹺﻴﺑﹺﺪ ﺗ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻚ ﻠﱠﻤ ﺗﻭ ﺪ ﻳﺪ ﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﻌﺿ ﻭ ﰲ ﺔﻋﺮﺴ ﺑﹺ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺮﻘﺘﺳ ﺍ ﻥﺎﻜﻓ ،ﺎﹰﻳﻮﹺﺿ ﻮ ﻓﹶ ﺍﹰﺮﻣﺃﹶ ﻊﹺ ﺿ ﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﺾ ﻓﹾﺭ ﻞﹶ ﻌﺟ ﺍﺬﹶ ﻫ ﻭ ،ﺲﹺ ﻴﺋﺮﻟﺍ ﻝﹺ ﺰﻨﳌﺍ ﱃﺇﹺ ﺖ ﻤ ﺿ ﱵﻟﺍ ﻡﹺﺪ ﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﻼﹼ ﺤ ﻣ ﰲ ﻦ ﻜﹸ ﺴ ﻳ ﺕ ﺍﺫ ﻪﺘﻘﱠﺷ ﰲﻭ .ﻞﹺ ﻏﹶ ﺪ ﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺭﺍﺬﹶ ﻬﳌﺍ ﺎﻬﻴﻤ ﺴ ﻳ ﱵﻟﺍ ﻲﻠﹶﻨﻐﻴﺟ ﺃﹶ ﻊﹺ ﻘﹶﻨﺘﺴ ﻣﻭ ﺔﺧ ﺎﺳﻭ ﰲ ﻦ ﻜﹸ ﺴ ﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺕﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺓﺮﺳ ﺄﹸﻟ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻪﺘﻄﹶ ﻠﹾﺳ ﺏ ﺮﺠ ﻴﻟ ﺔﻠﻴﻟﹶ ﻞﹼ ﻛﹸ ﺎﹰﻤﺋﺍﺩ ﻙ ﺎﹶﻨﻫ ﺡ ﺎﺗﺮﻳ ﻥﺎﻛﻭ ،ﺎﹰﻜﻠﻣ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻥﺎﻛ ،ﻞﹺ ﻏﹶ ﺪ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺓﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﺔﻓﹶﺮﻏﹸ ﻞﱢ ﻛﹸ ﺓﺎﻴﺣ ﺭﹺﻮﻣﺃﹸ ﺐﹺ ﻴﺗﺮﺗ ﰲ ﺍﹰﲑﺜﻛﹶ ﻪﺗﺪ ﻋ ﺎﺳ ﺪﻗ ﻪﻟﺰﹺﻨﻣ ﲑﹺ ﺑﹺﺪ ﺗ ﰲ ﺎﻬﺒﺴ ﻛﹶ ﱵﻟﺍ ﺔﹸﺑﺮﺠ ﺘﻟﺍﻭ .ﺔﺘﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻩﺩﻻﻭﺃﻭ ﻪﺘﺟ ﻭ ﺯ ﻝﹺ ﺎﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻲ ﻠﺧ ﻰﺘﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻥ ﻮ ﻜﹶ ﻟ ﺪ ﻳﺪ ﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﻌﺿ ﻭ ﰲ ﺔﹰﺻ ﺎﺧ ﺍﹰﺭﻭﺮﺴ ﻣ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻥﺎﻛﻭ .ﺪ ﻳﺪﺟ ﻒ ﻇﱢ ﻮﻣ ﺪ ﻴﺳ 70 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] .ﺓﲑﺒﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﺘﻄﹶ ﻠﹾﺳ ﺩﺪ ﺤ ﺗﻭ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭ ﺭ ﺮﻋ ﺎﺸﻣ ﺡ ﺮﺠ ﺗ ﺔﹲﺟ ﻭ ﺯ ﻰﺘﻔﹶﻟﺍ ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺲ ﻴﻟﹶ ﺎﹰﻘﺑﹺﺎﺳ ﺎﻨﻠﻗﹸ ﺎﻤﻛﻭ .ﺍﹰﺭﻭﺮﺴ ﻣﻭ ﺓﹰﲑﺜﻛﹶ ﺔﹰﻤ ﻌﻃﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺦ ﺒﻄﹾ ﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻟ ﺲﻴﻟﻭ .ﺓﲑﺜﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻢﻬﺑﺎﻴﺛﻭ ﻢﻬﺗﺎﻔﹶﺸ ﻨﻣ ﻒ ﻈﱠ ﻨﺗ ﺩﻻﻭﺃ (ﺐﻴﺒﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﱴﻔﻟﺍ) ﻩﺪﻨﻋ ﺲﻴﻟﻭ ﰲ ﺍﹰﺮﻛ ﺎﺑ ﻪﻟﹶﻭﺎﻨﺘﻳ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﺐﹺ ﺨ ﻨﻟﺍﻭ ﺓﻮﻬ ﻘﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺏﹺ ﻮﻛﹸ ﺀِﺎﻨﺜﹾﺘﺳ ﺎﺑﹺ ،ﻡﹺﻮﻴﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﻂﹾ ﻘﻓﹶ ﺓﹰﺮﻣ ﻞﻛﹸ ﺄﹾﻳ ﺏ ﺎﺸ ﻟﺎﻓﹶ ،ﺎﹰﻴﻣﻮ ﻳ .ﺡﹺ ﺎﺒﺼ ﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺲ ﺒﻋ ،ﻪﻴﻟﺇﹺ ﻢّ ﻀ ﻨﺘﺳ ﻪﺘﺟ ﻭﺯ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﺮﹺﻬﺷ ﺃﹶ ﺔﺘﺳ ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺏ ﺎﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻠﹶﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺔﹸﻠﹶﻜ ﺸﻣ ﺕ ﺃﹶﺪﺑ ﻻ ﺪﻗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻑ ﺮﻌﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﺓﹰﺩﻭﺪ ﺤ ﻣ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻜﹸ ﺘﺳ ﺓﹶﺮﻴﺒﹺﻜﹶ ﹾﻟﺍ ﻪﺘﻄﹶ ﻠﹾﺳ ﻥﹼ ﺃﹶ ﻊﹴ ﻗﱡﻮﺗ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺍﹰﲑﺜﻛﹶ ﻖ ﻠﹶﻘﹾﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻦ ﻜﻟ ،ﻥ ﻼﻋ ﻹِ ﺍ .ﺀٍﻲ ﺷ ﻞﱢ ﻛﹸ ﺪ ﻌﺑ (ﻻﹰ ﻮﻏﹸ) ﺔﹰﻴﻓﺍﺮﺧ ﺔﹰﻗﹶﻮﻠﺨ ﻣ ﺓﹸﺃﺮﳌﺍ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻜﺗ ﺐ ﺣ ﺎﹰﻀﻳﺃﹶ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺖ ﺒﺣ ﺃﹶﻭ ،ﺎﻬﺟﹺ ﻭ ﺰﻛﹶ ﺔﹰﺷﻮﺸﺑ ﺓﹰﺎﺘﻓﹶ ﺓﹸﺃﹶﺮﳌﺍ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ - ﺔﺛﹶﺩﺎﺤﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﻂ ﺒﻀ ﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺙﹶ ﺪ ﺣ ﺎﻣ ﺍﺬﻫﻭ ﺓﹶﺪ ﻋ ﺎﺴﻣ ﻞﹺ ﻴﻨﺑﹺ ﺓﹲﺪﻴﻌﺳ ﺎﻬﻧﺃﹶ ﻭﺪ ﺒﻳﻭ ،ﺎﻴﻘﻳﺮﹺﻓﹾﺃﹶ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻰﻟﹶﻭﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﺎﻬﺗﺭﺎﻳﺯﹺ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺔﹰﺴ ﻤ ﺤ ﺘﻣ ﺔﹰﻴﺑﹺﻭ ﺭﻭﺃﹸ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛﻭ .ﻪﻟﹶ ﺎﻬﺟﹺ ﻭﺯ ﰲ ﻞﹸ ﻐﺸ ﻨﻳ ﻮﻫﻭ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭ ﺭ ﺐ ﻗﺍﺮﺗﻭ ،ﺔﻴﻘﻳﺮﹺﻓﹾﹶﺃ ﺔﻠﹶﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻋ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻝﹸ ﺄﹶﺴ ﺗ ﻲ ﻫ ﻭ ﻡﻮ ﻴﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻀ ﻗﹶ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﱃﺇﹺ ﻊ ﺟﺮﻳ ﱴ ﺣ ﺍﹰﺮﻜﱢ ﺒﻣ ﻞﹺ ﻤﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻋ ﻒ ﻗﱠﻮﺗ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭ ﺭ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﺕ ﺪ ﻛﱠ ﺄﹶﺗﻭ .ﻦ ﻜﹶ ﻣﺃﹶ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ﻩﺪ ﻋ ﺎﺴﺗﻭ ﺦﹺ ﺒﻄﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺎﹰﻀﻳﺃﹶ ﺕ ﺪ ﻛﱠ ﺄﹶﺗ ﺎﻤﻛﹶ .ﺔﻘﹶﻴﻀ ﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺎﺣﺎﺒﺼ ﻟﺍ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﺭﹺﻮﻀﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺮﺧ ﺄﹶﺗ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﺝ ﺮﹺﻬ ﺒﺗ ﻦﻜﹸ ﺗ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﻪﺗﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ﻦﻜﻟ ،ﻞﹺ ﻏﹶ ﺪ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﻪﺗﺮﺳ ﺃﹸﻭ ﻪﺘﺟ ﻭﺯ ﺭﻭﺰﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻨﻣ ﺖ ﺒﻠﹶﻃﹶ ﺪﻗﻭ .ﲔﹺ ﻋ ﻮﺒﺳ ﺃﹸ ﻞﱢ ﻛﹸ ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺐﹺ ﺗﺍﻭﺭ ﻊﹺ ﻓﹾﺩ ﻦ ﻣ ﻲﺸ ﻤ ﺘﺳ ﺔﹶﻔﹶﻴﻈ ﻨﻟﺍ ﺓﹶﺃﺮﳌﺍ ﻩﺬ ﻫ ﻥﹼ ﺃﹶ ﻞﹶ ﻴّﺨ ﺘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻴﻠﹶﻋ ﺐ ﻌﺻ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ،ﺏﹴ ﺩﺃﹶﻭ ﺭﹴﺬﹶ ﺤ ﺑﹺ ﺐﹺ ﻠﹶﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺾ ﻓﹶﺭ ﺕ ﺃﹶﺭﻭ ﻪﺘﻴﺑ ﺖ ﻔﹶﺸ ﺘﻛﹾ ﺍ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﺎﻬﻧﺃﹶ ﻪﻨﻣ ﺎﹰﻨﻇﹶ ،ﻪﻨﻜﹸ ﺴ ﻳ ﻱﺬ ﻟﺍ ﺥﹺ ﻮﻜﹸ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻞﹺ ﻏﹶ ﺪ ﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺭﹺﺬ ﻘﹶﻟﺍ ﻥ ﺎﻜﻤ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﺮّﻤ ﺗﻭ .ﺐﹺ ﺒﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻬﺑﹺ ﻪﻠﹸﻤ ﻋ ﻪﻨﻋ ﻊ ﻴﻀ ﻳ ﺪﻗﻭ ،ﻪﻟﹶ ﺎﻬﻣﺍﺮﺘﺣ ﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻣ ﺍﺬﻫ ﺺ ﻘﻨﻴﺳ ،ﻪﻴﻓ ﻦ ﻜﹸ ﺴ ﻳ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﺲﹺ ﻴﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ/ﻰﺿ ﻮﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﻴﻔﻇﱢ ﻮﻣ ﺮﻜﺷ ﻭ ،ﺔﻴﻧﹺﺎﺴﻧﺈﹺﺑﹺ ﺶﺗﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺮﻌﺸ ﻳ ﺃﹶﺪ ﺒﻓﹶ ،ﺮﹴﻳﺪ ﻘﹾﺗﻭ ﻡﹴﺍﺮﺘﺣ ﺍ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﺓﹸﺃﺮﳌﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻪﻟﹶ ﺖ ﻣﺪ ﻗﹶ ،ﻚﻟﺫ ﻊﻣﻭ .ﻼﹰ ﻳﺰﹺﺟ ﺍﹰﺮﻜﺷ ﺩﺪ ﳉﹸ ﺍ ﺎﻬﻌﻣﻭ ﺖ ﻣﺪ ﻗﹶ ﺓﹶﺎﺘﻔﹶﻟﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺄﹶﻟ ،ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻮﻫ ﺪ ﻳﺪ ﺠﻟﹾﺍ ﻊﹺ ﺿ ﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﰲ (ﺕﺭﺎﺑﻭﺮﻟ) ﺪ ﻴﺣ ﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﻖﹺ ﻠﹶﻘﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺐ ﺒﺳ ﻥﺎﻜﻓ ،ﻥ ﺎﻨﺤ ﺑﹺ ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺙﹸ ﺪ ﺤ ﺗ ﻲ ﻫﻭ ﺓﹶﺎﺘﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭ ﺭ ﺐ ﻗﹶﺍﺭ ﻡﺎﺗ ﺏﹴ ﺎﻴﺗﺭ ﺍﻭ ﺓﲑﺒﻛﹶ ﺔﺸﻫ ﺪ ﺒﹺﻓﹶ ،"ﻮ ﻐﻨﺑﹺ" ﻰﻤ ﺴ ﻳ ﺐ ﻠﹾﻛﹶ ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻖ ﻧﹺﺎﻌﺗ ﻲﻫ ﻭ .ﻡﹴﺎﻈﻋ ﻭ ﻢﺤ ﻟﹶﻭ ﺐﹴ ﻴﻠﺣ ﻭ ﺐﹴ ﻠﱠﻌﻣ ﻡﹴﺎﻌﻄﹶ ﺑﹺ ﺍﹰﺪﻴﺟ ﻢ ﻌﻃﹾ ﺃﹸ ﺐ ﻠﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﹼ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﺕ ﺪ ﻛﹼ ﺄﹶﺗ ﺎﻬﻧﺃﹶ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ﺎﻬﻤّ ﻬﻳ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺓﹶﺎﺘﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻢ ﻬﻳ ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻭﺪ ﺒﻳﻭ .ﺭﹴﺬﹶ ﺤ ﺑﹺ ﻩﺎﻋﺮﺗﻭ ﻩﺮﻌﺷ ﻙ ﺮﻔﹾﺗﻭ ،ﻥ ﺎﹶﻨﺣ ﻭ ﺔﻗﹶﺮﹺﺑﹺ ﺎﻫﺪ ﻀ ﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻓ ،ﻪﻨﻣ ﺓﺎﺘﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺰﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻥﺎﻛ ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ - ﻊﹺ ﺿ ﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﻭﺪ ﺒﻳ ﺎﻤﻛﹶ - ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻦ ﻇﹶ ﺪﻗﻭ ،ﺔﹰﻘﻴﻘﺣ .ﺎﻬﺟ ﻭ ﺯ 71 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] .ﻥ ﺎﺴﻧﺈﹺﻛﹶ ﻮﻫ ﻪﺑﹺ ﻊ ﺘﻤ ﺘﻳ ﱵﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺮﺒﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺔﻳﺎﻨﻌﺑﹺ ﻊ ﺘﻤ ﺘﻳ ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﹼ ﺃﹶ ﺔﻘﻴﻘﺣ ﻦ ﻋ ﻞﹶ ﻓﹶﺎﻐﺘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺡﹴ ﺎﺠﻧ ﻥ ﻭﺪ ﺑﹺ ﻝﹶ ﻭﺎﺣ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ،ﻞﹺ ﻔﹾﻄﱢ ﻟﺍ ﻂﺋﺎﻏ ﻞﹺ ﻛﹾ ﺄﹶﻟ ﻯﺩﺎﻨﻳ ﺐﹴ ﻠﹾﻛﹶ ﺔﻳﺅ ﺭ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻜﻣﺇﹺ ﻢ ﻬﻔﹾﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻴﻠﻋ ﻞﹶ ﻬﺳ .ﺭﹺﻮﻣﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻊ ﺿ ﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻩﺮﹺﻛﹶ ﺪﻗﻭ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ،ﺱﹺ ﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺶﻨﻛ ﺎﺴﻣ ﻦﻋ ﺩﺮﻄﹾ ﻳﻭ ﺏ ﺮﻀﻳ ﻪﻴﻧﺫﹸﺃﹸ ﻝﻮﺣ ﺕ ﺎﺑﺎﺑﺫﹸ ﻊ ﻣ ﺏﹺ ﺮﳉﹶ ﺍ ﺽﹺ ﺮﻣ ﻱﺫ ﺩﺭﹺﺎﺷ ﺐﹴ ﻠﻛﹶ ﺔﻳﺅﺭ ﻡﺎﻨﻳ ﺐﹴ ﻠﻛ ﺔﹸﻳﺅﺭ ﻪﻴﻠﻋ ﺐ ﻌﺻ ﻦﻜﻟﹶ .ﺔﺸﻴﻌﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻋ ﺚ ﺤ ﺒﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺎﻳﺎﻔﻨﻟﺍ ﺕ ﻼﺘﻛﹸ ﻝﹶ ﻮ ﺣ ﻝﻮﺠﺘﻣ ﺐﹴ ﻠﻛ ﺔﻳﺅﺭ ﺎﹰﺒﻴﻠﺣ ﺏ ﺮﺸ ﻳ ﺐﹴ ﻠﻛﹶ ،ﻒ ﻈﱠ ﻨﻳﻭ ﻩﺮﻌﺷ ﻙ ﺮﻔﹾﻳ ﺐﹴ ﻠﻛﹶ ،ﻦﹴ ﺤ ﺻ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺔﹰﺒﻠﱠﻌﻣ ﺔﹰﻠﹶﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻌﻄﻳ ﺐﹴ ﻠﻛﹶ ،ﺄﻜﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺎﻬﻌﻣ ﺐ ﻠﻜﻟﹾﺍ ﺓﹸﺎﺘﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺬﹶ ﺧ ﺃﹶ ،ﺔﺒﺳ ﺎﻨﻣ ﻲﻓﻭ .ﺐﹺ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻞﹶ ﺜﻣ ﺔﹶﻳﺅﺭ ﻞﹶ ﻴﺨ ﺘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻴﻠﻋ ﺐ ﻌﺻ...ﺍﹰﺪﻴﺟ ﺎﺒﻠﱠﻌﻣ .ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻯﺪ ﻟﹶ ﻩﺎﻬﺘﻨﻣ ﺮﻣﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻎﹶ ﻠﹶﺑ ،ﺍﺬﻬﺑﹺﻭ ،ﺐﹴ ﻴﺒﹺﻃﹶ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﰲ ﻞﹶ ﺻ ﻭ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻭ .ﺪ ﻫ ﺎﺷ ﺎﻤ ﻣ ﺐﹺ ﻀ ﻐﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﻉﹺ ﻮﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺓﺪ ﺷ ﻦ ﻣ ﻦﹺ ﻄﹾ ﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻊﹺ ﺟ ﻮﺑﹺ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺮﻌﺷ ،ﻡﹺﻮﻴﻟﹾﺍ ﻚﻟﺫ ﻝﹶ ﻮﻃﹸ ﰲ ﻢ ﺨ ﻀ ﺗ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﺦﹺ ﺳ ﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﻥﹶ ﻭﺰﻔﻘﹾﻳ ﻢﻫﻭ ﻉﹺ ﻮﺠﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺔﻴﻟﺎﳋﺍ ﻥ ﻮﻄﺒﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﻪﺋﹶﺎﻨﺑﺃﹶ ﺪ ﺟ ﻭﻭ ،ﺀِﺎﺴﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ" ،ﻝﹶ ﺀَﺎﺴﺗ ،ﻉﹺ ﻮﺠﻟﹾﺍ ﺓﺪ ﺷ ﻦﻣ ،"ﺎﺒﻳﺃﹶ" ﺓﹶﺮﻛﹸ ﺓﹰﲑ ﻐﺻ ﺔﹰﻔﹶﻴﻔﻟﹶ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻌﻠﺘﺒﻳ ﻢﻫﺪ ﻫ ﺎﺷﻭ ،ﻪﻨﹺﻜﹶ ﺴ ﻣ ﺏﹺ ﺎﺑ ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺮﹴﻬ ﻧ ﰲ ﻯﺃﹶﺭ ،ﻞﹺ ﻴﻠﱠﻟﺍ ﻝﹶ ﻮﻃﹸ ﻭ .ﻩﻻﻮﻣ ﺐﹺ ﻠﹾﻛﹶ ،ﺐﹺ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍﹶ "ﻮ ﻐﻨﺑﹺ" ـﻟ ﺔﻴﺟﹺ ﻮﻟﹶﻮﺛﹶﺎﺑ ﻩﺮﻜﹸ ﺑﹺ ﺮﻌﺷ ،ﺓﹰﺄﹶﺠ ﻓﹸﻭ "؟ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺪ ﻟﹶﻭ ﻢ ﺛﹸ .ﺡﹴ ﺎﺒﺻ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﻪﻛﹸ ﺮﻓﹶﻭ ﻪﻔﹸﻴﻈ ﻨﺗ ﻪﺒﹺﺟﹺ ﺍﻭ ﻦﻣ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﺄﹶﻜﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺓﺭﺍﺮﺣ ﰲ ﻖ ﻧﺎﻌﻳ ﺐ ﻠﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﹼ ﺃﹶ ﻒ ﻴﻛﹶ ،ﻪﺒﹺﻠﹾﻗﹶ ﻦﹺ ﻴﻋ "؟ﺐ ﻠﻜﻟﺍ ﺪ ﻟﹶﻭ ﻦﻣ" :ﺭﺍﺮﻣ ﻝﹶ ﺀَﺎﺴﺗ ﺐ ﺣ ﰲ ﺡ ﺮﻤ ﻳ ﻮﻫﻭ ،ﺦﹺ ﺑﹺﺎﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ ﻡﹺﺩﺎﺨﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺎﻫﲑ ﺜﻳ ﱵﻟﺍ ﺮﻋ ﺎﺸﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺎﹰﻣﺎﻤﺗ ﻲ ﺴِ ﻧ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻩﺮﻛﹸ ﻉ ﻮﺿ ﻮ ﻣﻭ ﺎﻤﻛ ﺎﻬﻣﺪﺧ ﻭ ﺓﹶﺎﺘﻔﻟﹾﺍ ﺐ ﺣ ﺃﹶﻭ ،ﻊﹴ ﻨﹺﻘﹾﻣ ﺮﹺﻜﺷ ﰲ ﻪﻠﹶﻳﺫﹶ ﺰﻫ ﻭ ﺫﹶﺬﹼ ﻠﹶﺗﻭ ﺔﻬﻜﹾ ﻨﺑﹺ ﻪﻣﺎﻌﻃﹶ ﻞﹶ ﻛﹶ ﺃﹶ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ،ﻪﺗﺪ ﻴﺳ ﻭ ﻩﻻﻮﻣ ﻦ ﻜﻟﹶ .ﻞﹺ ﻴﻠﱠﻟﺎﺑ ﻪﻴﻜ ﻟﺎﻣ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺱ ﺮﺤ ﻳﻭ ﺭﹺﺎﻬﻨﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﻡﺎﻨﻳ ﻮﻬﻓﹶ ،ﺎﹰﻌﻨﹺﺘﻘﹾﻣ ﺍﹰﺮﻛ ﺎﺷ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﱃﺇﹺ ﻪﻠﻳﺫ ﺰﻫﻭ ،ﻪﻨﻣ ﻊ ﻗﹼﻮﺘﻳ .ﺎﻣ ﺎﻣﻮﻳ ﻪﺒﹺﻳﺩﺄﺘﺑﹺ ﺎﻳﺮﹺﺳ ﺭﺬﹶ ﻧ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺐﹺ ﻠﹾﻗﹶ ﰲ ﻡﹴﻵﺂﻛﹶ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﻪﻠﻳﺬﹶ ﻟ ﺓﺰﻫ ﻞﹼ ﻛﹸ ﻪﺟ ﻭﺯﻭ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﻪﻴﻠﹶﻋ ﺐ ﻴﺒﹺﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ ﺏ ﺎﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻠﹶﻋ ﺃﹶ .ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻊ ﻗﹼﻮﺗ ﺎﳑ ﺮﺜﻛﺃﹶ ﻼﹰ ﺟﹺ ﺎﻋ ﻦﻜﻟ ﻡﻮﻴﻟﺍ ﻚﻟﺫ ﺀﺎﺟ ،ﺍﹰﲑﺧﺃﹶﻭ ﻥﹶ ﻭﺬﺧ ﺄﹾﻳ ﻻ ﻢﻬﻧﺃﹶ ﺎﻤﻴﺳ ﻻ ،ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺪﻬﻌﺘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻦﻣ ﺪ ﻳﺮﻳ ﻮﻬﻓﹶ ،ﻊﻴﺑﹺﺎﺳﺃﹶ ﺔﺘﺳ ﺓﺪ ﻤ ﻟ ﺔﻠﻄﹾ ﻌﻟ ﻥﺍﺮﻓﺎﺴﻴﺳ ﺎﻴﻓﺎﻛ ﺎﹰﺒﻴﻠﺣ ﻭ ﺎﹰﺒﻠﹼﻌﻣ ﺎﻣﺎﻌﻃﹶ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻛﺮﺘﻴﺴ ﹶﻓ .ﻒ ﻄﹾ ﻠﹸﺑﹺ "ﻮﻐﻨﺑﹺ"ـﺑﹺ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻲ ﻨﹺﺘﻌﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻩﺮﺴﻴﻓ ،ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻢ ﻬﻌﻣ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻦﻣ ﻮﺟ ﺮﻳ ﻮﻬﻓﹶ .ﻪﻣﺎﻌﻃﹶ ﱃﺇ ﺔﹰﻓﹶﺎﺿﺇﹺ ﻡﹴﺎﻈﻋ ﺀِﺍﺮﺷ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻪﺑ ﲔﻌﺘﺴ ﻳ ﺎﺳ ﻮﺜﻠﻓﹸﻭ "ﻮﻐﻨﺑﹺ"ـﻟ .ﺮﻣﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﻰﻟﱠﻮﺘﻳﻭ ﻪﺒﹺﺘﻨﻳ 72 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﺔﺻ ﺮﻔﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﺪ ﺟ ﻭ ﺪﻗ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻌﻳ ،ﻪﺒﹺﻠﹾﻗﹶ ﻕﹺ ﺎﻤﻋ ﺃﹶ ﰲ ﻦﻜﻟ ،ﺏﹺ ﺎﺠﻳﻹِ ﺍ ﰲ ﺐﹺ ﻠﹶﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺏ ﺍﻮﺟ ﻥﺎﻛ .ﺮﻈ ﺘﻨﻳ ﺎﻤﻟﹶﺎﻃ ﱵﻟﺍ ﺔﺒﻴﹺّﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ .ﱐﺎﺜﹼﻟﺍﻭ ﻝﹺ ﻭﻷَ ﺍ ﻡﹺﻮﻴﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺎﹰﻣﺎﲤ ﻩﻻﻮﻣ ﺮﻣﺍﻭﺃﹶ ﻞﹶ ﺜﺘﻣﺍ – ﻪﺘﻴﺑﹺﺮﺘﻟ ﺎﹰﻘﻳﺪ ﺼ ﺗ - ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ،ﲔﹺ ﺟﻭ ﺰﻟﺍ ﺓﺭﺩﺎﻐﻣ ﺪ ﻌﺑﻭ ﺪ ﻟﹶﻭ ﻦﻣ" :ﻼﺋﺎﻗ ،ﺕ ﻮﺻ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺙﹶ ﺪ ﺣ ،ﻦﹴ ﺤ ﺻ ﻦ ﻣ ﻪﺒﻴﻠﺣ ﻖﻌﻠﹾﻳ ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﺍ ﺐ ﻗﺍﺮﻳ ﺎﻤﻛ ،ﺚ ﻟﺎﺜﹼﻟﺍ ﻡﹺﻮﻴﻟﺍ ﰲﻭ ،ﻪﺒﹺﻠﹾﻗﹶ ﰲ ﺐ ﻀ ﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻊ ﺒﻨﻓﹶ ،"ﺐﻠﹾﻛﹶ " ﻯﻮﺳ ﺎﹰﺑﺍﻮﺟ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﺪ ﺠﹺ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ،ﺮﹺﻄ ﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹺ ﺍﺆﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻭ "؟ﺐﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻡﻮﻴﻟﹾﺍ ﻚ ﻟﹶ ﻝﹸ ﻮﻗﺄﹶﺳ ﻦ ﻜﻟ ،ﻚ ﻠﹶﻳﺫﹶ ﺰﻬﺘﻟ :ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻝﹶ ﺎﻘﻓﹶ .ﻪﻠﹶﻳﺫﹶ ﺰّﻬﻳ ﻮﻫﻭ ﻪﻴﻟﺇﹺ ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺮﻈﹶ ﻧﻭ ،ﺐﹺ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺮﻈﹶ ﻧﻭ .ﻙ ﺎﻋﺭ ﺃﹶﻭ ﻚ ﺑﹺ ﻲﻨﹺﺘﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻲﺗﺎﻴﺣ ﻊ ﻴﹺّﺿ ﺃﹸ ﻦ ﻟﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺃﹶ ،ﺄﻜﹶ ﺘّﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﱃﺇﹺ ﺐ ﻠﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺩﺎﻗ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﺐﹺ ﻴﻠﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺢﹺ ﺋﺎﻔﺻ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﻭ ،ﺐﹺ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻡﹺﺎﻌﻃﹶ ﺕ ﺎﺒﻠﹾﻋ ﻞﹼ ﻛﹸ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺑﻭﺭ ﻊ ﻤ ﺟ ﺍﺬﻜﻫﻭ ﺔﹶﻤ ﻌﻃﹾ ﺃﹶﻭ ﺐ ﻴﻠﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹶ ﻭﺎﻧ ،ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻪﻟﻮﺻﻭ ﺪ ﻨﻋﻭ .ﻪﺒﺤﻳ ﻱﺬﻟﺍ ﻞﹶ ﻤ ﻌﻟﺍ ﺎﹰﻛﺭﹺﺎﺗﻭ ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺎﹰﺟﺭﹺﺎﺧ ﻑ ﺮﺼ ﻧﺍﻭ .ﻪﺋﺎﻨﺑﺃﹶ ﺎﻳﺇﹺ ﺐﹺ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ .ﺐ ﻠﹾﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺎﻣﻭ Self Assessment Exercise Write out some of the new Arabic vocabularies you have learnt in the translation above.
4.0 Conclusion The above Arabic passage is a translation of another story from the collection of Saro- Wiwa, “A Forest of Flowers”.
Though this story is shorter than the one translated in the previous unit, but the author was still able to maintain the style of writing, which includes using classical language and blending witticism with seriousness, yet picturing the happenings of his local community in an attempt to criticize them.
5.0 Summary This unit has introduced the students to another story entitled “Robert and the Dog” from the collection of the same author, Saro-Wiwa.
The story was also translated into Arabic and it treats the lavishness and extravagance of the socially and economically highly placed people who use their position to oppress the down-trodden or the poverty-stricken members of the society.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Bring out some of the derivable lessons from the story translated in this unit.
73 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] 7.0 References and Further Readings Saro-Wiwa, Ken, (1986) “A Forest of Flowers” Saros International Publishers: Port Harcourt.
Wehr, Hans (1960) A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, Macdonald & Evans Ltd: London.
Hornby, A.S (2010) Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English, 8th Edition, Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Unit 4: Translation of “Love Song of a Housewife” 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body: Translation of “Love Song of a Housewife” 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction The previous unit saw an Arabic translation of another story from Saro-Wiwa’s collection.
This unit will feature another one from the same collection.
The story is tagged “Love Song of a Housewife”.
It is a three page story and the sixteenth in the collection.
It falls among the stories that make up the second part of the collection.
It is important for students to critically study the author’s style of constructing stories and how he manages the components.
This will really help students acquire story writing skills.
2.0 Objectives It is expected that at the end of this unit, students should be able to: - Decode some English texts into Arabic language - Differentiate between humorous and serious narrative - Analyze narratives of varying lengths 3.0 Main Body: English text of “Love Song of a Housewife” I have waited here all evening for him to return so we can dine together.
But there is no sign of him.
I’d have phoned the office, but should I do so and he’s there, he’ll fly into a rage.
And should he not be there, my fears will have been confirmed.
Or will they?
74 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] The late nights he keeps these days cannot be because of his work.
I’m sure he is busy in another woman’s arms.
I have seen lipstick on his shirt several times.
I definitely found face-power all over his shirt-front.
I knew he was up to something.
But I couldn’t confront him.
And I kept on hoping I was wrong.
But I’m sure I’m not wrong.
Or am I?
He was always a deeply caring man.
I was proud of him and have lived for him, determined to live up to his high standards.
Ten years together and not one day have I looked at another man with desire.
I thought he’d be equally faithful to me.
Or has he been?
I cannot be said to have grown any worse.
Time has not taken much from me.
Indeed I should think I was even more desirable now, in my maturity.
A little more flesh here and there, some fat on the upper arms, but surely that was to be expected?
After three children.
Two boys, one girl.
And he always told me he didn’t want any more children.
I could have more children if he wanted them.
And I’m sure we’d be able to care for them.
I’d make any sacrifice that was needed.
I’m willing to do so.
God, I’m willing.
Whatever he says.
Whatever he wants.
If that will only stop him from dancing.
Or have I been too accommodating?
Too nice to him?
Would it have driven the lesson home to him if I’d nagged him some, challenged him some, called him to his senses?
Would that have helped?
What does he want?
What do men want?
You are a pretty, elegant, faithful, hard-working mother and wife; you have read all the books about how to keep a family happy and your husband contented; you know what he wants and you give it all to him; he does not ever show any signs of dissatisfaction with you, and yet?
What does he want?
Fun?
You’re willing to go to parties and nightclubs with him and you can dance as well as any other woman young or old.
What does he want?
I think I hear the sound of a car outside.
Yes, No, it’s not him.
And his food’s grown cold.
How I wish I could have my dinner all alone.
But habit has made me want to have him opposite me at table.
I’ve grown accustomed to him guzzling his drink; I love to hear him commend my cooking.
My cooking … Is that what he hates?
Does it bore him to have good food all the time?
But he’s never complained?
If he as much as raised a whimper of a protest, I’d go and purchase all the cookery books in the world and give him exactly what he wanted … Did I hear the telephone ring?
No.
my senses begin to deceive me.
Why won’t he call, just to let me know exactly where he is?
Frankly, I wouldn’t mind if he were at a cocktail party, or at the club or even in another woman’s house… Another woman’s house?
Really, it’s the suspense that bites.
Kills.
Suppose he’s had an accident on his way home?
What then?
Maybe I should call the hospital or the police?
I should make a fool of myself in public, you say.
Probably.
But at least it would ease the burden on my mind.
Or would it?
75 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] You know what I dread most?
That one day, I’ll hear he’s had a baby by some wretched young girl in some crummy part of town.
On, I should commit suicide.
No, wait … That will please some people, honour them.
And who’ll take care of my children?
No, not suicide.
Rather, I should get into my very best clothes, call up his dearest friend or his assistant in the office and offer to make love to them.
Make love to them.
That should serve him right.
Cut his ego to size.
The son-of-a-bitch.
Let him but bring a bastard to this house.
I’ll set the children on him!
Could I?
But suppose he were actually to inform me some day that he’s acquired a new wife?
After all, his friends are doing it, so why shouldn’t he?
Ugh, that would really mortify me.
To share his love on a regulated basis … It’s better to have him doing it quietly on the side rather than it institutionalized, programmed, time-tabled.
Monday, Wednesday, Friday, my turn.
Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday, hers.
And Sunday s?
God defend us against these terrible monsters!
Come to think of it, the Europeans do it better.
When you are fed up with each other, you cut the links, share the responsibilities and go and start all over again with someone else.
But the male beasts here just want it all their way.
The pigs!
Harems, harems.
Lord, why did you make women in so cruel a world?
Why will two, three or four of them want to share one man?
Can you see a man agreeing to share a woman with another man?
Yet most women do not think twice before doing it.
I thank God I’m not like other women.
If he dares, I’ll show him a thing or two.
Surely.
But wait.
What’s that I hear in his room?
Sounds like snoring.
Oh, he might have come in while I was having a shower and making myself desirable to him … Goodness, and his dinner is all cold!
He must have been mad at not seeing his dinner on the table when he arrived home.
How often he’s told me about that!
… Oh Lord, it’s him indeed, snoring away his hunger and anger!
Oh dear, oh dear … And to think I’ve been worrying myself stiff… ‘Honey!
Darling!
Wake up!
It’s dinner time.
Honey!
Please’ Arabic translation of “Love Song of a Housewife” ﺖ ﻴﺑ ﺔﺑﺭ ﻦﻣ ﺐﳊﹸ ﺍ ﺔﻴﻨﻏﺃﹸ ﺖ ﻨﻜﹸ ﻟﻭ ،ﻪﻣﻭﺪﻗﹸ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻞﹲ ﻴﻟﺩ ﻙﺎﻨﻫ ﺲﻴﻟ ﻦﻜﻟ ،ﺎﻌﻣ ﻰﺸ ﻌﺘﻧ ﻲ ﻜﹶ ﻟ ﻪﺗﺩﻮﻋ ﺮﻈ ﺘﻧﺃﹶ ﺀِﺎﺴﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹶ ﻮﻃﹸ ﺎﻨﻫ ﺖ ﻔﻗ ﺪﻘﻟ ﻦﹺ ﻋ ﺐ ﺋﺎﻏ ﻮﻫﻭ ﺖ ﻠﹾﺼ ﺗﺍ ﻥﺇﹺﻭ ،ﻰﻨﹺّﻋ ﺐ ﻀ ﻐﻴﺳ ﻪﻴﻓ ﺮﺿ ﺎﺣ ﻮﻫﻭ ﺖ ﻠﹾﻌﻓﹶ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﻦﻜﻟ ،ﺎﻴﻔﺗﺎﻫ ﻪﺒﹺﺘﻜﹾ ﻤ ﺑﹺ ﺖ ﻠﹾﺼ ﺗﺍ ﺐﹺ ﺒﺴ ﺑﹺ ﺖ ﺴ ﻴﻟﹶ ﻡﺎﻳﺄﻟﹾﺍ ﻩﺬﻫ ﻼﹰ ﻴﻟﹶ ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﺍ ﱃﺇ ﻩﺮﹺﺧ ﺄﹶﺗ ﺓﹶﺩﺎﻋ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ؟ﻚﻟﺬﻛ ﺲ ﻴﻟﺃﹶ ،ﺎﺘﺒّﺜﹶﻣ ﻲﻘﻠﹶﻗﹶ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻜﹸ ﻴﺳ ،ﺐﹺ ﺘﻜﹾ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺭﺍﺮﻣ ﻪﺼ ﻴﻤ ﻗﹶ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻩﺎﻔﺸ ﻟﺍ ﺮﻤﺣ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻳﺃﹶﺭ ﺪﻘﻟﻭ ،ﻯﺮﺧﺃﹸ ﺓﺃﺮﻣﺇ ﺪ ﻀ ﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻓ ﻝﹲ ﻮﻐﺸ ﻣ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﺪﻛﱢ ﺄﹶﺘﻣ ﻲﻧﺇﹺ .ﻪﻠﻐﺷ 76 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﺃﹸﺮﺠ ﺗﺃﹶ ﻻ ﻦﻜﻟ ،ﺐﹴ ﻳﺮﹺﻏﹶ ﺀٍﻲ ﺸ ﻟ ﻂﹸ ﻄﱢ ﺨ ﻳ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻧﺇﹺ ،ﻪﺼ ﻴﻤ ﻗﹶ ﻰﻠﻋ ﻪﺟﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﺭﻭﺭﺫﹶ ﺕ ﺪ ﺟﻭ ﺎﻤﻛﹶ ،ﺍﺭﺍﺮﻜﹾ ﺗﻭ ؟ﺮﺼ ﻘﹶﻣ ﺎﻧﺃ ﻞﹾ ﻫﻭ ،ﺍﹰﺮﺼ ﻘﹶﻣ ﺖ ﺴﻟ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻘﱢﻴﺘﻣ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺃﹶ ﲑ ﻏﹶ ،ﺮﺼ ﻘﹶﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺎﻧﺃﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻘﺘﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺕ ﺭ ﺮﻤ ﺘﺳ ﺎﻓﹶ ،ﻪﺘﻬﺟ ﺍﻮﻣ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺶ ﻴﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻥﺃ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺖ ﻣﺰﺣ ﻭ ،ﺖ ﻴﻴﺣ ﻭ ﻪﻟ ﺖ ﺸ ﻌﻓﹶ ﻪﺑﹺ ﺮﺨ ﻓﹾﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﻭ ،ﻪﺗﺮﺳ ﺄﹸﺑﹺ ﺎﻤ ﺘﻬ ﻣ ﻼﹰ ﺟ ﺭ ﻲﺿ ﺎﳌﺍ ﰲ ﻥﺎﻛ ﻂﱞ ﻗﹶ ﻪﺘﺷ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﺎﻌﻣ ﺕ ﺍﻮﻨﺳ ﺮﺸ ﻋ ﺎﻨﻴﻀ ﻗﹶ ﺪﻘﻟ .ﺎﻬﻴﻟﺇ ﻝﹸ ﻭﺎﻄﹶ ﺘﻳ ﻰﺘﻟﺍ ﺔﻴﻟﺎﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺎﻳﻮﺘﺴ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻖ ﻓﹾﻭ ﻲﺗﺎﻴﺣ ﺎﻴﺣ ﺃﹶﻭ ؟ﺎﺼ ﻠﺨ ﻣ ﻲﻟ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛ ﻞﹾ ﻫﻭ .ﺓﹰﺄﹶﻓﹶﺎﻜﹶ ﻣ ﺩﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻟ ﺺ ﻠﺨ ﻳ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻨﻨﻇﹶ ﻭ ،ﻪﻴﻓ ﺐ ﻏﹶ ﺭ ﺃﹶ ﱂﻭ ،ﺮﺧ ﺁ ﻼﹰ ﺟ ﺭ .ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﻦ ﻣﺰﻟﺍ ﻲ ﻠﹶﻋ ﻝﹺ ﻮﺘﺴ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ،ﻼﹰ ﺟ ﺭ ﻦ ﺘﻓﹾﺃﹸ ﻻ ﺪ ﺣ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻦﹺ ﺴ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺖ ﻣﺪ ﻘﹶﺗ ﺪﻗﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺃﹶ ﻝﹶ ﺎﻘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻜ ﻤﻳ ﻻ ﺎﹰﻤﺴ ﺟﹺ ﺕ ﺩﺩﺯ ﺍ ﺪ ﻗ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ،ﻲﻟﺎﻤﺘﻛﹾ ﺇﻭ ﻲﺠﹺ ﻀ ﻨﻟ ،ﺮﺜﹶﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻬﺘﺸ ﺗ ﻦ ﻤ ﻣ ﻡﺎﻳّﺄﻟﹾﺍ ﻩﺬ ﻫ ﻲﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﻯﺭﺃﹶ ،ﺔﹰﻘﻴﻘﺣ ﻦﹺ ﻳﺪ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﺩﻻﹶ ﻭﺃﹶ ﺔﺛﹶﻼﺛﹶ ﺏﹺ ﺎﺠﻧﺇﹺ ﺪ ﻌﺑ ؟ﻊ ﻗﱠﻮﺘﻳ ﺎﻤ ﻣ ﺍﺬﻫ ﺎﻌﺒﻃﹶ ،ﻉﹺ ﺭﺫﹾﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﻋ ﺔﹰﻤ ﺤ ﺷ ﺕ ﺩﺩﺯ ﺍﻭ ،ﻻﹰ ﺎﻤﺟ ﻭ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﻚﻟﺫ ﻦﻣ ﺮﺜﹶﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺐ ﺠﹺ ﻧﺃﹸ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻟ ﻦ ﻜ ﻤ ﻳ .ﺩﻻﻭ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺍﺪ ﻳﺰﹺﻣ ﺪ ﻳﺮﻳ ﺎﻣ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﺎﻤ ﺋﺍﺩ ﻲﻟ ﻝﹸ ﻮﻘﻳ ﻥﺎﻛﻭ .ﺖ ﻨﺑﹺﻭ ﷲُ ﺍ ﺎﻳ ،ﻚﻟﺬﻟ ﺓﺪ ﻌﺘﺴ ﻣ ﺎﻧﺃﹶ ،ﺮﻣﺄﻟﹾﺍ ﺐ ﻠﱠﻄﹶ ﺘﻳ ﺎﻣ ﻞﹼ ﻛﹸ ﻲﺤ ﺿ ﺄﹸﺳ ،ﻢﻬﺘﻳﺎﻋﺭﹺ ﻊ ﻴﻄ ﺘﺴ ﻧ ﺎﻨﻧﺃﹶ ﺎﻨﻴﻘﻳ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺫﹾﺇﹺ ،ﺐ ﻠﹶﻃﹶ ،ﺔﹰﻔﹶﻴﻄ ﻟﹶ ﻪﻟﹶ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ﻭ .ﻰﻧﺰﻟﺍﻭ ﻕﹺ ﺪ ﻧﺰﺘﻟﺍﻭ ﻖﹺ ﺴ ﻔﹶﺘﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻚﻟﺫ ﻪﻌﻨﻤ ﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺇﹺ ،ﻪﻴﺗﻭﺄﹸﺳ ﻲﻨﻣ ﺐ ﻠﹶﻃﹶ ﺎﻤﻠﱠﻛﹸ .ﺪ ﻳﺭﹺﺃﹸ ﻲﻧﺇﹺ ؟ﻞﻘﱡﻌﺘﻟﺍ ﱃﺇﹺ ﻪﺗﻮ ﻋﺩﻭ ﻪﺘﻳﺪ ﺤ ﺗ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ،ﺓﹰﺮﻣ ﻪﻴﻠﻋ ﺕ ﺮﻣّﺬﹶ ﺗ ﻮ ﻟﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻤ ﻬﻔﹾﻳ ﻞﹾ ﻫﻭ ؟ﻡﹺﺯﹺﻼﹼ ﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﺮﺜﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺔﹰﻨﺴِ ﺤ ﻣ ،ﺔﹰﻔﻳﺮﹺﻇﹶ ،ﺔﹲﺼ ﻠﺨ ﻣ ،ﺓﹲﺪ ﻬﹺﺘﺠ ﻣ ﺔﹲﺟ ﻭﺯ ،ﺖ ﻴﺑ ﺔﹸﺑﺭ ،ﻡﺃﹸ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ؟ﻝﹸ ﺎﺟﺮﻟﺍ ﺪ ﻳﺮﻳ ﺍﺫ ﺎﻣ ؟ﺪ ﻳﺮﹺﻳ ﺍﺫ ﺎﻣ ؟ﺊ ﻴﺷ ﰲ ﻚﻟﺫ ﻊ ﻔﹶﻨﻳ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ﺎﹰﻴﺿ ﺍﺭ ﻚ ﻠﹶﻌﺑ ﻞﹸ ﻌﺠ ﺗ ﻒ ﻴﻛﻭ ﺓﹰﺪ ﻴﻌﺳ ﺓﹶﺮﺳ ﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹸ ﻌﺠ ﺗ ﻒ ﻴﻛ ﻦ ﻋ ﺐﹺ ﺘﻜﹸ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﺕ ﺃﹾﺮﻗﹶ ﺪﻘﻟ ؛ﺔﹲﻠﹶﻴﻤ ﺟ ،ﺔﹲﻘﹶﻴﻧﹺﺃﹶ ﺎﻣ ؟ﻚﻟﺫ ﻊﻣﻭ ،ﻚ ﻨﻋ ﻂ ﺨ ﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺎﻣﻼﻋ ﻚ ﻟ ﺮﻬﹺﻈﻳ ﺎﻣ ﻮﻬﻓﹶ ؛ﻼﹰ ﻣﺎﻛ ﻩﺎﻳﺇﹺ ﻪﻨﻴﺗﺆﺗﻭ ﺪ ﻳﺮﹺﻳ ﺍﺫ ﺎﻣ ﲔ ﻓﺮﹺﻌﺗ ؛ﻚ ﻨﻋ ﻱ ﺄﹶﻛﹶ ﺺ ﻗﹾﺮﻟﺍ ﲔ ﻌﻴﻄ ﺘﺴ ﺗﻭ ،ﻪﻌﻣ ﺔﻴﻠﻴﻟﹶ ﻲﻫ ﻼﻣﻭ ﺕ ﻼﻔﹶﺣ ﺭﹺﻮﻀﺤ ﻟ ﺓﺪ ﻌﺘﺴ ﻣ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ؟ﺡ ﺮﻣ ،ﺔﹲﻴﻠﺴ ﺗ ؟ﻮﻫ ﺪ ﻳﺮﻳ ﺍﺫ ؟ﺪ ﻳﺮﻳ ﺍﺫﹶ ﺎﻣ ،ﺓﹰﺯﻮﺠ ﻋ ﻡﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﺓﹰﺎﺘﻓﹶ ،ﺔﺼ ﻗﺍﺭ ﻯﺮﺧ ﺃﹸ ﺓﺃﹶﺮﻣﺇ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻊ ﻴﻄﺘﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻮ ﻟﹶ ﻲﻨّﻤ ﺗﺃﹶ .ﻪﻣﺎﻌﻃ ﺩﺮﹺﺑ ﺪ ﻗﻭ .ﻮﻫ ﺲ ﻴﻟﹶ ،ﻻ .ﻢ ﻌﻧ .ﺝﹺ ﺭﹺﺎﺨﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺓﺭﺎﻴﺳ ﺕ ﻮﺻ ﻊ ﻤ ﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺄﹶﻛﹶ ﻢ ﻬﹺﺘﻠﹾﻳ ﻮﻫﻭ ﻪﻴﻟﺇﹺ ﺮﻈﹶ ﻨﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺩﻮﻌﺗ ﺪ ﻗﻭ ،ﺀِﺎﺸﻌﻟﺍ ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻲﺘﻟﹶﺎﺒﻗﹸ ﻩﺍﺭﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺕ ﺩﻮّﻌﺗ ﺪ ﻘﹶﻟ ﻦ ﻜﻟ ،ﻱﺪ ﺣ ﻮﻟ ﻰﺸ ﻌﺗﺃﹶ ﱡﻞﻤ ﻳ ﻮﻫ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ؟ﻩﺮﻜﹾ ﻳ ﺎﻣ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﻞﹾ ﻫ...ﻲﺨ ﺒﻃﹶ .ﻲﺨ ﺒﻃﹶ ﺡ ﺪ ﻤ ﻳ ﻮﻫﻭ ﻪﻴﻟﺇﹺ ﻊ ﻤ ﺘﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺐّ ﺣ ﺃﹸﻭ ؛ﻪﺑﺍﺮﺷ ﻭ ﻪﻣﺎﻌﻃﹶ 77 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ،ﻲﺨ ﺒﻃﹶ ﺏﹺ ﻮﻠﹸﺳﺃﹸ ﺪ ﺿ ﺽﹺ ﺍﺮﺘﻋ ﺎﺑﹺ ﻡﺎﻗ ﻮ ﻟﹶﻭ .ﻂﱞ ﻗﹶ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﻚ ﺸ ﺘﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻦ ﻜﻟ ؟ﺓﺮﻣ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﺔﹰﻴﻬﹺﺷ ﺔﹰﻠﹶﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻝﹶ ﻭﺎﻨﺘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ...ﺕ ﺎﺒﺟ ﻮﻟﺍ ﻦﻣ ﻲﻬﹺﺘﺸ ﻳ ﺎﻣ ﻪﻟ ﺖ ﺨ ﺒﻄﹶ ﻟﹶﻭ ﻢﹺ ﻟﹶﺎﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺦﹺ ﺒﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻓﹶ ﻦ ﻋ ﺐﹺ ﺘﻜﹸ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﺖ ﻳﺮﺘﺷ ﺍﻭ ﺖ ﺒﻫ ﺬﹶ ﻟﹶ ﻦ ﻳﺃﹶ ﻂ ﺒﻀ ﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺎﻴﻔﺗﺎﻫ ﻲﺑﹺ ﻞﹸ ﺼ ﺘﻳ ﻻ ﺍﺫﺎﳌﻭ .ﻲﻨﹺﻋﺪ ﺨ ﺗ ﻲﺘﺳ ﺎﺣ ﺕ ﺃﹾﺪ ﺑ .ﻻ ؟ﻒ ﺗﺎﻬﻟﹾﺍ ﲔ ﻧﹺﺭ ﺖ ﻌﻤ ﺳ ﻮﻫ ﻮ ﻟﹶﻭ ﻰﺘﺣ ،ﻰﻬﻠﹾﻣ ﰲ ﻮﻫ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ،(ﺔﻃﹶ ﻮﻠﹸﺨ ﻣ) ﻞﹺ ﻴﺘﻛ ﻮ ﻛﹶ ﺔﻠﹶﻔﹾﺣ ﻲﻓ ﻮﻫ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﻖ ﻠﹶﻗﹾﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻟﹶ ﻲﻧﺇﹺ ،ﺔﹰﺣ ﺍﺮﺻ ؟ﻮﻫ ...ﻯﺮﺧ ﺃﹸ ﺓﺃﹶﺮﻣﺇﹺ ﺖ ﻴﺑ ﻲﻓ ﻪﻟ ﺖ ﺛﹶﺪ ﺣ ﻮ ﻟﹶ ﺽ ﺮﹺﺘﻓﹾﺍ ،ﻞﹸ ﺘﻘﹾﻳﻭ ﻱﺫﺆ ﻳ ،ﺮّﻀ ﻳ ﺀٌﻲ ﺷ ﺐ ﱡﻗﺮﺘﻟﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ،ﺔﻘﹶﻴﻘﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ ؟ﻯﺮﺧ ﺃﹸ ﺓﺃﹶﺮﻣﺇ ﺖ ﻴﺑ ﰲﹺ ﺖ ﻠﹾﺼ ﺗﺍ ﻮ ﻟﹶ ﻦﹺ ﺴ ﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻜﹸ ﻳ ﻪﻠﱠﻌﻟﹶ ؟ﻚﻟﺫ ﻊ ﺒﺘﻴﺳ ﺍﺫ ﺎﻣ ؟ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﱃﺇﹺ ﻪﻘﻳﺮﹺﻃﹶ ﰲ ﺕ ﺍﺭﺎﻴﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻡﹺﺍﺪﻄ ﺻ ﺍ ﺔﹸﺛﹶﺩﺎﺣ ،ﻞﱢ ﻗﹶﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻦ ﻜﻟ .ﺍﺭﺎﻬﺟﹺ ﺔﻗﹶﺎﻤﺤ ﻠﹾﻟ ﺔﹰﺿ ﺮﻋ ﻲ ﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﻞﹸ ﻌﺟ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻧّﺃﹶ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻲﻨﹺﻌﻳ ﺲﻴﻟﺃ ؟ﺔﻃﹶ ﺮﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻭﹺﺃﹶ ﻰﻔﹶﺸ ﺘﺴ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ؟ﻚﻟﺬﹶ ﻛﹶ ﺲ ﻴﻟﹶﺃﹶ .ﻲﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﻲﻓ ﻖ ﻠﹶﻘﹶﻟﺍﹾ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﻒ ﻔّﺨ ﻴﺳ .ﺪﻠﹶﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻖﹴ ﻴﺤ ﺳ ﺀٍﺰﺟ ﰲ ﺓﺎﺘﻓﹶ ﻦﻣ ﺍﹰﺪﻟﹶﻭ ﺐ ﺠ ﻧﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻗ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﺎﹰﻣﻮﻳ ﻊ ﻤ ﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻮﻫ ؟ﺮﺜﻛﹶ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻋﺰﹺﻔﹾﻳ ﺍﺫﺎﻣ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻌﺗ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ﻡﻮﻘﹸﻴﺳ ﻱﺬ ﻟﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻣﻭ .ﻢﻬﻣﺮﻜﹶ ﻴﺳ ﻭ ،ﺱﹺ ﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻲﺿ ﺮﻴﺳ ،ﺮﻈ ﺘﻧﺍ ،ﻻ .ﻲﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﺮﺤ ﺘﻧﺄﹶﺳ ،ﷲِ ﺍ ﻥﹶ ﺎﺤﺒﺳ ﻱﺩﺎﻧﺃﹸ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﻲﻳﺯﹺ ﻞﹺ ﻤ ﺟ ﺄﹶﺑﹺ ﻦ ﻳﺰﺗﺃﹶ ﺽ ﻭﺮﻔﹾﻣ ،ﻼﹶ ﺑ .ﻞﱡ ﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻮﻫ ﺭﺎﺤﺘﻧﻻ ﺍ ﺲ ﻴﻟﹶ ،ﻻ ؟ﻢﻬﹺﺘﻴﺑﹺﺮﺗﻭ ﻱﺩﻻﻭ ﺃﹶ ﺔﻳﺎﻋﺮﹺﺑﹺ ﻩﺆﻓﺎﻜﻴﺳ ؟ﻢﻬﻌﻣ ﺔﻌﺟ ﺎﻀﻤ ﻟﹾﺍﹶ ،ﻲﻌﻣ ﺩﺎﺴﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﱃﺇﹺ ﻢ ﻬﹺﻳﺮﹺﻏﹾ ﺃﹸ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ﻪﺒﹺﺘﻜﹾ ﻣ ﰲ ﻩﺪ ﻋ ﺎﺴﻣ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻴﻠﻋ ﻪﻘﻳﺪ ﺻ ﺰﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ﻭ !ﺩﻻﻭ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﻪﻤ ﺻ ﺎﺧﺄﹸﺳ ،ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﱃﺇﹺ ﻢﹴ ﻴﻧﹺﺰﺑﹺ ﺕ ﺄﹾﻳ ،ﻪﻋ ﺩ ،ﺔﻴﻐﺑ ﻦ ﺑ ،ﻪﺘﻴﻧﹺﺎﻧﺃﹶﻭ ﻪﻤ ﻠﹾﻇﹸ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ؟ﻊ ﻴﻄ ﺘﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻪﺋﹶﺎﻗﺪ ﺻ ﺃﹶ ﻥﹼ ﺇﹺ ﻝﹸ ﺎﺤﻟﹾﺍﻭ ،ﻚﻟﺫ ﰲ ﺔﹰﺑﺍﺮﻏﹶ ﻼﻓﹶ ؟ﺓﺪ ﻳﺪ ﺟ ﺓﺃﺮﻣﺎﺑﹺ ﺝ ﻭﺰﺗ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﺎﹰﻣﻮ ﻳ ﻲﻧﹺﱪ ﺧ ﺃﹶ ﻮ ﻟﹶ ﺭ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ﻦ ﻜﻟ ﺓﺃﹶﺮﻣﺍ ﻊ ﻣ) ﻪﺒﺣ ﻢ ﺳ ﺎﻘﺗﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ،ﺕ ﻮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻟ ﺐ ﺒﺴ ﻴﺳ ،ﻚ ﻟﺫ ،ﷲِ ﺍ ﻥﺎﺤﺒﺳ ؟ﻮﻫ ﻪﻠﹸﻌﻔﹾﻳ ﻻ ﺍﺫﺎﳌﻭ ،ﻪﻧﻮﻠﹸﻌﻔﹾﻳ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺎﹰﺠﻣﺮﺒﻣ ﻪﺑﹺ ﺮﻬﺠ ﻳ ﻻﻭ ﺍﺮﺳ ﻲ ﻧﹺﺰﻳﻭ ﺮﺠ ﻔﹾﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻟ ﻦ ﺴ ﺣ ﻷَ ﺎﻓﹶ...ﺐﹺ ﻴﺗﺮﺘﻟﺍﻭ ﻢﹺ ﻴﻈ ﻨﺘﻟﺍ ﺱﹺ ﺎﺳﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﻋ (ﻯﺮﺧ ﺃﹸ ﻡﻮﻳﻭ ،ﺀِﺎﺛﻼﺜﹼﻟﺍ ﻡﻮﻳ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻜﻳﻭ ،ﺎﻧﺃﹶ ﻱﺭﹺﻭﺩ ﺔﻌﻤﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻡﻮﻳﻭ ،ﺀِﺎﻌﺑﺭ ﺄﻟﹾﺍ ﻡﻮﻳﻭ ،ﲔﹺ ﻨﺛﹾﻹﺍ ﻡﻮﻳ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻜﻴﻓﹶ ،ﻝﹺ ﻭﺪ ﺠ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺀِﻻﺆﻫ ﺮّﺷ ﺎﻨﻋ ﻊ ﻓﺍﺪﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﷲَ ﺍ ﻮﺟ ﺮﻧ ؟ﻦ ﻣ ﺭﻭ ﺩ ﺪ ﺣ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻡﺎﻳﺃﹶ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻜﹸ ﺗﻭ .ﻲ ﻫ ﺎﻫﺭﻭ ﺩ ﺖ ﺒﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻡﻮﻳﻭ ،ﺲﹺ ﻴﻤ ﳋﹶ ﺍ 78 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﻕﹺ ﺮﱡﻄﻟﺍ ﻦ ﺴ ﺣ ﺃﹶ ﺍﻮﻓﹸﺮﻋ ﲔ ﻴﹺّﺑﹺﻭﺭﻭﻷُ ﺍ ﻥﹼ ﺃ ﺮﺗ ،ﺮﹺﻣﻷَ ﺍ ﰲ ﺮﻜﱢ ﻓﹶﻭ !
(ﻝﹺ ﺎﺟﺮﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﻥﹶ ﻮ ﻤ ﺴ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍﹶ) ﺔﺒﻋ ﺮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺓﺫﱠﺎﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻖﹺ ﺋﻼﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻢ ﺳ ﺎﻘﺘﺗ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ﺎﻬﻌﻣ ﺕ ﺎﻗﻼﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﻊ ﻄﹶ ﻘﹾﺗ ،ﻚ ﺟﹺ ﻭﺰﺑﹺ ﺖ ﻠﹾﻠﹶﻣ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ .ﻕﹺ ﻮﺴﻔﹸﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﺭﹺﻮﺠﻔﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﺔﺳ ﺭﺎﻤﻤ ﻟ ﺺﹴ ﺨ ﺷ ﻊ ﻣ ﺓﺪ ﻳﺪ ﺟ ﺔﻴﻣﺍﺮﻏﹶ ﺔﻗﹶﻼﻋ ﰲ ﺃﹶﺪ ﺒﻳ ﻰﺘﺣ ﻪﻘﹶﻳﺮﻃﹶ ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﱡﻞﻛﹸ ﺐ ﻫ ﺬﹾ ﻴﻓﹶ ﺎﻬﻨﻴﺑﻭ ﻚ ﻨﻴﺑ ﺕ ﺎﻴﻟﻮﺌﹸﺴ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ،ﺕ ﺎﻣﺮﺤ ﻟﹾﺍﹶ !ﺮﻳﺯﹺﺎﻨﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ .ﺀِﺎﺴﻨﹺّﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﲔ ﻣﺍﻮﻗﹶ ﺎﹰﻤﺋﺍﺩ ﺍﻮﻧﻮﻜﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻥﹶ ﻭﺪ ﻳﺮﻳ ﻢ ﺋﺎﻬﺒﻟﺍ ﻝﹶ ﺎﺟﺮﻟﺍ ﺀِﻻﺆﻫ ﻦ ﻜﻟﹶ .ﺪ ﻳﺪﺟ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ﺀٍﺎﺴﻧﹺ ﺙﹸ ﻼﺛﹶ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ،ﻥ ﺎﺗﺃﹶﺮﻣﺍ ﻰﺿ ﺮﺗ ﺍﺫﺎﳌ ؟ﺔﺌﻴﹺّﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺎﻴﻧﺪ ﻟﺍ ﻩﺬ ﻫ ﰲ ﺀَﺎﺴﻨﻟﺍ ﺖ ﻘﹾﻠﹶﺧ ﺍﺫﺎﻤﻟ ،ﷲُ ﺍ ﺎﻳ .ﺕ ﺎﻣﺮﺤ ﻟﹾﺍﹶ ﻞﹴ ﺟ ﺭ ﻊ ﻣ ﺓﹰﺃﺮﻣﺍ ﻢ ﺳ ﺎﻘﺘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻰﺿ ﺮﻳ ﺍﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻼﹰ ﺟ ﺭ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻂﹲّ ﻗﹶ ﺖ ﻌﻤ ﺳ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ﻭ .ﺍﹰﺪﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻼﹰ ﺟ ﺭ ﻦ ﻤ ﺳ ﺎﻘﺘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻊ ﺑﺭ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﷲَ ﺍ ﺮﻜﹸ ﺷ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻧﺇﹺﻭ .ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻞﹴ ﺟ ﺭ ﻢﹺ ﺳ ﺎﻘﺗ ﻲﻓ ﻥﹶ ﻭﺩﺩﺮﺘﻳ ﺎﻣ ﺀِﺎﺴﻨﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺍﲑ ﺜﻛﹶ ﻥﱠ ﺈﻓﹶ ،ﻚﻟﺫ ﻊ ﻣﻭ ؟ﺮﹺﺧ ﺁ .ﺪﻴﻛ ﺃﹶ ،ﻪﺑﺩﺅﺄﹸﺳ ﻯﺮﺧ ﺃﹸ ﺓﺃﹶﺮﻣﺎﺑﹺ ﺝ ﻭﺰﺘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻲﺟﹺ ﻭ ﺯ ﺮﺳ ﺎﺠﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺇﹺ .ﺮﹺﺧ ﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﺀِﺎﺴﻨﹺّﻟﺎﻛﹶ ﺖ ﺴ ﻟﹶ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹶ ﺧ ﺩ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ﺎﻤﺑﺭ ،ﷲِ ﺍ ﻥﹶ ﺎﺤﺒﺳ ،ﻂﹲ ﻴﻄ ﻏﹶ ﻪﻧﺄﻛﹶ ؟ﻪﺘﻓﹶﺮﻏﹸ ﻦﻣ ﻪﻌﻤ ﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻱﺬ ﻟﹼﺍ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﺎﻣ .ﺮﻈ ﺘﻧﺍ ،ﻦ ﻜ ﻟﹶ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﻚ ﺷ ﻻ !ﺎﹰﻣﺎﻤﺗ ﻩﺅﺎﺸﻋ ﺩﺮﹺﺑ ﺪ ﻗﻭ ،ﷲِ ﺍ ﺾﻧﺎﺤﺒﺳ ...ﻲﻨﹺﻬﹺﺘﺸﻳ ﻲ ﻜﹶ ﻟ ﻲ ﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﺰﻬﺟ ﺃﹸﻭ ﻢ ﺤ ﺘﺳ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﻪﻧﺇﹺ ،ﷲُ ﺍ ﺎﻳ...!ﻪﺘﺌﹶﻴﹺﻬ ﺘﺑﹺ ﻲﻨﹺﻴﺻ ﻮﻳ ﺎﻣ ﺍﲑ ﺜﻛﹶ ﻭ .ﺖ ﻴﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﻪﺗﺩﻮﻋ ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺔﻟﹶﻭﹺﺎﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻪﺋﹶﺎﺸ ﻋ ﺪ ﺠﹺ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﺫﹾﺇﹺ ﻂﹶ ﺨ ﺳ ﻱﺬ ﻟﺍ ﻖﹺ ﻠﹶﻘﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺬﻬﻟ ﻲ ﻋ ﺍﺩ ﻼﻓﹶ...ﻱﺰﹺﻳﺰﹺﻋ ﺎﻳ ،ﻱﺰﹺﻳﺰﹺﻋ ﺎﻳ !ﺐﹺ ﻀ ﻐﻟﺍﹾﻭ ﻉﹺ ﻮ ﺠﻟﹸﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻂ ﻴﻄ ﻐﺑﹺ ﺔﻓﹶﺮﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﻢ ﺋﺎﻨﻟﺍ ﻮﻫ ...ﻲ ﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﻪﺑﹺ ﺖ ﺠ ﻋ ﺯ ﺃﹶ "!ﻲﺒﹺّﺣ ﺎﻳ ﺀِﺎﺸﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻗﹾﻭ ﻥﹶ ﺎﺣ ﺪ ﻗﹶ !ﻆﹾ ﻘﻴﺘﺳ ﺍ !ﻱﺰﹺﻳﺰﹺﻋ ﺎﻳ !ﻲﺒﹺﻴﺒﹺﺣ ﺎﻳ" Self Assessment Exercise What did you learn from the story above?
4.0 Conclusion The Arabic passage above is a translation of yet another story from “A Forest of Flowers”.
The story is a romantic narrative picturing the marital life of a couple.
The author’s main idea is that unnecessary suspicion of the other party in a marital relationship is capable of ruining the home.
Further, we are made to understand that narrow-mindedness of most women in matters related to polygamy is often the cause of many broken homes.
5.0 Summary 79 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] We have been able to read and decipher another English story into Arabic in this unit.
The story borders on issues of love, romance and marriage - we saw how a housewife almost destroyed her marriage due to unwarranted assumptions and suspicions she nursed in her mind against her husband.
And these contemplations eventually caused worries and fear for the housewife who later found out that she had been engaging in mere illusory thinking.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Translate the following short story into Arabic: “My Passion, My Life” Every morning I excitedly get out of bed.
Just a few minutes of goals and visions for the day swirl in my head.
No lingering for me, no alarm, no wishful notes too.
Just me in my night gown with no hat.
I sit down to enter my dreams and what can notes.
In my journal entries that began long ago with a tiny book and its lock and key.
I used to dwell on all the icky things back then but now I write God with my cheers and glees instead.
I remember the days I knew not whether I was going to live or die.
I also never thought I'd see why cancer came by.
I'm glad I had cancer because today I like the who I've become.
Which would have never occurred had it not appeared.
If I dwell, I can remember the day of an accident that left me in a wheel chair for years.
Because I know if I do, today there will be a lot of have nots and heart of tears too.
As a coach I've been trained to be in the present moment with me.
Thank goodness for apple trees.
For if it had not been for growing things fresh air would not have been.
And I would not be able to enjoy breathing it all in.
Next I write wisdom, only wisdom that I can share.
I know that someone will be here and be inspired because I'd cared.
I travel through my day with a soul of glee.
Knowing, really knowing, this is the right place for me to be.
The excitement occurs when I pick up my pen and get the surprise of how far it’s all come.
I know there were days long ago when I dreaded my day.
I'm glad, I'm glad, there aren't none of them anymore.
For when their inklings first appear, I now have the training and support to make them disappear.
Coaching made me work so that I can appear.
When I crawl under the covers at night, I smile with prayer at the difference I made in everyone’s life this day.
Just because I was there.
Before I drift off to sleep my sugar 80 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] plums swirl with what next I can do with my pen.
I nod off to sleep, gracefully and slow, lingering on the stories yet to be told.
Occasionally there is a 2 am up.
Just because what was swirling before needs to be said.
So I honor the time with my pen and then its back to la-la-land I go.
I'm so glad of my passion, my life.
It allows everything to be said.
After my last eye lid shutter, my last thought is tomorrow’s putter.
7.0 References/Further Readings Saro-Wiwa, Ken, (1986) “A Forest of Flowers” Saros International Publishers: Port Harcourt.
Wehr, Hans (1960) A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, Macdonald & Evans Ltd: London.
Hornby, A.S (2010) Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English, 8th Edition, Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Catherine Franz, http://www.abundancecenter.com Unit 5: Translation of “A Caring Man” 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body: Translation of “A Caring Man” 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Lessons in the Arabic-English translation module certainly must have opened your eyes to secrets of translation.
You also may have by now been familiar with techniques of English-Arabic translation.
What you have taken in this module is supposed to complement the lessons contained in the former; hence, you should try to harmonize instructions in the two modules for your optimum benefits.
This unit is however, going to showcase another story by our author, Saro-Wiwa, it is titled “A Caring Man”.
2.0 Objectives 81 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] On completion of this unit, students are expected to: - Have mastered the art of translation to a reasonable level.
- Attempt constructing short stories in both languages (i.e.
English and Arabic) - Be dynamic in their style of writing and translating.
3.0 Main Body: Translation of “A Caring Man” “A Caring Man” - The Original Version I knew he was having affairs on the side.
But I hardly thought he would prove so very degenerate, humiliating me into the bargain.
You know how it is.
You are holding down a full-time job just to make ends meet in these hard, difficult times.
So you cannot do the household chores alone.
And when you have two little girls into the bargain, housekeeping and mothering become quite a nightmare.
So naturally you need help.
And your help had better be a girl because then she becomes a friend to your little ones.
Dani never did take an interest in these domestic details.
He always thought and said it was entirely my responsibility.
And I agreed with him.
That was how Ayo came to live with us.
Ayo was a skinny, spindly-legged girl just approaching puberty when she came to us.
I took one look at her and decided there and then that before she could say one word to me, I’d have to give her a thorough bath.
Which I did.
And after I gave her some of my old clothes, she looked more presentable.
She was not useful to me at first.
But I believed I could train her.
She did respond to training.
And before very long she became indispensable to me and the household.
Dani and I were getting on.
At fifty, there were strands of grey in my hair as in his.
At that age, a woman is perhaps not so attractive to most men.
But a husband, well, you would suppose there are things to think back on, memories of twenty-six years of marriage and companionship.
I never did worry about the affairs he had on the side.
I did not consider myself cheated.
I set it down to the warmth of the African male about which no amount of nagging and tears will ever be able to do much.
Besides if he was going to be like his father who married eight wives and had well over three dozen children… I had only myself to blame for marrying him.
So he had his fun and I had my marriage.
And that was that.
Problems actually began when I heard that he had had a baby by some woman.
I took it badly; any wife would.
But I’d have gotten over it by adopting the child, rearing him with my natural children as a part of one happy or not-so-happy family.
My friend Toun did so.
And it worked.
But Dani’s mother didn’t give me a chance.
She was happy 82 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] as a bee at my discomfiture and went out of her way to rub salt into the wound her son had inflicted on my.
I never did get on well with my mother-in-law, you see.
She was secure in the love of her son.
I was not.
And I’ve always hated any hint of rivalry.
Now with his new baby and her obvious delight, we were perpetually at daggers drawn.
And my anger at Dani was duly compounded.
I was not about to leave him – I’m not one for a divorce – and I had to take the children into account.
But he had to know that I was not exactly ecstatic, to put it mildly.
It helped a lot that I was often away at wok some nights in the month.
It meant that I did not have to see him very often.
And I could work out my unhappiness alone.
He did a lot to make up to me – he was always a caring man – but I did not encourage him.
I’m afraid Ayo and the children saw a lot of our rows.
Because they were noisy, robust affairs, full of blows, scratches, broken chairs, broken crockery, flying cutlery and fulsome tears.
I gave Dani so quarter.
I wanted him to feel remorse and to be on his best behaviour at least for some of the time.
He was.
As a I was soon to find out.
One rare Sunday morning after breakfast, Dani and I sat in the lunge listening to classical music as was our habit when a knock came at the door.
‘Who is that?’ I asked.
‘Mama Ayo,’ a voice answered.
To my surprise, Dani fed upstairs.
He was well dressed and I did not understand why he should make so undignified an exit at the sound of Mama Ayo’s voice.
‘Come in,’ I said Mama Ayo and her husband came in.
we exchanged pleasantries and I offered them seats.
They didn’t want a drink or anything.
I heard the key click in the lock upstairs.
“Mama Ayo spoke next.
She was direct and to the point.
‘Is Oga in?’ She asked.
‘No,’ I lied.
‘He’s gone to church.’ ‘We wanted to see him.
Because now that he has started sleeping with Ayo, we won’t be pleased if Ayo gets pregnant.’ Bland.
Crude.
Direct.
Shattering.
I didn’t know what to do.
I wished I could hide myself twenty feet underground.
That the earth under my feet would open and swallow me up.
That thunder would strike me dead.
I felt ashamed, embarrassed and humiliated all at once.
I tried to, but could not speak.
It was with difficult that I said the next words to Mama Ayo and her husband.
‘I understand how you feel … we will make arrangements to send Ayo back to you.
That will stop Oga from …’ Already tears were dribbling down my checks.
Mama Ayo and her husband quietly withdrew, leaving me to my sorrows.
I grew weak and tired, as though a heavy 83 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] load had been placed on my shoulders.
Stuck in my seat.
I felt dizzy and dazed.
There was no holding back the hot tears.
I do not know for how long I stayed like that but finally, I picked myself up and dragged my unwilling feet up the staircase.
The door to our bedroom was still locked.
I knocked loud.
‘Open the door, you miserable wretch,’ I yelled at the top of my voice.
There was no sound from the bedroom.
I knocked louder still.
‘Open the door, or I’ll break it myself, you good-for-nothing adulterer.
Do you hear me?
You shameless, empty gas bag, let me just get my hands on you.’ The key turned in the lock and I pushed the door open and rushed into the room.
Dani was sitting on the bed.
I do not remember the look on his face.
Because although I looked at him, I did not see him, so blinding was the hate I felt for him at that moment.
‘Why did you run upstairs and lock yourself in?’ I asked.
‘I didn’t run upstairs.
I didn’t lock myself in,’ he lied.
‘Liar.
You didn’t want to stand face to face with your crime.’ ‘Crime?
What crime?’ ‘You knew what Mama Ayo and her husband came to tell you, didn’t you?’ ‘How was I to know?
How could I know?’ ‘Then why didn’t you wait to hear them out?’ ‘I didn’t even know they were the ones at the door.
So what did they say?’ ‘That you’ve been sleeping with Ayo.
That if she gets pregnant, they won’t be pleased.’ ‘And did you believe them?’ Dani asked, a hollowness in his voice.
‘Have you been sleeping with Ayo?’ ‘No.’ ‘So, Mama Ayo and her husband are lying?’ ‘Do you believe them?’ ‘Of course.
They could not invent such a story.’ ‘You believe them and disbelieve me?’ ‘Naturally.
You are a born liar.
How dare you stand before me to deny what’s so obvious?
Why did you flee so guiltily upstairs … you good-for-nothing scab.
You call yourself a man and you cannot face your own misdeeds.
Now I imagine you will tell me the truth with Ayo standing before you.
Because I’m going to get Ayo here right now.’ And getting out of the room onto the landing I yelled ‘Ayo, Ayo, Ayo.’ There was no answer.
I went to the helpers’ quarters where Ayo normally stayed.
She was gone.
I returned upstairs to look for Dani.
He too had slipped out.
I heard the car drive out of the garage.
I lay back in bed and cried myself to sleep.
84 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] I do not know for how long I slept.
But I must have slept for a long time.
Because when I woke up it was already night.
I found a note from Dani saying he was off to London for a week on a business trip.
He stayed away a whole month.
During all that time, he telephoned once asking ‘Is everything all right?’ I banged the telephone on him.
At the end of the fourth week, he returned, his hair in jerry coils.
At fifty-five, he was wearing jerry coils, like a miserable, cocaine-sniffing West Indian on the crumby streets of Brixton.
I took one look at him and the image that came to my mind was of a vulture wearing glass beads.
I refused to talk to him, of course.
I locked him out of our room and he had to make do with the other bedroom.
I made sure his sheets were unwashed for weeks.
I did not serve him any of his meals.
No punishment I could devise looked bad enough for him.
And oh, how I hated to see him in those jerry coils!
They made me more vicious.
Then one day I heard a car drive up to our house.
I looked out of the window and saw a brand new Mercedes Coupe, in a lovely wine colour.
Dani was at the wheel.
He got out and walked up to me and dropped the car keys into my palm.
“Yours,’ he said simply, nodding towards the car.
Well, jerry coils are one thing, but a Mercedes Coupe in wine colour is something else.
The milk of human forgiveness welled up in my breast.
Dani was always a caring man, you know.
Arabic Translation of “A Caring Man” ﻪﺗﺮﺳ ﺄﹸﺑﹺ ّﻢ ﺘﻬ ﻣ ﹲﻞﺟ ﺭ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻲﻨﹺﻨﻴﻬﹺﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﺣ ﱃﺇﹺ ﺦ ﺴ ﻔﹶﺘﻴﺳ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻘﺘﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﺎﻣ ﻦ ﻜ ﻟﹶ ،ﺍﹰﺮﺳ ﺔﹰﻴﻣﺍﺮﻏﹶ ﺔﹰﻗﹶﻼﻋ ﻩﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻧﹺّﺇﹺ ﻍﹺ ﺮﻔﹶﺘﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﻞﹴ ﻤ ﻌﺑﹺ ﻅﹶ ﺎﻔﺘﺣ ﺎﻟﺍ ﻝﹸ ﻭﹺﺎﺤﺗ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ .ﺀِﻲ ﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻖﹺ ﻠﹸﳋﹸ ﺍ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻞﹸ ﺜﻣ ﺡ ﺮﺠ ﻳ ﻒ ﻴﻛﹶ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻌﺗ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ .ﺔﻣﻭﺎﺴﻣ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﺍﺫﺇﹺﻭ .ﻙ ﺪ ﺣ ﻭ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ﻝﹺ ﺰﹺﻨﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﲑﺑﹺﺪ ﺘﺑﹺ ﻡﺎﻴﻘﻟﹾﺍ ﻚ ﻨﻜ ﻤ ﻳ ﻼﻓﹶ ،ﺔﻴﺳ ﺎﻘﻟﹾﺍ ﻑ ﻭﺮﻈﱡ ﻟﺍ ﻩﺬ ﻫ ﻲﻓ ﺔﺸ ﻴﻌﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺐﹺ ﺴﻜﹶ ﻟ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺝ ﺎﺘﺤ ﺗ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ ،ﺎﹰﻌﺒﻄﹶ ﻓﹶ .ﺎﹰﺳﻮﺑﺎﹶﻛ ﺔﹸﻧﺎﻀﺤ ﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﻝﹺ ﺰﹺﻨﳌﺍ ﲑ ﺑﹺﺪ ﺗ ﺭﺎﺻ ،ﺔﻣﻭﺎﺴﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﻥ ﺎﺗﺮﻴﻐﺻ ﻥ ﺎﺘﻨﺑﹺ ﻙ ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻲﻓ ﻂﱞ ﻗﹶ ﺐ ﻏﹶ ﺮﻳ ﻥﺍﺩ ﻦ ﻜﹸ ﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ .ﺔﹰﻘﹶﻳﺪ ﺻ ﻙ ﺩﻻﻭ ﺄﻟ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻜﺗ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺓﹰﺎﺘﻓﹶ ﻡﺩﺎﺨﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻜﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﺴ ﺣ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍﻭ ،ﻡﹴﺩﺎﺧ ﺪﻗﻭ ،ﻲﺘﻴﻟﻮﺌﹸﺴ ﻣ ﻦﻣ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﺔﹶﻴﻨﹺﻴﺗﻭﺮﻟﺍ ﺔﻴﻟﺰﹺﻨﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹶ ﺎﻤﻋ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﹼ ﺇﹺ ﻝﹸ ﻮﻘﻳﻭ ﺪ ﻘﺘﻌﻳ ﺎﻤ ﺋﺍﺩ ﻥﺎﻜﻓﹶ ،ﺔﻳﻭﹺﺮﺳ ﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹺ ﺎﻤﻋ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ .ﺎﻧﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻮ ﻳﺁ ﺚ ﻜﹾ ﻣ ﺐ ﺒﺳ ﻮﻫ ﺍﺬﻬﻓ ،ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻪﺘﻘﹾﻓﹶﺍﻭ 85 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﺓﹰﺮﻈﹾ ﻧ ﺎﻬﻴﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺕ ﺮﻈﹶ ﻧ ،ﺎﻨﻴﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺖ ﺋﹶﺎﺟ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻍﹺ ﻮﻠﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﺳ ﺏ ﺮﻘﹶﺘﺗ ﻲ ﻫﻭ ﲔﹺ ﻠﹶﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﺔﹶﻠﹶﻳﻮﹺﻃﹶ ،ﺔﹰﻠﹶﻴﺤ ﻧ ﺓﹰﺎﺘﻓﹶ ﻮ ﻳﺁ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﺎﻬﺘﺴ ﺒﻟﹾﺃﹶ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ﺎﻬﺘﻔﹾﻈﱠ ﻨﻓﹶ ،ﺀٍﻲ ﺷ ﻲﻓ ﻲﻨﹺﻤ ﻠﱢﻜﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻞﹶ ﺒﻗﹶ ﻞﹴ ﻣﺎﺷ ﻞﹴ ﺴ ﻐﺑﹺ ﺎﻬﻔﹶﻈﱢ ﻧﺃﹸ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺍﹰﺭﻮﻓﹶ ﺖ ﻣﺰﻋ ﻭ ﺓﹰﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻘﺘﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﻦ ﻜ ﻟ ،ﺔﻳﺍﺪﺒﹺﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺀٍﻲﺷ ﰲ ﻲﻧﹺﺪ ﻴﻔﺗ ﻦ ﻜﹸ ﺗ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﺽﹺ ﺮﻌﻠﹾﻟ ﺔﹰﺤ ﻟﺎﺻ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺼﻓﹶ ،ﺔﹶﳝﺪ ﻘﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﺑﹺﺎﻴﺛ ﲎ ﻏ ﻻ ﺔﻠﹶﻴﻠﻗﹶ ﺓﺪ ﻣ ﺪ ﻌﺑ ﺕ ﺭﺎﺻ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ،ﺐﹺ ﻳﺭﹺﺪ ﺘﻟﺍﻭ ﺔﻴﺑﹺﺮﺘﻠﹾﻟ ﺖ ﺑﺎﺠﺘﺳ ﺍ ،ﺔﹰﻘﹶﻴﻘﺣ ﻭ ،ﺎﻬﺒﻳﺭﹺﺪ ﺗﻭ ﺎﻬﺘﻴﺑﹺﺮﺗ ﻊ ﻴﻄ ﺘﺳ ﺃﹶ .ﺀَﺎﻌﻤ ﺟ ﺓﺮﺳ ﺄﹸﻠﹾﻟﻭ ﻲ ﻟ ﺎﻬﻨﻋ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﰲﻭ .ﻪﻟﺬﹶ ﻋ ﻭ ﻲﻟﺬﹶ ﻋ ﻲﻓ ﺐﹺ ﻴﺸ ﻟﺍ ﺮﺋﺎﻔﺿ ﻯﺮﺗ ،ﺮﹺﻤ ﻌﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﲔ ﺴِ ﻤ ﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ ،ﻥﺍﺩﻭ ﺎﻧﺃﹶ ﻦ ﺴ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺎﻨﻣﺪ ﻘﹶﺗ ﺀَﺎﻴﺷ ﺃﹶ ﻙ ﺎﻨﻫ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻌﺗ ،ﺎﹰﻌﺒﻄﹶ ﻓﹶ ،ﻞﹺ ﻌﺒﻠﹾﻟ ﺔﺒﺴ ﻨﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺎﻣﺃﹶ ،ﻝﹺ ﺎﺟﺮﻟﺍ ﻢﹺ ﻈﹶ ﻌﻤ ﻟ ﺔﹰﺑﺍﺬﹼ ﺟ ﺔﹰﻨﺗﺎﻓ ﺓﹸﺃﹶﺮﳌﺍ ﻥﹸ ﻮﻜﺗ ﻻ ﺪﻗ ،ﺮﹺﻤ ﻌﻟﺍ ﺔﻗﹶﻼﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﻖ ﻠﹶﻗﹾﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻛﹸ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﺔﹰﻨﺳ ﻦ ﻳﺮﹺﺸ ﻋ ﻭ ﺔﺘﺳ ﺔﺒﺤ ﺻ ﻭ ﺝﹺ ﺍﻭﺯ ﺭﹺﺎﻛﺬﹾ ﺗ ﻞﹸ ﺜﻣ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ،ﲑﹺ ﻜ ﻔﹾﺘﻟﺍ ﱃﺇﹺ ﻮﻋﺪ ﺗ ،ﻲﻘﻳﺮﹺﻓﹾﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹺ ﺟ ﺮﻟﺍ ﻝﹺ ﺎﻌﻔﻧﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻣ ﺮﻣﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺮﺒﺘﻋ ﺍ ﻞﹾ ﺑ ،ﺔﹰﺷ ﻮﺸ ﻐﻣ ﻲ ﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﺪ ﻋﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺄﹶﻟ ﺍﹰﺮﺳ ﺎﻬﻳﺮﹺﺠ ﻳ ﻲﺘﻟﱠﺍ ﺔﻴﻣﺍﺮﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻱﺬ ﻟﺍ ﻪﻴﺑﹺﺃﹶ ﻞﹶ ﺜﹾﻣ ﻥﹶ ﻮﻜﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺩﺍﺭﺃﹶ ﻮﻫ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ،ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺔﹰﻓﹶﺎﺿﺇﹺﻭ .ﺀٌﺎﻜﺑ ﻻﻭ ﺮﻣﺬﹶ ﺗ ﻪﻴﻓ ﻊ ﻔﹶﻨﻳ ﻻ ﻱﺬ ﻟﺍ ﻝﹺ ﺎﻌﻔﻧﺎﻟﺍ ﻲﺟﹺ ﺍﻭﺰﻟ ﻲﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﻡﻮﻟﺃﹶ/ﺐ ﻧﺅﺃﹸ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺫﹶﺇﹺ ﻲﻟ ﺯﺎﺟ...ﺍﺪ ﻟﹶﻭ ﲔ ﺛﻼﺛﹶﻭ ﺔﺘﺳ ﻦ ﻣ ﺮﺜﹶﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺐ ﺠ ﻧﺃﹶﻭ ،ﺓﻮﺴ ﻧﹺ ﻥ ﺎﻤﺜﹶﺑﹺ ﺝ ﻭﺰﺗ .ﺮﻣﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻬﺘﻧﺍ ،ﺹﹺ ﻼﺧ ﻭ ،ﺍﹰﺪ ﺟﹺ ﻪﺗﺬﹾ ﺨ ﺗّﺍ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ﻻﹰ ﺰﻫ ﻭ ﺔﹰﻴﻠﺴ ﺗ ﺝ ﺍﻭﺰﻟﺍ ﺬﹶ ﺨ ﺗﺍ ﺪﻗ ﺫﹾﺇﹺ ،ﻪﻌﻣ ﺐ ﻀ ﻐﺘﺳ ﺎﻤﻛﹶ ،ﺮﹺﻣﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺍﺬﹶ ﻬﻟ ﺍﹰﲑﺜﻛﹶ ﺖ ﺒﻀ ﻏﹶ ،ﺓﺃﹶﺮﻣﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺍﹰﺪﻟﹶﻭ ﺐ ﺠ ﻧﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻗ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻌﻤ ﺳ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻞﹸ ﻛ ﺎﺸﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﺃﺪ ﺑ ،ﻪﺘﻴﺑﹺﺮﺗﻭ ﺪ ﻟﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﺔﻧﺎﻀﺤ ﺑﹺ ﺖ ﻤ ﻘﹸﻓﹶ ،ﺮﹺﻣﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺖ ﺒﻠﹶﻏﹶ ﻦﻜ ﻟ ،ﻝﹺ ﺎﺤﻟﹾﺍ ﻩﺬ ﻫ ﻞﹺ ﺜﹾﻣ ﰲ ﺎﻬﺴ ﻔﹾﻧ ﺕ ﺪ ﺟ ﻭ ﺓﺃﹶﺮﻣﺍ ﻱ ﺃﹶ ﻞﻗﹸ ﺖ ﺌﹾﺷ ﻥﹾ ﺇﹺ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ،ﺓﺪ ﻴﻌﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺎﹶﻨﺗﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ﻦ ﻣ ﺍﹰﻮﻀ ﻋ ﺭﺎﺻ ﻰﺘﺣ ﻱﺩﻻﻭ ﺃﹶ ﻊ ﻣ ﻪﺘﻳﺎﻋﺮﹺﺑﹺ ﺖ ﻤ ﻤ ﺘﻫ ﺍﻭ ﻲﻟ ﺍﺪ ﻟﹶﻭ ﻪﺗﺬﹾ ﺨ ﺗّﺍﻭ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ،ﺔﹰﺻ ﺮﻓﹸ ﻲﻨﹺﺗﻮ ﺗ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻥﺍﺩ ﺓﹶﺪ ﻟﺍﻭ ﻦ ﻜ ﻟﹶ .ﺖ ﺤ ﺠ ﻧﻭ ﻥﹾﻮﻫﻮﺗ ﻲﺘﻘﹶﻳﺪ ﺻ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﺖ ﺑﺮﺟ ﺪﻗ .ﺎﻬﺑﹺ ﺱ ﺄﹾﺑ ﻻ ﺓﹰﺮﺳ ﺃﹸ ،ﻲ ﻠﹶﻋ ﺖ ﻐﻃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﺣ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺮﻣﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺎﻬﺑﹺ ﻯﺩﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻗﻭ ،ﻰﺿ ﻮ ﻓﹶ ﻲﻓ ﺔﹰﻣﻭﺰﻬ ﻣ ﻲﻨﹺﺗﺃﹶﺭ ﺎﻤﻠﱠﻛﹸ ﻞﹺ ﺤ ﻨّﻟﺎﻛﹶ ﺓﹰﺭﻭﺮﺴ ﻣ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﺐ ﺣ ﰲ ﺔﹰﻨﺌﻤ ﻄﹾ ﻣ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﻲ ﻫ ﻥﹾ ﺇﹺﻭ .ﺔﹰﺒﻴﹺّﻃﹶ ﺔﹰﻠﹶﻣﺎﻌﻣ ﻲﻨﹺﻠﹸﻣﺎﻌﺗ ﻦ ﻜﹸ ﺗ ﻢ ﻠﹶﻓﹶ ،ﻲ ﻠﹶﻋ ﺎﻬﻨﹺﺑﺍ ﻡﹺﺍﺮﺟ ﺇﹺ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺎﹰﺣﺮﺟ ﻲﻨﹺﺗﺩﺍﺯﻭ ﻥﹶ ﺂﻟﹾﺍ ﻩﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺭﺎﺻ ﺪ ﻗﹶﻭ .ﺔﺴ ﻓﹶﺎﻨﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺀِﺎﻤﻳﺇﹺ ﻱ ﺃﹶ ﻩﺮﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻨﻜﹸ ﻓﹶ ،ﻪﺒﹺّﺣ ﻦ ﻣ ﺮﹴﻓﹶﻭ ﺃﹶ ﺐﹴ ﻴﺼ ﻨﺑﹺ ﺖ ﻴﻈ ﺣ ﺎﻤﻓﹶ ،ﺎﻫﺪ ﻟﹶﻭ .ﺮﺜﹶﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻥﺍﺩ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺖ ﻄﹾ ﺨ ﺳ ﻭ ،ﻢﹴ ﺋﺍﺩ ﻡﹴﺎﺼﺧ ﰲ ﺎﻧﺮﺼ ﻓﹶ ،ﻚ ﺷ ﻻ ﺔﹲﺠ ﻬﹺﺘﺒﻣ ﻲ ﻫ ﻭ ،ﺪﻳﺪ ﺟ ﺩﻮﻟﻮ ﻣ 86 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﻦ ﻜ ﻟ ،ﺭﹺﺎﺒﺘﻋ ﺎﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻴﻋ ﻲﻓ ﺩﻻﻭﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺬﹶ ﺧ ﺁ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻟ ﺯﺎﺟ - ﻕﹺ ﻼﻄﱠ ﻠﻟ ﺓﹰﺪ ﻌﺘﺴ ﻣ ﺖ ﺴ ﻟﹶ - ﻪﻗﻼﻄﹶ ﻟ ﻂﹸ ﻄﱢ ﺧ ﺃﹸ ﻦ ﻛﹸ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ .ﻒ ﻄﹾ ﻠﹸﺑﹺ ﻪﺗﻮﻜﹶ ﺷ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ،ﻝﹺ ﻮﻫﱡﺬﻟﺍ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﹰﺔﻧﻼﻫ ﺫﹶ ﺖ ﺴ ﻟﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺃﹶ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻌﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻪﻟﹶ ﻲﻐﺒﻨﻳ ﻞﱠ ﻛﹸ ﻩﺍﺭﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻟ ﺲ ﻴﻟﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻨﹺﻌﻳ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻭ ،ﺮﹺﻬ ﺸ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﻲﻟﺎﻴﻠﱠﻟﺍ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﻞﹺ ﻤ ﻌﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﰲ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﺎﹰﺒﻟﺎﻏ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺃﹶ ﺍﹰﲑﺜﻛﹶ ﻲﻧﹺﺩﺎﻓﹶﺃ ﺎﹰﻤ ﺘﻬ ﻣ ﻼﹰ ﺟ ﺭ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛ - ﻲﻌﻣ ﺢ ﻟﹶﺎﺼﺘﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺍﹰﲑﺜﻛﹶ ﻝﹶ ﻭﺎﺣ ﺪ ﻗﻭ ،ﻱ ﺪ ﺣ ﻮﻟ ﺔﹶﻠﹶﻜ ﺸ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﱠ ﺣ ﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻌﻄﹶ ﺘﺳ ﺎﻓﹶ ،ﲔﹴ ﺣ .ﻪﻌﺠ ﺷ ﺃﹸ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻦﻜ ﻟﹶ - ﻪﺗﺮﺳ ﺄﹸﺑﹺ ﺔﺌﹶﻴﻠﻣ ﺔﺑﺎﺨ ﺻ ﺔﺟ ﺎﺠ ﺿ ﺕ ﺍﺭﺎﺠ ﺷ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﺎﻬﻧﺄﹶﻟ ﺎﻨﺗﺎﹶﻛﺍﺮﻋ ﺾ ﻌﺑ ﺍﻭﺪ ﻫ ﺎﺷ ﺩﻻﻭ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﻮﻳﺃﹶ ﻥﱠ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻑ ﺎﺧﺃﹶ ﻲﻧﺇﹺ ﻢ ﻠﹶﻓﹶ .ﺔﻨﺧ ﺎﺳ ﺕ ﺍﺀَﺎﻜﺑﻭ ،ﲔﻛ ﺎﻜﺳ ﻭ ،ﺔﻴﻓﺰﺧ ﻥ ﺍﻭﺁﻭ ،ﺓﺭﻮﺴ ﻜﹾ ﻣ ﻲﺳ ﺍﺮﻛﹶ ﻲﹺ ﻣﺭﻭ ،ﺕ ﺎﺒﻠﹾﺧ ﻭ ،ﺕ ﺎﺑﺮﻀ ﺑﹺ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ،ﺔﻗﹶﺎﺒﻠﹶﺑﹺ ﻑﺮﺼ ﺘﻳ ﻰﺘﺣ ﻡﹺﺪ ﻨﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺮﻌﺸ ﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻩﺪ ﻳﺭﹺﺃﹸ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﻭ ،ﺩﺎﺴﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ ﻯﺩﺎﻤﺘﻴﻟ ﺔﺻ ﺮﻓﹸ ﻱ ﺃﹶ ﻥﺍﺪﻟ ﻞﹾ ﻌﺟ ﺃﹶ .ﺔﻠﹶﻴﻠﻗﹶ ﺓﺪ ﻤ ﻟ ﻞﱢ ﻗﹶﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺎﻨﺴ ﻠﹶﺟ ﺪ ﺣ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻡﹺﻮ ﻳ ﺔﺤ ﻴﺒﹺﺻ ﻲﻓ ﻥﺍﺩﻭ ﲏﻧﺃﹶ ﺙﹶ ﺪ ﺣ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ،ﺎﹰﻴﻗﻼﺧ ﺃﹶ ﺮﻴﻐﺗ ﺪﻗ ﻪﻧﺃﹶ ﺍﹰﲑﺧ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻔﹾﺸ ﺘﻛﹾ ﺍ ﺪ ﻗﻭ .ﺏﹺ ﺎﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺔﹰﻗﱠﺩ ﺎﻨﻌﻤ ﺳ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﺎﻧﺩﻮﻌﺗ ﺎﻤ ﻛﹶ ﺔﻴﻜ ﻴﺳ ﻼﻛ ﺎﻘﹶﻴﺳ ﻮﻣ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻊ ﻤ ﺘﺴ ﻧ ﻝﹺ ﺎﺒﻘﹾﺘﺳ ﻻ ﺍ ﺔﻋ ﺎﻗ .ﺖ ﻟﹾﺄﹶﺳ "؟ﺏﹺ ﺎﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻦ ﻣ" .ﺕ ﻮ ﺻ ﻲﻨﹺﺑﺎﺟ ﺃﹶ "،ﻮ ﻳﺃﹶ ﻡﺃﹸ" ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﺓﹰﺄﹶﺠ ﻓﹸ ﺏ ﺮﻫ ﺍﺫﹶﺎﻤﻟ ﻢ ﻬﻓﹾﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﻞﹴ ﻴﻤ ﺟ ﻱ ﺰﹺﺑﹺ ﻦ ﻳﺰﺘﻣ ﻮﻫﻭ ،ﻲ ﻗﻮ ﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻖﹺ ﺑﹺﺎﻄﱠ ﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻥﺍﺩ ﺮﻓﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻲ ﻨﹺﺒﺠ ﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻗﹶﻭ .ﻮﻳﺃ ﻡﺃﹸ ﺕ ﻮﺻ ﻉﹺ ﺎﻤﺳ .ﺎﻬﻟﹶ ﺖ ﻠﹾﻗﹸ "،ﻞﹾ ﺧ ﺩﺍﹸ" ﻲﻓ ﺎﺒﻏﹶ ﺮﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﺎﻤﻬﻧﺃﹶ ﺮﻴﻏﹶ ،ﺎﺴ ﻠﹶﺠ ﻓﹶ ﺱﹺ ﻮﻠﹸﺠ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﺎﻤﻬﺘﺒﻟﹶﺎﻃﹶ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﺎﻳﺎﺤ ﺘﻟﺍ ﺎﻨﻟﹾﺩﺎﺒﺗﻭ ،ﺎﻫﻮﺑﺃﹶﻭ ﻮﻳﺃ َﻡﺃﹸ ﺎﻨﻴﻠﹶﻋ ﺖ ﻠﹾﺧ ﺩ ﻡﻼﻛﹶ ﻚﻟﺫ ﻊ ﺒﹺﺗﻭ ،ﻲﻗﻮ ﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻖﹺ ﺑﹺﺎﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻞﹺ ﻔﹾﻘﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺡﹺ ﺎﺘﻔﹾﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺔﹶﻜﹶ ﺘﻜﹾ ﺗ ﺖ ﻌﻤ ﺳ ﻢ ﺛﹸ .ﺔﻠﹶﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻱ ﺃﹶ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ﺏﹴ ﺍﺮﺷ ﻝﹺ ﻭﺎﻨﺗ .ﺓﹰﺪ ﺠﹺ ﻣ ﺎﻬﻣﻼﻛﹶ ﻲﻓ ﺔﹰﺣﺮﺼ ﻣ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﺪﻗﻭ ،ﻮﻳﺃ ﻡﺃﹸ .
"؟ﺩﻮﺟ ﻮ ﻣ ﻝﹺ ﺰﹺﻨﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺏ ﺭ ﻞﹾ ﻫ " ﻲﻨﹺﺘﻟﹶﺄﹶﺳ 87 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] .ﺖ ﺑﺬﹶ ﻛﹶ ﺪ ﻗﹶﻭ ".ﺔﺴ ﻴﻨﹺﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺐ ﻫ ﺫﹶ ﺪﻗ ،ﻻ" ﺖ ﺒﺟ ﺃﹶ ".ﻮﻳﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻠﹶﻤ ﺣ ﻥﹾ ﺇﹺ ﻰﺿ ﺮﻧ ﻦﻟﹶﻭ ،ﻮﻳﺃ ﻊ ﺟﹺ ﺎﻀﻳ ﺃﹶﺪ ﺑ ﺪﻗ ﻪﻧﺄﹶﻟ ،ﻩﺮﻧ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻳﺮﻧ" :ﺖ ﻟﺎﻗ ﻢ ﺛﹸ .ﻪﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﺖ ﻗﹾﻮﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ ﺔﹰﻌﺠﹺ ﻔﹾﻣﻭ ﺔﹰﺣ ﺮﺼ ﻣ ،ﺔﹰﻈﹶ ﻴﻠﻏﹶ ،ﺔﹰﻔﹶﻴﻄ ﻟﹶ ﺎﻬﻣﻼﻛﹶ ﰲ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﺪﻗﻭ ﺢ ﺘﻔﹶﻨﺗ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ،ﺎﻣﺪ ﻗﹶ ﻦ ﻳﺮﹺﺸ ﻋ ﺭﹺﺪ ﻘﹶﺑﹺ ﺽﹺ ﺭ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﺤ ﺗ ﻲ ﻔﺘﺧ ﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻊ ﻴﻄ ﺘﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻮ ﻟﹶ ﺖ ﻴﻨﻤ ﺘﻓﹶ ،ﻞﹸ ﻌﻓﹾﺄﹶﺳ ﺍﺫ ﺎﻣ ﺭﹺﺩﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ﰲ ﺔﻧﺎﻫﺈﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﺓﺮﻴﺤ ﻟﹾﺍﻭ ﻞﹺ ﺠ ﺨ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﺕ ﺮﻌﺷ .ﺕ ﺎﻤﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺪ ﻋ ﺮﻟﺍ ﻲﻧﹺﺮﻣّﺪ ﻳ ﻭ ﺃﹶ ،ﻲﻨﹺﻌﻠﺘﺒﺗﻭ ﻲﻣﺍﺪﻗﹾﺃﹶ ﺖ ﺤﺗ ﺽ ﺭ ﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﺎﻬﻠﻌﺑﻭ ﻮﻳﺃﹶ ﻡﺃﹸ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻡﹺﻼﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺎﺑﹺ ﺖ ﻬ ﻓﹸ ،ﺔﺑﻮﻌﺼ ﻟﺍ ﻞﱢ ﻜﹸ ﺑﹺﻭ ،ﻊ ﻄ ﺘﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻦ ﻜ ﻟﹶ ﻡﹺﻼﻜﹶ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻟﹾﻭﺎﺣﻭ .ﻪﻨﹺﻴﺣ ﺖ ﻗﹾﻮﻟﹾﺍ :ﺔﹰﻠﹶﺋﺎﻗ "...ﻦﻣ ﻲﻠﻌﺑ ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﻊ ﻨﻤ ﻴﺳ .ﻮﻳﺃﹶ ﻢﻜﹸ ﻴﻟﺇﹺ ﻞﹶ ﺳ ﺮﻧ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺭﹺﻮﻣﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﺐﹺ ﻴﺗﺮﺘﺑﹺ ﻡﻮﻘﻨﺳ ...ﻥ ﺍﺮﻌﺸ ﺗ ﻒ ﻴﻛ ﻢ ﻬﻓﹾﺃﹶ ﻲﻧﹺّﺇﹺ" .ﻲﻧﹺﺍﺰﺣ ﺃﹶﻭ ﻲﻨﹺﻨﻴﻛ ﺭﺎﺗ ﺀٍﻭﺪ ﻬﺑﹺ ﺎﻬﻣﺃﹸﻭ ﻮﻳﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻟﺍﻭ ﻑ ﺮﺼ ﻧﺍ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ،ﻲﺘﻨﺟ ﻭ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻞﹸ ﻴﺴِ ﺗ ﺕ ﺍﺮﺒﻋ ﺕ ﺃﹶﺪ ﺑ ،ﻥﹶ ﻵﺍﻭ ﺔﹰﺧ ﻭﺪ ﻣ ﻲﺳ ﻮﻠﹸﺟ ﰲ ﺔﹰﻘﹶﺼ ﻠﹾﻣ ﺖ ﻴﻘﺑ ﺍﺬﻜﻫﻭ .ﻞﹲ ﻴﻘﺛﹶ ﻞﹲ ﻤ ﺣ ﻲﻓﺎﺘﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﻊ ﺿ ﻭ ﻲﻧﺄﹶﻛﹶ ﺔﹰﺒﻌﺘﻣ ﺔﹰﻜﻬﻨﻣ ﺕ ﺮﺻ ،ﻚ ﻟﺬﻛ ﺖ ﻴﻘﺑ ﺓﺪ ﻣ ﻱ ﺄﹶﻟ ﺭﹺﺩﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻠﹶﻓﹶ ،(ﻲ ﻨﻴﻋ ﻦﻣ ﺔﻠﹶﻠﱢﺴ ﺘﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ) ﺔﻨﺧ ﺎﺴ ﻟﺍ ﺔﻌﻣﺪ ﻟﺍ ﻑ ﺎﻘﻳﺇﹺ ﻊ ﻄ ﺘﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ .ﺓﹰﺭﻮﻬﺒﻣ ﺖ ﻘﹾﻗﹶﺪ ﻓﹶ ،ﺎﹰﻘﻠﹶﻐﻣ ﺎﻨﺘﻓﹶﺮﻏﹸ ﺏ ﺎﺑ ﻝﺍﺯ ﺎﻣﻭ ،(ﺓﺎﻗﺮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ) ﻢﹺ ﻠﱠﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻮﺤ ﻧ ﺔﻠﹶﻴﻘﺜﱠﻟﺍ ﻲﻣﺍﺪﻗﹾﺃﹶ ﺕ ﺭ ﺮﺟ ﻭ ﺍﹰﲑﺧ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻤﻗﹸ ﻲﻨﹺﻨﻜﻟﹶ .ﺪ ﻳﺪ ﺷ ﻒ ﻨﻌﺑﹺ .
"،ﻲ ﻘﺷ ،ﺀُﻲﻧﹺﺩ ،ﺮﻴﻘﺣ ﺎﻳ ،ﺏ ﺎﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﺢﹺ ﺘﻓﹾﺍ" :ﺔﹰﻠﹶﺋﺎﻗ ﻊﹴ ﻔﺗﺮﻣ ﺕ ﻮﺼ ﺑﹺ ﺖ ﺧ ﺮﺻ ﺪﻗﻭ ،ﻻﹼ ﺇﹺﻭ ،ﺏ ﺎﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﺢﹺ ﺘﻓﹾﺍ" :ﺖ ﺤ ﺻ ﻭ ،ﺪ ﺷ ﺃﹶ ﻒ ﻨﻌﺑﹺ ﺏ ﺎﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻘﹾﻗﹶﺪ ﻓﹶ ،ﻡﹺﻮﻨﻟﺍ ﺔﻓﹶﺮﻏﹸ ﻦ ﻣ ﺕ ﻮ ﺻ ﻱ ﺃﹶ ﻊ ﻤ ﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ".ﻱ ﺪ ﻴﺑﹺ ﻚ ﻴﻠﹶﻋ ﻚﺴِ ﻣﺃﹸ ﻲﻨﹺﻋ ﺩ ،ﻞﹸ ﻔﱠﻐﻣ ﺢ ﻗﻭ ﺎﻳ ؟ﻲﻨﹺﻌﻤ ﺴ ﺗ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ،ﺮﻳﺮﹺﺷ ،ﻊ ﻴﻨﹺﺷ ،ﻥ ﺍﺯ ﺎﻳ ،ﻱﺪ ﻴﺑﹺ ﻩﺮﺴ ﻛﹶ ﺄﹸﺳ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺎﹰﺴﻟﺎﺟ ﻥﺍﺩ ﺕ ﺪﺟ ﻭﻭ ،ﺔﻓﹶﺮﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹺ ﺧ ﺍﺩ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺖ ﻋ ﺮﺳ ﺄﹶﻓﹶ ،ﺢ ﺘﻔﹶﻧﺍ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺏ ﺎﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﺖ ﻌﻓﹶﺩﻭ ﺏﹺ ﺎﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻞﹶ ﻔﹾﻗﹸ ﺖ ﺤ ﺘﻓﹶ ﻩﺮﻜﹸ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥﱠ ﺄﹶﻟ ،ﻩﺭﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ،ﻪﻴﻟﺇﹺ ﺮﻈﹸ ﻧﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﻲﻨﹺﻧّﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﻢﹺ ﻏﹾ ﺮّﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ،ﻪﻧﺄﹶﻟ ،ﻪﻬﹺﺟ ﻭ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺮﻈﹶ ﻨﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺮﹺﻛﱠ ﺬﹶ ﺗﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﺮﹺﻳﺮﹺﺴ ﻟﺍ .ﻲﻧﹺﺎﻤﻋ ﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ،ﺔﻈﹶ ﺤ ﻠﹼﻟﺍ ﻚ ﻠﹾﺗ ﻩﺪ ﺿ ﻪﺑ ﺮﻌﺷ ﺃﹶ ﻱﺬ ﻟﺍ .ﻪﺘﻟﹾﺄﹶﺳ "؟ﻞﹺ ﺧ ﺍﺪ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺖ ﻴﻔﹶﺘﺧ ﺍﻭ ﻱﻮﹺﻠﻌﻟﺍ ﻖﹺ ﺑﹺﺎﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺖ ﺑﺮﻫ ﺍﺫﺎﳌ" 88 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﺎﻨﻴﻋ ﻡﻮﻘﹸﺗ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺩﺮﹺﺗ ﻢ ﻟﹶ .ﺏ ﺍﺬﹼ ﻛﹶ " .ﻮﻫ ﺏ ﺬﹶ ﻛﹶ "،ﻞﹺ ﺧ ﺍﺪ ﻟﺍ ﰲ ﻒ ﺘﺧ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ،ﻲﻗﻮ ﻔﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻖﹺ ﺑﹺﺎﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺏ ﺮﻫ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ" ".ﻚ ﺘﻤ ﻳﺮﹺﺠ ﺑﹺ ِﲔﹴ ﻌﺑﹺ "؟ﺔﻤ ﻳﺮﹺﺟ ﻱ ﺃﹶ ؟ﺔﳝﺮﹺﺟ " "؟ﻚﻟﺬﻛ ﺲﻴﻟﹶﺃﹶ ،ﻚ ﻴﻟﺇﹺ ﺍﻮﻜﹸ ﺸ ﻴﻟ ﺎﻬﺟ ﻭﺯﻭ ﻮﻳﺁ ﻡﺃﹸ ﺖ ﺗﺃﹶ ﺍﺫ ﺎﻣ ﺖ ﻓﹾﺮﻋ ﺖ ﻧﺃ" ؟ﻑ ﺮﹺﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻟ ﻲﻐﺒﻨﻳ ﻒ ﻴﻛ ؟ﻑ ﺮﹺﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻒ ﻴﻛ" ؟ﻢﻫﺍﻮﻜﹾ ﺷ ﻊ ﻤ ﺴ ﺘﻟ ﺮﻈ ﺘﻨﺗ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﺍﺫﺎﳌ ،ﻥﹾ ﺫﹶﺇﹺ" ؟ﻻﺎﻗﹶ ﺍﺫﺎﻣﻭ .ﺏﹺ ﺎﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﺪﻨﻋ ﺍﺀَﺎﺟ ﻥ ﺍﺬﻠﹼﻟﺍ ﺎﻤﻫ ﺎﻤﻬﻧّﺃﹶ ﻑ ﺮﹺﻋ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ" .
"ﻮﻳﺁ ﻞﹶ ﻤ ﺣ ﻥﹾ ﺇﹺ ﺮﻣﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻢ ﻬﻴﺿ ﺮﻳ ﻦ ﻟﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶﻭ .ﻮﻳﺁ ﺲ ﻣﻼﺗ ﺕ ﺃﹾﺪ ﺑ ﺪﻗ ﻚ ﻧﺇﹺ ﻻﺎﻗ " .ﻪﺗﻮ ﺻ ﰲ ﺡﹴ ﺎﻴﺻ ﻊ ﻣ ،ﻥﺍﺩ ﻝﹶ ﺄﹶﺳ "؟ﺎﻤﻬﹺﺘﻗﹾﺪ ﺻ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ﻭ" ؟ﻮﻳﺁ ﺲ ﻣﻼﺗ ﺖ ﻨﻛﹸ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ﻭ" ".ﻻ" ؟ﻥ ﺎﺑﺬ ﻜﹾ ﻳ ﺎﻬﺟ ﻭﺯﻭ ﻮﻳﺁ ﻡﺃﹸ ﻥﹼ ﺃﹶ ﺍﺬﻫ ﻲﻨﹺﻌﻳ ﻞﹾ ﻫ ﻭ ،ﻥﹾ ﺫﹶﺇﹺ" ؟ﺎﻤﻬﻨﻴﻗﺪ ﺼ ﺗ ﻞﹾ ﻫ " ".ﺔﻳﺎﻜﹶ ﳊ ﺍ ﻩﺬ ﻫ ﻞﹶ ﺜﹾﻣ ﺎﻘﹶﻠﺘﺨﻳ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺎﻤﻬﻟﹶ ﻦ ﻜ ﻤ ﻳ ﻻ ،ﺎﹰﻌﺒﻃﹶ " "؟ﲏﺘﺑﺬﱠ ﻛﻭ ﺎﻤﻬﺘﻗﹾﺪ ﺻ " ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺕ ﺭ ﺮﻓﹶ ﺍﺫﺎﳌﻭ ؟ﺎﹰﻨﻴﹺّﺑ ﺍﹰﺮﻣﺃﹶ ﺮﻜ ﻨﺗ ﻲﻣﺎﻣﺃ ﺖ ﻤﻗﹸﻭ ﻲ ﻠﹶﻋ ﺕ ﺃﹾﺮﺠ ﺗ ﻒ ﻴﻛ .ﺓﺩﻻﻮﹺﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﺏ ﺍﺬﹼ ﻛﹶ ﺖ ﻧﺃﹶ .ﺎﹰﻴﻌﻴﺒﹺﻃﹶ ﺔﹶﻬﺟ ﺍﻮﻣ ﻊ ﻄ ﺘﺴ ﺗ ﻢ ﻟﹶﻭ ﻞﹲ ﺟ ﺭ ﻚ ﻧﺃﹶ ﻲﻋ ﺪ ﺗ ،ﻡﺎﻤ ﻧ ﺎﻳ ﻖﹺ ﻠﹸﳋﹸ ﺍ ﺊﹶ ﻴﹺّﺳ ﺎﻳ...ﺐﹺ ﻧﺬﱠ ﻟﺎﺑﹺ ﻙ ﺭﹺﻮﻌﺷ ﻦ ﻣ ﻲﻗﻮ ﻔﹶﻟﹶﺍ ﻖﹺ ﺑﹺﺎﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﻮﻋﺩﺃﹶ ﻑ ﻮ ﺳ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺄﹶﻟ ،ﻚ ﻣﺎﻣﺃﹶ ﺔﹰﻔﹶﻗﺍﻭ ﻮ ﻳﺁ ﺖ ﻳﺃﹶﺭ ﺍﺫﺇﹺ ﻖ ﺤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻝﹸ ﻮﻘﺘﺳ ﻚ ﻧﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻇﹸ ﺃﹶ ﻲﻧﹺّﺇﹺ ﻥﹶ ﻵﺍﻭ .ﻚﺑﹺﻮﻧﺫﹸﻭ ﻚ ﺗﺍﺀﺎﺳ ﺇﹺ ".ﺍﹰﺭﻮﻓﹶ ﺎﻨﻫ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻮ ﻳﺁ 89 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ﻊﹺ ﻤ ﺳ ﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻦ ﻜﻟﹶ ".ﻮ ﻳﺁ ،ﻮ ﻳﺁ ،ﻮ ﻳﺁ" ﻱﺩﺎﻧﺃﹸ ﺖ ﺤ ﺻ ﻭ ﻲﺿ ﺭﺄﹶﻟﹾﺍ ﻖﹺ ﺑﹺﺎﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﱃﺇﹺ ﺔﻓﺮﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺖ ﺟ ﺮﺧ ﺍﺬﻜﹶ ﻫﻭ ﺕ ﺭﺩﺎﻏ ﺪ ﻗﻭ .ﺓﹰﺩﺎﻋ ﻦ ﻜﹸ ﺴ ﺗ ﻮ ﻳﺁ ﺖ ﻧﺎﻛ ﺚﹸ ﻴﺣ ﻡﹺﺪ ﺨﻟﹾﺍ ﺕ ﻼﹼ ﺤ ﻣ ﱃﺇﹺ ﺖ ﻠﹾﺧ ﺪ ﻓﹶ ،ﺪ ﺣ ﺍﻭ ﻱﹺّ ﺃﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﺔﺑﺎﺟﺈﻟﺍ ﺖ ﻌﻤ ﺴ ﻓﹶ .ﻦﹺ ﻜﹶ ﺴ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻋ ﺎﹰﻀﻳﺃﹶ ﻮﻫ ﻖ ﻟﹶﺰﻧﺍ ﺪ ﻗﹶﻭ ﻥﺍﺩ ﻦ ﻋ ﺚﹶ ﺤ ﺑﺃﹶ ﻲ ﻜﹶ ﻟ ﻱﻮﹺﻠﹾﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﻖﹺ ﺑﹺﺎﻄﹼ ﻟﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺖ ﻌﺟ ﺮﻓﹶ .ﺔﹶﻠﱠﺤ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ .ﻡﹺﻮﻨﻟﺍ ﰲ ﺖ ﻗﹾﺮﻐﺘﺳ ﺍ ﻰﺘﺣ ﺖ ﻴﻜﹶ ﺑﻭ ﺮﹺﻳﺮﹺﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ﺕ ﺄﹾﻜﹶ ﺗﺎﻓﹶ ،ﺀِﺍﻮﻳﺈﻟﹾﺍ ﺝ ﺭﹺﺎﺧ ﺓﺩﻮﻘﹸﻣ ﺓﺭﺎﻴﺳ ﺕ ﻮ ﺻ ،ﺖ ﻈﹾ ﻘﹶﻴﺘﺳ ﺍ ﺎﻣﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻞﹸ ﻴﻠﻟﱠﺍ ﻂﹶ ﺒﻫ ﺪ ﻗﹶ ﻪﻧﺄﹶﻟ ،ﻼﹰ ﻳﻮﹺﻃﹶ ﺖ ﻤ ﻧﹺ ﻲﻨﹺﻧﺃﹶ ﻞﹸ ﻤ ﺘﺤ ﻳ ﻦ ﻜ ﻟ ،ﺖ ﻌﺠ ﻄﹶ ﺿ ﺍ ﺓﺪ ﻣ ﻱ ﺄﹶﻟ ﺭﹺﺩﺃﹶ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﺓﺪ ﻤ ﻟ ﻚﻟﺎﻨﻫ ﻰﻘﹶﺒﻴﺳ ﻭ ،ﺔﻳﺭﹺﺎﺠﺗ ﺔﻠﹶﺣ ﺭﹺ ﻲﻓ ﻥﹾ ﺪ ﻨﻟﹶ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺮﻓﹶﺎﺳ ﺪﻗ ﻪﻧّﺃﹶ ﻥﺍﺩ ﺎﻬﻴﻓ ﻲﻧﹺﺮﺒﺧ ﺃﹶ ﺔﹰﺳ ﺍﺮﻛﹸ ﺕ ﺪ ﺟ ﻭﻭ .ﻉﹴ ﻮﺒﺳ ﺃﹸ "؟ﺀٍﻲ ﺷ ﱡﻞﻛﹸ ﻒ ﻴﻛ" ﻝﹸ ﺄﹶﺴ ﻳ ﺓﹰﺪ ﺣﺍﻭ ﺓﹰﺮﻣ ﺎﹰﻴﻔﺗﺎﻫ ﻲ ﺑﹺ ﻞﹶ ﺼ ﺗﺍ ﺓﺪ ﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻚ ﻠﹾﺗ ﻝﹶ ﻼﺧ ﻭ ،ﺮﹴﻬ ﺷ ﺓﺪ ﻤ ﻟ ﻚ ﻟﺎﻨﻫ ﺚﹶ ﻜﹶ ﻣ .ﻥ ﻮﻔﹶﻠﹾﺘﻟﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻋ ﺖ ﺿ ﺮﻋ ﺃﹶﻭ ﺔﺑﺎﺟﺇﹺ ﻦ ﻋ ﺖ ﻌﻨﺘﻣﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻜ ﻟ ﺕ ﺎﻔﹼﻟﹶ ﺲ ﺒﻠﹾﻳ ﻮﻫ ،ﺮﹺﻤ ﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﲔ ﺴِ ﻤ ﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻲﻓ .ﺕ ﺎﻴﻟﹶ ﻱﺫ ﺮﹺﻌﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻒ ﻴﻔﻟﹶ ﺎﹰﺴﺑﹺﻻ ﻡﺪ ﻗﹶ ،ﻊﹺ ﺑﹺﺍﺮﻟﺍ ﻉﹺ ﻮﺒﺳ ﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﺔﻳﺎﻬﻧﹺ ﰲ ﺕ ﺮﻈﹶ ﻧ .ﲔ ﺘﺴِ ﻜ ﻳﺮﹺﺑﹺ ﻉﹺ ﺭﹺﺍﻮﺷ ﺔﺿ ﻮﻘﹶﻣ ﻲﻓ ﻦ ﻴﻳﹺﺎﻛﻮ ﻛﹶ ﻖ ﺸ ﻨﺘﻳ ،ﺪ ﻨﻬﹺﻟﹾﺍ ﺏﹺ ﺮﻏﹶ ﻦ ﻣ ﻲﻘﺷ ﻞﹲ ﺟ ﺭ ﻪﻧﺄﹶﻛﻭ ،ﺮﹺﻌﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻦﹺ ﻋ ﺖ ﻌﻨﺘﻣﺍ .ﺔﹰﻴﺟﹺ ﺎﺟﺯ ﺍﹰﺩﻮﻘﻋ ﺲ ﺒﻠﹾﻳ ﺮﹴﺴ ﻧ ﺓﹸﺭﻮﺻ ﻲ ﻫ ﻲﺴِ ﻔﹾﻧ ﰲ ﺕ ﺮﻀ ﺣ ﱵﻟﺍ ﺓﹸﺭﻮﺼ ﻟﺍﻭ ،ﺓﹰﺪﺣ ﺍﻭ ﺓﹰﺮﻈﹾ ﻧ ﻪﻴﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﻒ ﻴﻈ ﻨﺗ ﻦ ﻋ ﺖ ﻌﻨﺘﻣﺍ ﻢ ﺛﹸ .ﻯﺮﺧ ﺄﹸﻟﹾﺍ ﺔﻓﹶﺮﻐﻟﹾﺍ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺡ ﺍﺮﻓﹶ ،ﺎﻨﺘﻓﹶﺮﻏﹸ ﺏ ﺎﺑ ﻪﻧﻭﺩ ﺖ ﻠﹾﻔﹶﻗﹾﺃﹶ ﺪ ﻗﹶﻭ .ﺎﹰﻌﺒﻃﹶ ،ﻪﻌﻣ ﻡﹺﻼﻜﻟﹾﺍ ﱡﻞﻛﹸ ﻪﺌﹾﻓﺎﻜﻳ ﻢ ﻟﹶ ﻥﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺕ ﺮﻌﺷ ،ﻚ ﻟﺫ ﻞﱢ ﻛﹸ ﻊ ﻣﻭ .ﻪﻣﺎﻌﻃﹶ ﺦﹺ ﺒﻃﹶ ﻦ ﻋ ﺖ ﻌﻨﺘﻣﺍ ﺎﻤﻛﹶ ،ﻊ ﻴﺑﹺﺎﺳﺄﹶﻟ ﻩﺮﹺﻳﺮﹺﺳ ﺔﻴﻄ ﻏﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺫﹾﺇﹺ !
(ﻪﺳ ﺃﹾﺭ ﻰﻠﹶﻋ ) ﺮﹺﻌﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﺕ ﺎﻴﻠﹶﻟﺍ ﻚ ﻠﺗ ﰲ ﻩﺍﺭﺃﹶ ﻥﺃﹶ ﻩﺮﻛﹸ ﺪ ﺷ ﺃﹶ ﺖ ﻫ ﺮﹺﻛﹶ ﺪ ﻗﹶﻭ .ﻪﻟﹶ ﺖ ﻄﹾ ﻄﱠ ﺧ ﻱﺬ ﻟﺍ ﺏﹺ ﺎﻘﻌﻟﹾﺍ .ﺮﺜﻛﹾ ﺃﹶ ﺔﹰﺳ ﺮﹺﺷ ﻲﻨﹺﺘﻠﹶﻌﺟ ﺓﹰﺪﻳﺪ ﺟ ﺱﹺ ﺪ ﻴﺳ ﺮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺓﹶﺭﺎﻴﺳ ﺖ ﻳﺃﹶﺭﻭ ﻙ ﺎﺒﺸ ﻟﺍ ﺝ ﺭﹺﺎﺧ ﺕ ﺮﻈﹶ ﻧ .ﺎﻨﺘﻴﺑ ﻰﻟﹶﺇﹺ ﺖ ﻘﹶﻴﺳ ﺓﹰﺭﺎﻴﺳ ﺖ ﻌﻤ ﺳ ﻡﹴﻮﻳ ﺕ ﺍﺫ ﻢ ﺛﹸ ﺢ ﻴﺗﺎﻔﻣ ﻊ ﺿ ﻭ ﻢّ ﺛﹸ ،ﱄﱠ ﺇﹺ ﻰﺸ ﻣﻭ ﺓﺭﺎﻴﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻦ ﻣ ﻝﹶ ﺰﻧ ،ﺔﺟ ﺍﺭﺪ ﻟﺍ ﺪ ﻨﻋ ﻥﺍﺩ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛﻭ .ﻞﹴ ﻴﻤ ﺟ ﻱﺮﹺﻤ ﺧ ﻥ ﻮﻟﹶ ﺕ ﺍﺫ .ﻲﻔّﻛﹶ ﺔﺣ ﺍﺭ ﰲ ﺓﺭﺎﻴﺴ ﻟﺍ .ﺓﺭﺎﻴﺴ ﻟﺍ ﻮﺤﻧ ﻪﺳ ﺃﹾﺭ ﻙ ﺮﺤ ﻳ ﻮﻫﻭ ،ﺖ ﻓﺎﺧ ﺕ ﻮ ﺻ ﰲ ﻝﹶ ﺎﻗ "،ﻩﺬ ﻫ ﻚ ﻟﹶ" 90 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] ،ﻱﺮﹺﻤ ﺨ ﻟﹾﺍ ﻥ ﻮﻠﱠﻟﺍ ﺕ ﺍﺫ ﺱﹺ ﺪ ﻴﺳ ﺮﻤ ﻟﹾﺍ ﺓﹶﺭﺎﻴﺳ ﻦ ﻜ ﻟﻭ ،ﺪﺣ ﺍﻭ ﺀٌﻲ ﺷ (ﻪﺳﺃﺭ ﻰﻠﻋ) ﺮﹺﻌﺸ ﻟﺍ ﻒ ﻴﻔﻟﹶ ﻥﱠ ﺇﹺ ،ﺔﹰﻘﹶﻴﻘﺣ ﺎﹰﻤ ﺘﻬ ﻣ ﻼﹰ ﺟ ﺭ ﻥﺍﺩ ﻥﹶ ﺎﻛ ،ﺪﻴﻛ ﺃﹶ ،ﻱﺭﹺﺪ ﺻ ﻲﻓ ﻱﺮﹺﺸ ﺒﻟﹾﺍ ﻮﹺﻔﹾﻌﻟﹾﺍ ﺐ ﻴﻠﺣ ﻊ ﺒﻧ ﺍﹰﺭﻮ ﻓﹶﻭ .ﺐ ﻴﺠﹺ ﻋ ،ﺮﺧ ﺁ ﺀٌﻲ ﺷ .ﻲﻨﹺﻗﹾﺪ ﺻ ،ﻪﺗﺮﺳ ﺄﹸﺑﹺ Self Assessment Exercise Reread the Arabic translation of “A Caring Man” and extract 20 vocabularies you have learnt.
4.0 Conclusion The Arabic passage above is an Arabic version of the English short story originally created by Ken Saro-Wiwa.
Its English version is replete with fluent and figurative expressions, thus enriching the Arabic version with polished language and clear lexes without defeating the fundamental purpose of the author.
The author’s perspective is geared toward societal reform.
5.0 Summary This unit has presented you with an Arabic translation of the fourth story extracted from “A Forest of Flowers”.
The story has derivable lessons, which students are expected to spin out for their personal and intellectual development.
Critical attention was paid to detail in translating so as to present accurate or close to perfect Arabic translation.
The next unit will thoroughly appreciate this story from literary perspective.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Translate the following passage into Arabic: “The Discovery of the High Lama” The older I get, the more I am astonished by this trickster hand of time.
Look at all the boys we thought would go on to become doctors and engineers.
They became lafanka men playing guitar in Thamel.
And all the lafanka ones went on to become stars in unexpected places.
One boy who came last in class throughout his school days won a scholarship to study fashion design in New York.
Another boy, who was the top student of our batch, became so disheartened after Harvard rejected his application- 91 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] he spent the next decade drinking in the Bamboo café, talking sadly about his plans to be a chemical engineer.
But the most surprising story of all was Bigyan's.
Did you ever meet him?
He was one of the boys who played in the Dead Rose Tigerbalm band in the Insight Bar.
Yes, that's right - the guitarist.
He had that curly hair always slick with gel, and the dreadful pair of sunglasses.
He wore that Pakistani imported leather jacket with a big white yin-yang patch on the back… 7.0 References/Further Readings Saro-Wiwa, Ken, (1986) “A Forest of Flowers” Saros International Publishers: Port Harcourt.
Wehr, Hans (1960) A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, Macdonald & Evans Ltd: London.
Hornby, A.S (2010) Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English, 8th Edition, Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Josh, Sushma (2011) “The Discovery of the High Lama”, www.short-stories.co.uk Unit 6: Literary Appraisal of a Short Story 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Body: “A Caring Man” vis-à-vis the components of a short story 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction We have in the previous lessons enumerated and explained the elements that make up a short story.
We have also tried as much as possible to render into English four 92 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] different stories from Saro-Wiwa’s stories collection entitled “A Forest of Flowers”.
In this unit however, as a way of experimentation, we will try to literarily appreciate one of the four translated stories, “A Caring Man”, using the mechanisms of a short story as our guide.
2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this unit, students will be able to: - Analyze any fictional works by means of the characteristics of a story.
- They will have as well acquired the ability to effectively appropriate story elements in creating their own fiction as the elements used for appraisal here are also applicable for appreciating such stories of longer size as the novel and the drama.
3.0 Main Body: “A Caring Man” vis-à-vis the components of a short story a.
The narrative “A Caring Man” is a short story narrated according to the principles laid down by pioneers of the genre.
The author narrated the story from the standpoint of the first person, who in this case, happens to be the protagonist (a housewife) of the story.
Thus, the writer uses “I”, “Me” “We” and “Us” even right from the opening of the story, and renders the narrative through the major character.
This makes it possible for reader to see the story events through the eyes of the central character.
The story, “A Caring Man” is premised on sociological comedy of love between ‘Dan’ and his wife, who had been married for twenty six years.
But their marital life however, turned sour when ‘Dan’, the family head, got involved with their house maid, ‘Ayo’ in a clandestine love relationship.
The story ultimately reached its high point when the house wife uncovers the love escapade between ‘Dan’, her husband and ‘Ayo’, the house help.
b.
The characters The story, ‘A Caring Man’ was constructed around a very few characters, eight to be specific.
These include ‘Dan’, the family head, his wife (hero of the story) and their two children.
Others are Dan’s mother, ‘Ayo’, the house help and her parents (Mama Ayo and Papa Ayo).
Dan’s wife is the central character of the story.
She was happily married, and the marriage was blessed with two female children.
Though, she was lucratively employed but the stress of her job made it difficult for her to manage effectively between work and household responsibility, as Dan, the husband, never took 93 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] interest in assisting her with the tasks.
Hence, the need arose for her to get a house help who would take care of the household chores while she devotes enough time to her job.
Eventually, she brought in ‘Ayo’.
Ayo was a skinny tall girl approaching puberty when she joined Dan’s family as a maid.
She was from a poor background though, but Dan’s wife took good care of her by feeding, clothing and training, which transformed her to a presentable young lady.
Thus, she became useful and indispensable to the entire family.
But unfortunately, her presence in the home soon became the pivot around which revolved the comedy in the home front.
Dan and wife were in their fifties – a plausible reason why Dan’s wife was losing physical attractiveness.
Other probable reason was the demand of her job and the stress she suffered there from.
These and other factors collaborated to deprive Dan of his wife’s attention.
In an attempt to reminisce on marital bliss and to get rid of these matrimonial challenges, Dan soon began to have extra marital affairs which later on “earned” him a bastard baby boy.
Dan’s wife took it badly initially but quickly got over it and she decided to adopt the child and rear him together with her biological children.
But Dan would not stop at that as he, before long, added salt to the injury of his wife: he condescended and put the house help ‘Ayo’ in a family way through a promiscuous affair.
It was at this point that “papa” and “Mama” Ayo featured in the story: they appeared in the house of Dan to express their anger and disapproval of Dan’s misconduct.
Their presence in the house consequently let the cat out of Dan’s bag as it turned to be an occasion for Dan’s wife to realize her husband’s persistent infidelity.
She was seriously devastated, ashamed, embarrassed and humiliated.
She wept bitterly and appealed to Papa and Mama Ayo for clemency; that arrangements would be made to send Ayo back to them, but before she could do this Ayo had fled the house.
Incredibly, Dan had withdrawn from the sitting room on hearing papa and Mama Ayo knock the door, hence leaving his wife to face the wrath of his misbehavior.
This caused a hot confrontation between the couple, and Dan before dawn had left home informing his wife through a note that he was travelling to London for a week on business trip.
But Dan did not return home until after one month probably after having suffered nostalgia.
The quarrel continued between the couple even after a month of separate living, and no punishment his wife devised seemed commensurate with his naughtiness.
When co-existing with the wife under the same roof was becoming miserable, Dan decided to appease her with a gift of Mercedes Benz car, which she gladly accepted and then pardoned him.
Her 94 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] remark was that “Dan was always a caring man…” Was he truly a caring man?
The answer is in between the lines of the story!
c. The setting With respect to the time setting, “A Caring Man” belongs to Nigeria’s post- independence period.
It is an invention of the period of military rule, when dictatorship, oppression and cruelty were the system of governance.
The story is a production of what is referred to in literary sphere as the modern period.
Concerning the place setting, it belongs to a metropolitan city in the Niger Delta area of Nigeria where ignorance, high life and social corruption often cause heartbreaking consequences on individuals, families and the society at large.
This is apparent in the fallout between two different families and the aftereffect on the larger society, all as a result of waywardness of a family head.
d. The plot The plot of the story, “A Caring Man” was designed through logical and sequential arrangement of the events in the story.
Thus, the story has beginning, middle and end as the author networks the activities of characters with one another, revealing the bearing of each character (and his/her actions) to the central theme of the story.
The author employed what is known as “Rising Action” when he revealed the conflict in the story to reader and where the events become complicated.
This, as far as this story is concerned, came to the open when Dan’s wife discovered that her husband was having an affair on the side.
This led the reader to the highest point of interest (climax) in the story as s/he wonders with anxiety what will happen next; will the conflict be resolved or not?
The conflict eventually got resolved with the settlement between the couple, thereby furnishing the reader with the outcome of events in the story.
e. The central theme The central idea behind the short story is the theory that “man is the backbone of the family” and any transgression on the part of the man in a given home, would certainly crumble the home and would impact negatively upon the larger society.
This was made clear in the story through the gross social misconduct of a family leader; how his home consequently fell apart and how the larger society was adversely affected.
The author also pointed out the need for man to assist the spouse in some petty domestic duties to ease the burden, especially when she is taking up a white collar job.
95 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Self Assessment Exercise What is the connection between plot and character in developing a short story?
4.0 Conclusion “A Caring Man” is a five-page short story curled from “A Forest of Flowers”, a collection of stories written by Ken Saro-Wiwa in 1986 to portray ignorance, fallacy and moral decadence of the Nigerian society.
“A Caring Man” is the seventeenth story in the story collection that was divided into two unequal parts.
The first part consists of eight short stories, while the second comprises of eleven different stories.
In “A Caring Man”, appreciated here, Saro-Wiwa’s underlying theme is that man as the pivot upon which any family rests, determines to a large extent, the moral rectitude of the nuclear family and that of the society as a whole.
The story is observed to have fulfilled all the requirements of a short story, and the writer was able to effectively manage the story elements.
5.0 Summary In this unit we were able to analyze the story, “A Caring Man” using the five components of a narrative, which include the narrative style (or writer’s point of view), the characters, the time and space setting, the plot and the main idea of the author.
Our experimentation here shows that none of these five elements can function in a short story in isolation of the others.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Use the experiment in this unit to appreciate the translated story, “Love Song of Housewife” "ﺖ ﻴﺑ ﺔﺑﺭ ﻦﻣ ﺐ ﳊﹸ ﺍ ﺔﹸﻴﻨﹺﻏﺃﹸ" contained in unit four (4) of this module three (3).
7.0 References/Further Readings Saro-Wiwa, Ken, (1986) “A Forest of Flowers” Saros International Publishers: Port Harcourt.
Jayyasi, Salma Khadra, (2005) ‘Modern Arabic Fiction’, Columbia University Press: Columbia.
96 ARA383 English-Arabic Translation [Year] Moosa, Matti, (1997) ‘The origins of Modern Arabic Fiction’, Lynne Rienner Publishers: Boulder, Colorado.
http://thelipath.wordpress.com 97
