ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ARA 382 COURSE TITLE: ARABIC GRAMMAR II 1 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II CO URSE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA GU IDE COURSE GUIDE COURSE CODE / TITLE: ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II COURSE DEVELOPER /WRITER: Dr. Mikail A. Folorunsho c/o Dept.
of Arabic and Islamic Studies University of Ibadan – Ibadan COURSE EDITOR /PROGRAMME LEADER Dr. A.K.T.
Otunuyi School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos COURSE COORDINATOR Dr. Mustapha A.R.
School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos 2 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel AdesujoAdemulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2011 First Printed ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by:………….
For National Open University of Nigeria 3 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction - - - - - - - - - 4 Course Aims - - - - - - - - 4 Course Objectives - - - - - - - - 4 Working through this Course - - - - - - 5 Course Materials - - - - - - - - 5 Study Units - - - - - - - - - 6 Tutor Marked Assignments - - - - - - 7 References - - - - - - - - - 7 Assessment - - - - - - - - - 8 – 9 Final Examination and Grading - - - - - - 9 Course Marking Scheme - - - - - - - 9 How to get the most from this Course - - - - - 9–11 Tutor and Tutorials - - - - - - - 11 Conclusion - - - - - - - - - 11 Summary - - - - - - - - - 12 COURSE GUIDE Introduction Welcome.
ARA 382 Arabic Grammar 2 is a two-Credit Unit Course for the Islamic Studies students in the Bachelor of Arts Degree programme of the School of Arts and Social Sciences of the National Open University of Nigeria.
It consists of fourteen units which acquaint students with the various types of pronouns in Arabic grammar, the formation of dual and plural from singular nouns in Arabic and the types of vowels in Arabic.
These also include the numbering system in Arabic, types and functions of particles in Arabic as well as the grammatical rules guiding the formation of sentences in Arabic.
4 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II This Course Guide provides information on what the course is all about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also tells you about assessments, and periodic tutorial classes that are available for the course.
What you will learn in this Course The overall aim of ARA 382 Arabic Grammar 2 is to introduce you to the various types of pronouns in Arabic grammar, the formation of dual and plural from singular nouns in Arabic and the types of vowels in Arabic.
The numbering system in Arabic, types and functions of particles in Arabic as well as the grammatical rules guiding the formation of sentences in Arabic are also included the introduction.
You will at the end of this course be free from grammatical errors when you speak or write in the language.
Course Aims The aims of this Course can be summarized as follows: i) Introducing you to the basic components of Arabic grammar ii) Preparing you for expressing yourself in grammatically perfect spoken and written Arabic.
iii) Enabling you to identify various types of nouns, verbs and particles in Arabic language Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, each unit of ARA 382 has specific objectives which are stated for you at its beginning.
I advise that you read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study to check your progress.
Here are the wider objectives of ARA 382 course as a whole.
By meeting the objectives, you can count yourself as having met the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: a) Highlight the noun in Arabic language; identify and utilize its masculine and feminine; singular, dual and plural forms in written and spoken Arabic.
b) Recognise the various types and tenses of Arabic language verbs in writtenforms and utilize them in spoken Arabic.
c) State the Arabic language particles, their meanings, uses and effects in Arabicgrammar d) Use Arabic pronouns and identify correct use of them in oral and writtenexpressions 5 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II e) Construct and recognize grammatically perfect nominal and verbal sentences f) Recognise Arabic numbering system and use them appropriately in oral and written expressions g) Identify the various types of Arabic pronouns and employ them in appropriate constructions Working through this Course To complete the course, you are required to read the study units and other related materials.
You will also need to undertake practical exercises for which you will need a pen, a note-book, and other materials that will be listed in this guide.
The exercises are to aid you in understanding the concepts being presented.
At the end of each unit, you will be required to submit written assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, you will write a final examination.
Course Materials The major materials you will need for this course are: i) Course guide ii) Study units iii) Text books iv) Presentation Schedule 6 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Study Units There are fourteen Units in this course broken into four modules.
They are listed below: MODULE 1: THE PRONOUNS IN ARABIC Unit 1: Detached (Personal) Pronouns in Arabic Unit 2: Attached Pronouns 1 (Pronominal Suffixes) Unit 3: Attached Pronouns 11 (Possessive Pronouns) Unit 4: Concealed Pronouns Unit 5: Demonstrative, Relative and Interrogative Pronouns MODULE 2: SINGULAR, DUAL AND PLURALS Unit 1: Singular and Dual Unit 2: Sound Masculine Plural Unit 3: Sound Feminine Plural Unit 4: Broken Plural MODULE 3: THE VOWELS Unit 1: Primary Vowels Unit 2: Secondary Vowels MODULE 4: ARABIC NUMBERING SYSTEM, PARTICLES AND FORMATION OF SENTENCES Unit 1: Arabic Numbers Unit 2: Arabic Particles Unit 3: Arabic Sentences 7 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) Each unit contains a number of self-tests.
These self-test questions on the sections you have just covered are meant to help to evaluate your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the materials.
Alongside with your tutor- marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individuals units and of the course.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) You will have to submit a specified number of Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs).
Every unit in this course has a tutor marked assignment.
You will be assessed on four of them but the best three performances from the (TMAs) will be used for 30% grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor Marked Assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline for submissions.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor for a discussion on the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
References and Further Readings Each unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try to get as many as possible of those textbooks and materials.
They are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
In addition, you must obtain text materials which are provided by the NOUN.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text materials.
Below is a list of the books suggested as references and further readings.
Adetunji, B.
&Hameed, D.O.
(2009).
A New Approach to the Arabic Language for Schools and Colleges, Abeokuta, Goad Educational Publishers Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Bakr, E.Y.,et al.
(1975).
Arabic by RadioSeries Cairo, A.R.E.
Broadcasting Corporation Balogun, I.A.B.
and Oseni, Z.I.
(1985).
A Modern Arabic Course, Bk 1, Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos.
Cowan, D. (1975).
Modern Literary Arabic.Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos .Folorunsho, M.A.
(1996) .A Modern Approach to Arabic Reading, Moyanjuola Publishers, Ede Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, A.A. &Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A.&Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahwwa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān Mukhtar, I.B.
(1992).
Arabic Brighter Grammar, Bk 1, Mainasara Press, Kano.
8 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Assessment File An assessment file and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the works you must submit to your tutor for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the tutor marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.
Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
Course Overview and Presentations Schedule Unit Title work Weeks Activity Module1 The Pronouns in Arabic Unit 1 Detached Week 1 (Personal) Pronouns in Arabic Unit 2 Attached Week 2 Pronouns 1 (Pronominal Suffixes) Unit 3 Attached Week 3 Assignment 1 Pronouns II (Possessive Pronouns) Unit 4 Concealed Week 4 Pronouns Unit 5 Demonstrative, Week 5 Relative and Interrogative Pronouns Module 2 Singular, Dual Assignment 2 and Plurals Unit 1 Singular and Week 6 Dual Unit 2 Sound Week 7 Masculine Plural 9 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Unit 3 Sound Feminine Week 8 Assignment 3 Plural Unit 4 Broken Plurals Week 9 Module 3 The Vowels Unit 1 Primary Vowels Week 10 Assignment 4 Unit 2 Secondary Week 11 Vowels Module 4 Arabic Numbering System, The Particles and Formation of Sentences Unit 1 Arabic Numbers Week 12 Unit 2 Arabic Particles Week 13 Unit 3 Arabic Week 14 Sentences Final Examination and Grading The final examination will be a text of three hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
Find time to read the unit all over before your examination.
The final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflects the kinds of self- assessment exercises and tutor marked assignment you have previously encountered.
And all aspects of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
Assessment Mark Assignment (Best Three 30% Assignments out of four Marked) Final Examination 70% Total 100% How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the 10 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II study units tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1) Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment 2) Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the Assignment relate to the units.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason why students fail is that they get behind with their course work if you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late to help.
4) Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5) Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6) Keep in touch with your centre.
Up-to-do course information will be continuously available there 7) Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than due date.
8) Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your stuffy so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10) When you have submitted your assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the 11 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objective (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide) Tutors and Tutorials Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor-marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if: You do not understand any part of the study unit or the assigned reading You have difficulty with the exercise You have a problem or problems with an assignment or with your tutor’s comments on any assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Conclusion ARA 382 provides you a basic component of Arabic Grammar upon which you develop mastery in the use of the Arabic language structure.
It is aimed at equipping you with analytical skills to examine the nature of Arabic language by introducing you to Arabic Grammar upon which you will be able to identify types of pronouns, types and procedures for the formation of dual and plural in Arabic.
It is also aimed at familiarizing you with the various types of vowels, the numbering system in Arabic, the particles and their functions as well as the rules guiding the formation of sentences in Arabic.
Summary All features of this course guide have been designed to facilitate your learning in order that you achieve the aims and objectives of the course.
They include the aims and objectives; Course Summary, Course Overview, Self Assessment Exercises and study questions.
You should ensure that you make maximum use of them in your study to achieve maximum results.
We hope that you will find the Course interesting and useful; and wish you success.
12 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE/TITLE ARA 382: Arabic Grammar II COURSE DEVELOPER/WRITER Dr. Mikail A. Folorunsho c/o Dept.
of Arabic and Islamic Studies Univeristy of Ibadan - Ibadan COURSE EDITOR Dr. A.K.T.
Otunuyi School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos 13 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II PROGRAMME LEADER Prof. A.F.Ahmed School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos COURSE COORDINATOR Dr. A.R.Mustapha School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja 14 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2011 First Printed ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by……………… For National Open University of Nigeria 15 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II TABLE OF CONTENTS Title Page 12 Course Team 13 Publisher’s Address 14 Table of Contents 15 MODULE 1: THE PRONOUNS IN ARABIC Unit 1: Detached (Personal) Pronouns in Arabic …………………….
16 Unit 2: Attached Pronouns 1 (Pronominal Suffixes)………………… 23 Unit 3: Attached Pronouns 11 (Possessive Pronouns)………………….31 Unit 4: Concealed Pronouns…………………………………………... 37 Unit 5: Demonstrative, Relative and Interrogative Pronouns…………..42 MODULE 2: SINGULAR, DUAL AND PLURALS Unit 1: Singular and Dual…………………………………………….. .49 Unit 2: Sound Masculine Plural……………………………………...…56 Unit 3: Sound Feminine Plural…………………………………………63 Unit 4: Broken Plural…………………………………………………...69 MODULE 3: THE VOWEL Unit 1: Primary Vowels………………………………………………..77 Unit 2: Secondary Vowels…………………………………………..…83 MODULE 4: ARABIC NUMBERING SYSTEM, THE PARTICLES AND FORMATION OF SENTENCES Unit 1: Arabic Numbers……………………………………………….90 Unit 2: Arabic Particles…………………………………………………97 Unit 3: Arabic Sentences…………………………………………104-109 16 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 1: THE PRONOUNS IN ARABIC UNIT 1: DETACHED (PERSONAL) PRONOUNS IN ARABIC 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Types of Pronouns in Arabic 3.2: Detached Pronouns in Arabic 3.3: Detached Pronouns in Nominative Cases 3.4: Detached Pronouns in Accusative Cases 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Pronouns are words or expressions standing in places of nouns.
This definition embraces both the English and Arabic pronouns.
Personal pronouns in English are either singular (I, He, She, You) or plural (We, They, You).
In Arabic, however, there are singular, dual and plural pronouns.
This complex aspect (pronouns) of Arabic requires the attention of learners as it forms the basis of most of the Arabic constructions.
This unit introduces you to different types of pronouns in Arabic, with emphasis on the detached (personal pronouns).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: - state the types of pronouns in Arabic - identify the detached pronouns in Arabic - get acquainted with the accusative and nominative detached pronouns in Arabic - identify the classification of detached pronouns according to the gender and the number of persons involved in the usage.
17 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Pronouns There are three types of pronouns in Arabic; these are: detached,ةلصفنم attached, ةلصتم and concealed ones ةرتتسم.
The three types are represented by the following table: Pronouns رئامضلا ةرتتسم ةلصتم ةلصفنم Concealed Attached Detached لعافلا ءُ اَت 3rd person 2nd person 1st person نيلعافلا اَن بئاغ بطاخم ملكتم نينثلإا فلأ ُ هاَيٍإ ,وه كَ اَيٍإ , تَ نَْأ يَ اَيٍإ , اَنَأ ةعامجلا واو ا َهاَيٍإ ,يه ك اَيٍإ , تٍ نَْأ اَناَيٍ إ , نُ حْ َن ةوس نلا نون امَ ُهاَيٍإ ,امه امَ كُ اَيٍإ ,امَ ُتنَْأ بطاخملا ءاي مْ ُهاَيٍإ ,مه مْ كُ اَيٍإ , مْ ُتنَْ أ بئاغلا ءاه ن ُهاَيٍإ , ن ه ن كُ اَيإ , ن ُتنَْأ باطخلا فاك نيلعافلا ريغ ان ملكتملا ءاي In this unit however, elaboration shall be made of the detached pronouns while the ‘attached’ and the ‘concealed’ will be treated in the subsequent units.
Self Assessment Exercise Define Arabic pronoun and identify the types of pronouns in Arabic.
3.2 Detached Pronouns in Arabic ةلصفنملا رئامضلا Pronouns in Arabic are either detached, attached or concealed.
The Arabic personal pronouns, which are fourteen in number, are of the detached category.
Three of these are for third person(s) masculine, three for third person(s) feminine, three for second person(s) masculine, three for second person(s) feminine and the last two for first person(s) masculine/feminine.
They are stated the following table: 18 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Usage: Persons Gender English Personal equivalents pronouns 3rd Person Masculine He وه singular 3rd person dual Masculine They امه 3rd person plural Masculine They مه 3rd person Feminine She يه singular 3rd person dual Feminine They امه 3rd person plural Feminine They نّ ه 2nd person Masculine You تنأ singular 2nd person dual Masculine You امتنأ 2nd person Masculine You متنأ plural 2nd person Feminine You ت نأ singular 2nd person dual Feminine You امتنأ 2nd person Feminine You نّ تنأ plural 1st person Masculine/feminine I انأ singular 1st person Masculine/feminine We نحن dual/plural Though different pronouns are used for different genders in Arabic yet there are some similarities.
The dual pronouns indicating the second and third persons respectively, {امتنأ} and { امه } are shared by both masculine and 19 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II feminine.
Also, the first person pronouns { انأ } and {نحن } are used for the two genders.
Let us now consider the English equivalents of the fourteen pronouns, it will be noted that only six English pronouns represent them all; these are: I, We, She, He, They, and You.
I - representing {انأ } 1st person singular masculine/feminine We - representing { نحن} 1st person dual/ plural masculine/feminine You - representing { تَ نأ } 2nd person singular masculine You - representing { ت نأ } 2nd person singular feminine You - representing {امتنأ } 2nd person dual masculine/feminine You - representing { متنأ } 2nd person plural masculine You - representing { نّ تنأ } 2nd person plural feminine He - representing {وه } 3rd person singular masculine She - representing {يه } 3rd person singular feminine They -representing {امه } 3rd person dual masculine/feminine They -representing {مه } 3rd person plural masculine They -representing { نّ ه } 3rd person plural feminine Self Assessment Test Identify six of the detached pronouns and state their English equivalents.
3.3 Detached Pronouns in Nominative Cases There are three cases in Arabic: nominative, accusative and genitive.
Two of these cases, namely the nominative and accusative are applicable to detached pronouns.
Please recall the last lesson (3.2), the pronouns treated are all in nominative cases.
When a detached pronoun appears as in the table above, it is treated as أدتبم ‘subject’ to which a ربخ ‘predicate’ is expected to be added, to make a complete statement.
Find few examples below: 20 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II ص لخم وه - وه ناصلخم امه - امه نوصلخم مه - مه ةدهتجم يه - يه ناتدهتجم امه - امه تُ ادهتجم نّ ه - نّ ه م لسم تنأ - تَ نأ ناملسم امتنأ - امتنأ نوملسم متنأ - متنأ ةنمؤم ت نأ - ت نأ ناتنمؤم امتنأ - امتنأ تُ انمؤم نّ تنأ - نّ تنأ ةسردم / س ردم انأ - انأ تُ اسردم / نوسردم نحن - نحن The subject أدتبم is defined as a noun in the nominative case which commences a sentence, while the predicate ربخ is also a noun in the nominative case joined to the subject to form a complete sentence.
The sentences above comprise a pronoun (which grammatically enjoys the status of a noun) and a noun each.
The pronoun which commences each of the sentences is treated as the subject.
The second noun in each of the sentences informs us of certain qualities in the first word of the sentences, i.e.
the subject, so it is the predicate.
Both are in the nominative cases.
Self Assessment Exercise - Add suitable predicates to the following pronouns امَ ُه , يَ ه ,امَ ُتنَْأ, ن ُه ,َ انَأ 3.4 Detached Pronouns in Accusative Cases Detached pronouns in accusative cases are treated as the objects )هب لوعفم( .
The object is defined as a noun in the accusative case indicating the particular thing on which the action of the doer (the subject -لعافلا ) occurs.
A detached pronoun in the accusative case is represented by ايإ suffixed by a lexical item representing the actual pronoun.
Find few examples below: 21 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Number/Gender Singular Dual Plural 1st يَ ايإ انايإ ا َنايإ person/masculine 1st person/feminine يَ ايإ انايإ ا َنايإ 2nd كَ ايإ امكايإ مْ كايإ person/masculine 2nd person/feminine ك ايإ امكايإ نّ كايإ 3rd ُهايإ امهايإ مْ هايإ person/masculine 3rd person/feminine اهايإ امهايإ نّ هايإ Let us consider the Qur’an, chapter 1 verse 5 where Allah says: نُ يعتسن كَ اّيإو دُ بعن كَ اّي إ meaning “Thee do we worship and Thine aid we seek”… كايإ occurs twice in this holy verse and the two occur each as ‘the object’ in the holy verse.
All the pronouns in the above table cannot occur in the sentences except as objects, in accusative case.
Let us go through this table for more illustrations ةلصفنملا بصنلا رئامض ةلصفنملا عفرلا رئامض اهعون رئامضلا ثنؤملل ركذملل ثنؤملل ركذملل ُ ةمَ لعَ مُ لا تْ حَ دَ مَ ياّيإ - مُ لعَ مُلا حَ دَ مَ ياّي إ ةم لس م ا ن أ - م ل س م ا ن أ د ر ف م ل ا ملكتملا رئامض يبأ حَ صن اناّيإ - يبأ حَ صن اناّيإ ناتملسم نحن - ن ا م ل س م ن ح ن ىنثملا ُ الل مَ ركأ اناّيإ - ُ الل مَ ركأ اناّيإ تُ املسم نحن - ن و م ل س م ن ح ن عمجلا دُ بعن ك اّيإ - دُ بعن كَ اّيإ ةنمؤم تنأ – ن م ؤ م ت َ ن أ درفملا رئامض تُ حصن امكاّيإ - تُ حصن امكاّيإ ناتنمؤم امتنأ – ن ا ن م ؤ م ا م ت ن أ ىنثم لا بطاخملا تُ أفاك نّ كاّيإ - تُ أفاك مكاّيإ تانمؤم نّ تنأ – ن و ن م ؤ م م ت ن أ عمجلا اَنمرَ َتحا اهاّيإ - اَنمرَ َتحا هاّيإ ةنمؤم يه – ص ل خ م و ه د ر ف م ل ا بئاغلا رئامض تُ بْ َبحَ أ امهاّيإ - تُ بْ َبحَ أ امهاّيإ ناتصلخم امه ن ا ص ل خ م ام ه ىنثملا تُ دْ صق نّ هاّيإ - تُ دْ صق مْ هاّيإ ت اصلخم نّ ه – ن و ص ل خ م م ه عمجلا 22 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Self Assessment Exercise - State the detached pronouns in accusative case with relevant illustrations 4.0 CONCLUSION جاتنتسلإا Pronouns are lexical items standing in places of nouns.
Arabic pronouns can be classified into three types – detached, attached and concealed.
Detached pronouns are fourteen, each representing a particular gender and number.
Two of the three cases in Arabic – the accusative, nominative and genitive- are applicable to the detached pronouns; these are the accusative and nominative cases.
5.0 SUMMARY ةصلاخلا In this unit, we have treated the types of pronouns in Arabic with emphasis on the detached pronouns.
We have attempted the classification of the pronouns according to the number and gender involved in the usage.
Various cases applicable to the detached pronouns have also been studied.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
State the detached pronouns in Arabic with their English equivalents 2.
Identify the three types of pronouns in Arabic 3.
Differentiate between the attached and the detached pronouns with appropriate illustrations.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Balogun, I.A.B.
and Oseni, Z.I.
(1985).
A Modern Arabic Course, Bk 1, Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos.
Cowan, D. (1975).
Modern Literary Arabic.
Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān 23 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 1 UNIT 2: ATTACHED PRONOUNS 1 (PRONOMINAL SUFFIXES) 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: The Pronominal Suffixes 3.2: Nūn ’al-wiqāyah 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0: References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The previous unit focuses on the detached pronouns while this unit addresses the attached pronouns.
The attached pronouns are the ones that cannot stand alone meaningfully.
They are usually attached to the end of verbs, nouns and particles.
When attached to verbs, they appear in nominative or accusative cases – depending on the type of verb as we will elaborate in this unit.
They appear in genitive case when attached to nouns or prepositions.
The ones in the nominative and accusative cases together with Nūn ’al-wiqāyah will be the subject of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Identify the pronominal suffixes in Arabic - Be acquainted with the pronominal suffixes in nominative and accusative cases - Compare and contrast the attached and detached pronouns in Arabic.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Pronominal Suffixes ةلصتملا رئامضلا As stated earlier, Arabic pronouns are either separated or suffixed.
Each of the fourteen separate personal pronouns is represented by a pronominal suffix when applied to perfect (past tense) verbs.
Pronominal suffixes representing these pronouns act as subjects of the verbs to which they are suffixed, hence they are called the nominative pronominal suffixes.
They are contained in the following: Examples: Perfect pronominal suffixes Personal pronouns 24 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II verbs بهذ سلج - وه ابهذ اسلج ا امه اوبهذ اوسلج او مه تْ بهذ تْ سلج ت يه اتبهذ اتسلج ات امه نّ بهذ نّ سلج ن نّ ه تَ بهذ تَ سلج تَ تَ نا امنبهذ امتسلج امت امتنأ س متبهذ متسلج مت متنا ت بهذ ت سلج ت ت نأ امتبهذ امتسلج امت امتنأ نّ تبهذ نّ تسلج نّ ت نّ تنأ تبهذ تُ سلج تُ انأ انبهذ انسلج ان نحن From the examples above, it will be noted that a similarity occurs in the second person dual masculine/feminine pronoun where the same pronominal 25 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II suffix امت is also applicable to the same gender and number as in the personal pronoun for the two.
Self Assessment Exercise Compare and contrast the attached pronouns and the detached pronouns The suffixes may be attached to the perfect verbs to remain in accusative cases as in the following Examples Corresponding Personal pronominal pronouns suffixes ُ هَبرَ ضَ ُهرَ صَ َن هى وه ُ امهَبرَ ضَ امُ هرَ صَ َن امهى امه مُ هَبرَ ضَ مُ هرَ صَ َن مهى مه ُ اهَبرَ ضَ ُ اهرَ صَ َن اهى يه امَ ُهَبرَ ضَ امَ ُهرَ صن امهى امه ن ُهَبرَ ضَ ن ُهرَ صن ن هى ن ه كَ َبرَ ضَ كَ رَ صَ َن كى كّ امكُ َبرَ ضَ امكرَ صَ َن امكى امك مكُ َبرَ ضَ مكُ رَ صَ َن مك مك ك َبرَ ضَ ك رَ صَ َن ك ى ك امكُ َبرَ ضَ امَ كُ رَ صَ َن امكى امك ن كُ َبرَ ضَ ن كرَ صَ َن ن ك ن ك ى ن َبرَ ضَ ىن رَ صَ َن ىنى انأ اَن َبرَ ضَ انَ رَ صَ َن ان نحن The pronominal suffixes in the nominative case may also be attached to the imperfect (present tense) verbs.
A verb that denotes an action in the present or the future is called imperfect (present tense) verbs.
As opposed to the perfect (past tenses) which are only suffixed, present tense verbs in Arabic are prefixed and suffixed.
There are four letters technically known as ‘anaytu ( تُ ينأ ) which commence present tense verbs.
Each of them has specific 26 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II pronouns with which it functions while various pronominal suffixes are added when applying a verb to different pronouns.
The following table contains two present tense verbs with initial present tense letters and appropriate pronominal suffixes applied: Examples: Present Corresponding initial present Personal pronoun tense verbs tense letters and pronominal suffixes حتفي بُ هذي - + verb + ي وه ناحتفي نابهذي نا + Verb + ي امه نوحتفي نوبهذي نو + verb + ي مه حُ تفت بُ هذت - + verb + ت يه ناحتفت نابهذت نا + verb + ت امه نّ حتفي نّ بهذي ن + verb + ي نّ ه حتفت بهذت - + verb + ت تَ نأ ناحتفت نابهذت نا + verb + ت امتنأ َ نوحتفت نوبهذت نو + verb + ت متنأ ني ح تفت نَ ي بهذت ني + verb + ت ت نأ ناحتفت نابهذت نا + verb + ت امتنأ نَ حتفت نَ بهذت ن + verb + ت نّ تنأ ُ حتفأ بُ هذأ - + verb+ أ انأ حُ تفن بُ هذن - + verb + ن نحن Similarity occurs among some verbs when applied to certain personal pronouns as those pronouns are represented by the same present tense letters and suffixes; e.g.
(a) يه (she) and تَ نأ (you – singular masculine) are represented by the same letter {- + verb + ت } (b) امه (they 3rd person dual feminine) and امتنأ (you – 2nd person dual 27 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II masculine/feminine) are represented by the same letter and suffixes ( نا + verb + ت ) More examples are: Zayd goes/ is going to the school ة سردملا ىلإ د يز بهذي Fatimah reads/ is reading a letter ًةلاسر ةمطاف ُأرقت Pronominal suffixes may also be attached to the imperative verbs.
A verb which expresses a request or gives an order is called imperative, request or command verb.
Verbs in this category are usually directed towards second person; e.g.
‘go’, ‘sit, ‘eat’, and so on.
As usual, different verbs are applicable to different persons in Arabic which equally focuses second person in the construction of its imperative verbs.
Imperative in Arabic is prefixed and suffixed.
The radical ‘alif serves as prefix for this verb while different pronominal suffixes are added, depending on the person(s) concerned.
The following table contains two imperative verbs applied to the six second person pronouns, with appropriate prefixes and suffixes cited.
Examples: Corresponding Second person Imperatives prefixes and suffixes Pronouns حْ تف ا بْ هذ ا + verb+ ا تَ نأ احتف ا ابهذ ا ا + verb+ ا امتنأ اوحتف ا اوبهذ ا او + verb+ ا متنأ يحتف ا يبهذ ا ي + verb+ ا ت نأ احتف ا ابهذ ا ا + verb+ ا امتنا ن حْ تف ا ن بْ هذ ا ن + verb+ ا نّ تنا Similar prefix and suffix are shared by (امتنأ), the second person dual masculine/feminine pronoun.
As noted above, the pronoun is represented by the letter ‘alif as prefix while the same letter serves again as the suffix.
Examples of how imperative is used in complete meaningful sentences are: ْ Read this letter َةلاس ر لا هذه أرق ا Sit on the chair ي سركلا ىلع سْ لج ا Self Assessment Exercise 28 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Convert the following past tense verbs to imperative verbs: .رصن ,برض ,بهذ ,بتك ,سلج There are also indirect imperative verbs, commonly used in giving order to carry out an action, to a third person.
The only difference between this latter form of imperative from the one treated earlier is that the former is preceded by ʼalif whereas indirect imperative is proceeded by lam ( ل ) in genitive case; succeeded by a present tense letter before the verb.
The following table contains two indirect imperative verbs applied to the six third person pronouns, with appropriate prefixes and suffixes.
Examples: Indirect Corresponding Third person pronouns Imperative prefixes and suffixes حْ تفيل بْ هذي ل - verb+ ي + ل وَ ه احتف ي ل ابهذي ل ا + verb+ ي + ل امَ ه اوحتفيل اوبهذي ل او + verb+ ي + ل مْ ُه يحتفيل يبهذ ي ل ي + verb+ ي + ل يَ ه احتفت ل ابهذت ل ا + verb+ ت + ل امَ ه نَ حْ تفي ل نَ بْ هذي ل ن + verb+ ي + ل نّ ه 3.2 Nūn ’al-wiqāyah (The guarding ‘n’) The guarding ‘n’ is one of the suffixes.
Let us now discuss this suffix representing the first person singular, feminine or masculine.
(a) ر اَبعْ تسْ ا ى نجَ اه جَ َاه is a past-tense verb.
The subject is ر اَبعْ تسْ ا .
The direct object is ءُ ايلا preceded by ‘n’ in ى نجَ اه ) ىن + جَ َاه( (b) ن اكَ ر َتشْ مُ َل ىد ازَ ى ف كَ اَي إ وَ ى ن ن إ ى ن ن ا consists of ى ن + ن إ.
The emphatic particle نّ إ governs ءُ ايلا preceded by ‘n’.
The predicate is ن اكَ ر َتشْ مُ ; it is in the nominative case indicated by فُ لَْلأا in the dual ending ن آ 29 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (c) The ن of the suffix ى ن is called by Arab grammarians ة َياقو لا نُ وُن ‘the guarding ‘n’ because it protects the preceding vowel from being absorbed by the long ة رَ سْ كَ constituting )ى نجَ اه( م لكَ َتمُ لْا ءُ اي = ( ى ن ن إ ).
In these two examples, the ‘n’ has protected the preceding ةحَ تْ َف being absorbed by the following long ة رَ سْ كَ .
Another example: (ى نمُ ر كْ ُي ) ‘he is generous to me’ here, the ‘n’ protects the preceding ُةم ضَ from being absorbed by the following long ة رَ سْ كَ .
In other words, ‘the guarding n’ serves to avoid a hiatus, i.e.
a break between a word ending with a vowel and another word beginning with a vowel (the pronominal suffix).
(d) ى ن if is appended to a verb, the ‘guarding n’ is never dropped.
It may be dropped, however, for the sake of ‘lightening’ ( ف ي فخْ َت لل ), if ى ن is appended to ن إ or one of its ‘sisters’ ى ن إ : (for ى ن ن إ ), ى نَأكَ (for ى نّنَأك) etc (e) The ‘guarding n’ is added before م لكَ َتمُ لْا ءُ اَي appended to the prepositions نْ م and نْ عَ , thus: ى نم )ى ن + نْ م ( , ىّنعَ )ىّن + نْ عَ ( the ‘n’ of the preposition ( نْ عَ , نْ م ) thus remains quiescent.
Apart from these two cases, the genitive pronominal suffix of the first person singular is always without ‘n’; e.g.
ىد ا زَ )ى+ دَ ازَ ( ‘my provisions’.
Self Assessment Exercise: Construct five words accompanied by the ‘guarding n’ 4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt one of the two aspects of attached pronouns in this unit.
We have dealt with the pronominal suffixes representing each of the separate pronouns in Arabic.
These suffixes cannot stand alone meaningfully.
They are usually attached to the verbs in the perfect, imperfect and imperative forms respectively.
Falling under the purview of the pronominal suffixes is also Nūn ’al-wiqāyah.
Relevant examples have been provided to substantiate the discussions.
30 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 5.0 SUMMARY The pronominal suffixes become meaningful when attached to verbs.
Each of the fourteen separate pronouns in Arabic is represented by appropriate pronominal suffixes.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the pronominal suffixes representing each of the separate pronouns and apply these to a past tense verb.
2.
Convert بَ َتكَ to present tense verb and apply relevant pronominal suffixes to the verb 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bakr, E.Y.
(1975).
Arabic by Radio, Book 3, Parts 1&2, Cairo, A.R.E.
Broadcasting Corporation Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, A.A. & Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān Mukhtar, I.B.
(1992).
Arabic Brighter Grammar, Bk 1, Mainasara Press, Kano.
31 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 1 UNIT 3: ATTACHED PRONOUNS II (POSSESSIVE PRONOUNS) 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: The Possessive Pronouns 3.2: The Pronominal Suffix of the First Person Plural 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There exist a category of attached pronouns known as the possessive pronouns.
The attached pronouns – pronominal suffixes to the three categories of verbs – the perfect, imperfect and imperative have been studied in the previous lesson.
Pronominal suffixes attached to nouns or prepositions are known as possessive pronouns.
This category of suffixes will be studied in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Identify the possessive pronominal suffixes when attached to nouns - Identify the pronominal suffixes when attached to prepositions - Compare and contrast the pronominal suffixes in this unit with the ones you have earlier studied in the last unit 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Possessive Pronouns 32 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Each of the fourteen separate pronouns is represented by a pronominal suffix which serves the purpose of possession in Arabic.
These possessive pronouns are contained in the following table English Possessive Personal equivalents pronouns pronouns His ُ هى وَ ُه Their امَ ُهى امَ ُه Their مهى مْ ُه Her اهى يَ ه Their امهى امَ ُه Their نّ هى ن ُه Your كَ تَ نَْأ Your امكُ امَ ُتنَْأ Your مْ كُ مْ ُتنَْأ Your ك ت نَْأ Your امثك امَ ُتنَْأ Your نّ ك ن ُتنَْأ My ى اَنَأ Our اَن نُ حْ َن It should be noted that possessive pronouns are added as suffix to nouns and prepositions.
- The pronominal suffix ( امَ كُ ) is shared by masculine and feminine duals.
Some of the personal pronouns are not adequately represented as they serve the purpose of possessive pronouns too; these include امَ ُهى - for masculine and feminine duals مْ ُهى - for masculine plural ن ُهى - for feminine plural Self Assessment Exercise -State the six second person personal pronouns in Arabic and cite the possessive pronouns representing each of the pronouns 33 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Please note that the pronouns function properly and meaningfully when they are suffixed to nouns or prepositions.
Let us consider the following table where the pronouns are suffixed to a singular noun Meaning Example English Possessive Personal equivalents pronouns pronouns His book ى باَتك His ُ هى وَ ُه Their book امَ ُهُباَتك Their امَ ُهى امَ ُه Their book مْ ُهُباَتك Their مهى مْ ُه Her book اَهُباَتك Her اهى يَ ه Their book امَ ُهُباَتك Their امهى امَ ُه Their book ن ُهُباَتك Their نّ هى ن ُه Your book كَ ُباَتك Your كَ تَ نَْأ Your book امَ كُ ُباَتك Your امكُ امَ ُتنَْأ Your book مْ كُ ُباَتك Your مْ كُ مْ ُتنَْأ Your book ك ُباَتك Your ك ت نَْأ Your book امَ كُ ُباَتك Your امثك امَ ُتنَْأ Your book ن كُ ُباَتك Your نّ ك ن ُتنَْأ My book ى باَتك My ى اَنَأ Our book اَنُباَتك Our اَن نُ حْ َن Self Assessment Exercise - Apply the possessive pronouns to the following nouns م لق , ت يب Let us consider the application of these suffixes to the word as illustrated in the following table: English translation Usage in Arabic Possessive Personal pronouns pronouns This is his school ُ هُتسردم هذه هى وه This is their school امُهُتسردم هذه امهى امه مُهُتسردم هذه مهى مه This is their school This is her school اهُتسردم هذه اهى يه 34 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II This is their school امُهُتسردم هذه امهى امه ن ُ هُ تسردم هذه ن هى ن ه This is their school This is your school كَ ُتسردم هذه كَ تَ نأ This is your school امكُ ُتسردم هذه امك امتنأ مكُ ُتسردم هذه مْ كُ متنأ This is your school This is your school ك ُتسردم هذه ك ت نأ This is your school امكُ ُتسردم هذه امَ كُ امتنأ ن كُ ُتسردم هذه ن كُ ن تنأ This is your school This is my school ى تسَ ردم هذه ىن انأ This is our school اَنُتسَ ردم هذه ان نحن 3.2 The Pronominal Suffix of the First Person Plural The pronominal suffix of the first person plural is اَن, whether in the accusative ( اَنَفرَ عَ ‘he knew us’) or in the genitive ( اَنُباَتك ‘our book’).
Both cases are illustrated by Jarir’s words: اَنَلاتْ َق نَ ي يحي مْ ل م ُث اَنَنلَْتَق the suffix اَن in ( اَنَنلَْتَق ( اَن+ لْ َتَق ) ) is in the accusative, but the suffix اَن in ان لاَ َتق ( اَن + ى لْ تْ َق ) is in the genitive.
As an accusative suffix, اَن is appended to ن إ or one of its sisters; e.g.
نَ ومُ د اق انن إ مُ َلعْ َن اَنَتيْ َل , The ‘n’ of اَن appended to ن إ , ن َأ or نّ َأكَ may be dropped for the sake of ‘lightening’) ف ي فخْ َتل ل(, thus: اَن إ (for اَنَن إ), اَنَأ (for اَنَنَأ ), اَنَأكَ (for انَ نَأكَ ).
Example )1 ر دْ َقلْا ُةرَ وسُ ( ر دْ َقلْا ة َليَل ى ف ُهاَنلْزَ ْنأ اَن إ “Verily, we sent it down on the Night of Judgement” (The Chapter of Judgement, verse 1); here , اَن إ is used for ا نَن إ.
Note also that اَن in ُهانَ لْزَ نْ أ is the nominative, for it is the subject.
The pronominal suffix is thus used in the nominative, accusative or genitive.
Self Assessment Exercise - State the pronominal suffix of the first person plural with relevant illustrations Furthermore, the possessive pronouns may be attached to prepositions as in the following examples ه ن إ , هب , هل - )وه( امه ن إ , امهب , امهل - )امه( 35 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II مه ن إ , مهب , مهل - )مه( اه ن إ , اهب , اهل - )يه( امه ن إ , امهب , امهل - )امه( نّ ه ن إ , نّ هب , نّ هل - ) نّ ه( كَ ن إ , كَ ب , كَ ل - ) تَ نأ( امكُ ن إ , امكُ ب , امكُ ل - )امتنأ( مكُ ن إ , مكُ ب , مكُ ل - )متنأ( ك ن إ , ك ب , ك ل - ) ت نأ( امكُ ن إ , امكُ ب , امكُ ل - )امتنأ( نّ كُ ن إ , نّ كُ ب , نّ كُ ل - ) نّ تنَْأ( ى ن إ , ىب , ىل - )اَنَأ( اّن ن إ , اَنب , اَنل - )نحن( Self Assessment Exercise - If the preposition ( ل ) is prefixed to a pronominal suffix for the third person singular masculine, it becomes ______ ?
You can use it in a sentence thus: (This book belongs to him).
Attach the preposition to the remaining pronominal suffixes and use them in sentences.
4.0 CONCLUSION Pronouns like his, her, their, your, my and our are described as possessive pronouns in English.
These pronouns have equivalents in Arabic.
Each of the fourteen separate pronouns in Arabic is represented by a possessive pronoun.
The possessive pronouns are added as suffixes to nouns and pronouns.
Some of these pronouns are shared by masculine and feminine.
5.0 SUMMARY Possessive pronouns are attached to either nouns or prepositions.
These pronouns become meaningful when attached.
Each of the separate pronouns in Arabic is appropriately represented by a possessive pronoun.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the possessive pronouns in Arabic and attach them to the following nouns: ت ْيَب , م َلَق , ةسَ رَ دْ مَ , ةرَ اَيسَ , ب اَتك 36 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adetunji, B.
& Hameed, D.O.
(2009).
A New Approach to the Arabic Language for Schools and Colleges, Abeokuta, Goad Educational Publishers Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Bakr, E.Y.
(1975).
Arabic by Radio, Book 3, Parts 1&2, Cairo, A.R.E.
Broadcasting Corporation Balogun, I.A.B.
and Oseni, Z.I.
(1985).
A Modern Arabic Course, Bk 1, Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos.
Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. 37 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 1 UNIT 4: CONCEALED PRONOUNS 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: The Concealed Pronouns 3.2.0: Categories of Concealed Pronouns 3.2.1 The Concealed Pronouns (Optional) 3.2.2: The Concealed Pronouns (Compulsory) 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the construction of Arabic sentences, certain circumstances call for the concealment of pronouns optionally or compulsorily.
When pronouns are concealed, the completeness or meaningfulness of the constructions remains unaltered.
This unit focuses the concealed pronouns and their usages in Arabic constructions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the lesson, you should be able to: - Define and classify the concealed pronouns into optional and compulsory categories - Identify the actual detached pronouns for which concealed pronouns could stand - Compare and contrast the attached, detached and concealed pronouns.
38 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concealed Pronouns You have learnt that Arabic pronouns can be divided into three broad categories: the attached, detached and concealed.
The first two categories can be seen in written forms and they can be pronounced in sentences.
Concealed pronouns cannot be seen in written forms and they cannot be pronounced.
As the name implies, they are concealed in both oral and written forms.
3.2.0 Categories of Concealed Pronouns ةرتتسملا رئامضلا Concealed pronouns can be categorised into two.
In the construction of Arabic sentences, the pronouns are optionally concealed in some usages while they are compulsorily concealed in some.
The two categories are treated with appropriate illustrations as follows: 3.2.1 The Concealed Pronouns (Optional) The concealed pronouns in this category may be represented by a proper noun or a separate pronoun in Arabic expressions.
The pronouns are concealed optionally because they are adequately represented.
Let us consider the following example: The teacher came م لعمُ لْا ءَ اج The sentence above consists an action ءَ اج and the doer (subject) of that action م لعملا.
The subject is a noun in the nominative case indicating the doer of an action and it is commonly cited after the action as in the example.
The subject is masculine in singular form.
It can as well be replaced by a separate pronoun وه .
The pronoun is said to be concealed optionally when an expression takes the form of the stated example.
The same explanation goes for the examples in the following table هراتتسا مكح ريمضلا ريدقت ريمضلا ىلادنسملا لعفلا ىلا دنسملا لعفلا رهاظلا زئاج وه ءَ اج قُ حَ لا قُ حلْا ءَ اجَ زئاج وه قَ زْ ر لا ُطس بْ َي ُالل قَ زْ رّ ّلا ُالل ُطس بْ َي زئاج يه رٍ َقَتسْ مُ ل ير جْ َت سُ مْ ش لاوَ رٍ َقَتسْ مُ ل سُ مش لا ىر جْ َت اَهَل ا َهَل 39 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Self Assesment Exercise - State the rules guiding the concealment of pronouns optionally with appropriate illustrations 3.2.2 The Concealed Pronoun (Compulsory) Pronouns are compulsorily concealed under certain grammatical conditions in Arabic usage.
Some of the conditions are discussed as follows: (i) A pronoun is compulsorily concealed when it occurs as the subject of an imperative verb ( ر مْ َلاا لُ عْ ف ) intended for a second person.
Let us consider this example: ة مكْ ح لاب كَ ّبر ل يبس ىلا عُ دْ ا “Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom: The word is an imperative verb directed to a second person singular masculine.
The subject ( لُ عافلا ) which is compulsorily concealed is ( تَ نَأ ) ‘You’ – the second person singular masculine pronoun.
Imperative verb like (sit down), بْ ر ضْ ا (beat), لْ كُ (eat) and لْ ُق (say) which obviously appear as one word each, are indeed enough for a speech.
This is because they are not single words as they appear to be.
Rather, they are sentences comprising two words, one of which is expressed but the other one ( تَ نَْأ) is concealed.
The listener understands this from the command, even though it is not expressed verbally.
The concealment of pronouns while constructing imperative verbs is not restricted to singular pronouns only; it is applicable to other types of pronouns as well.
Let us consider more examples: Concealed pronouns Imperative verbs (m) امَ ُتنَْأ اَبر ضْ ا ,اسَ لجْ ا , اَبَهذْ ا مْ ُتنَْأ اوُبر ضْ ا ,اوسُ لجْ ا ,اوُبَهذْ ا (f) ت نَْأ ى بر ضْ ا ,ىس لجْ ا ,ى بَهذْ ا مَ ُتنَْأ اَبر ضْ ا ,اسَ لجْ ا , اَبَهذْ ا ن ُتنَْأ نَ بْ ر ضْ ا , نَ سْ لجْ ا , نَ بْ َهذْ ا 40 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Self Assesment Exercises (i) State five examples of imperative verbs intended for a second person with their compulsorily concealed pronouns as in the above table.
(ii) A pronoun is compulsorily concealed when it occurs as the subject ( لُ عافلا ) of a present tense verb ( عُ راضملا ) intended for a second person ( تَ نأ).
Let us consider this example: ؟تكست ىتم و ملكتت ىتم فُ رعتَ أ يَ نب اي ‘My son, do you know when to talk and when to remain silent?
The words ملكتت and تكست are present tense verbs.
The subject ( لُ عافلا ) of the two verbs which is compulsorily concealed is ( تَ نأ ) – ‘You’, the second person singular masculine pronouns - Construct five sentences in the present from where a compulsory concealed second person singular pronoun for masculine ( تَ نَْأ) occurs as the subject.
Apply the same task to the second person singular pronoun for feminine ( ت نَْ أ) - The same rule enumerated above could be applied to dual and plural as well.
Give examples of where each of امَ ُتنَْأ (masculine), امَ ُتنَْأ (feminine), مْ ُتنَْأ and ن ُتنَْأ occurs as the subject.
(iii) A pronouns is compulsorily concealed when it occurs as the subject ( لُ عافلا ) of a present tense verb عُ راضملا constructed for the first person dual/plural, masculine/feminine ( نحن).
Let us consider the following example َةداعسلا كل وجرن We wish you success.
The word وجرن is a present tense verb applicable to dual, masculine or feminine as well as plural, masculine or feminine.
The subject which is compulsorily concealed is نحن -Cite some illustrations of the grammatical rules enumerated above.
(iv) A pronoun is compulsorily concealed when it occurs as the subject لُ عافلا of a present tense verb عُ راضملا intended for the first person singular, masculine or feminine pronoun ( انأ ).
Let us consider this example: ءَ امَ لْا بَ رَ شْ َأ نْ َأ دُ يرُ أ ‘I want to drink water’ The words دُ يرُا , بَ رَ شْ َأ are present tense verbs for the first person singular, masculine or feminine.
The subject of the two verbs which is compulsorily concealed is اَنَأ 41 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed the concealed pronouns in this unit.
Two types of the concealed pronouns are the ones optionally concealed and those that are compulsorily concealed.
The grammatical conditions governing the concealment of these pronouns and the classes to which each of the two groups can be divided into were also treated.
The discussion was spiced with relevant illustrations.
5.0 SUMMARY Arabic pronouns can be broadly divided into three – separate (detached), attached and concealed.
While the first two categories can be seen in written form and produced orally, concealed pronouns can neither be seen nor produced.
The concealment of these pronouns is guided by certain grammatical rules which we have examined in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
State relevant examples of the pronouns concealed optionally 2.
State at least three grammatical conditions that could lead to concealing the pronouns compulsorily REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Bakr, E.Y.
(1975).
Arabic by Radio, Book 3, Part 1, Cairo, A.R.E.
Broadcasting Corporation Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, A.A. & Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān 42 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 1 UNIT 5: DEMONSTRATIVE, RELATIVE AND INTERROGATIVE PRONOUNS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Demonstrative Pronouns 3.2 Relative Pronouns 3.3 Interrogative Pronouns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit addresses the demonstrative, relative and interrogative pronouns respectively.
The grammatical rules applicable to each of the three categories are stated with appropriate illustrations 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - cite the demonstrative pronouns and identify the rules affecting them - state the relative pronouns and the appropriate grammatical rules affecting them - mention the grammatical rules affecting the interrogative pronouns with relevant illustrations 3.0 MAIN CONTENT ةِ رَ اشَ لإ ءامَ سْ أ Demonstrative Pronouns In English, we have demonstrative pronouns like ‘this’, ‘that’, ‘these’ and ‘those’.
They are all applicable to human and non-human beings, making no difference between genders.
There are demonstrative pronouns also in Arabic but as usual, they come in singulars, duals and plurals, using different 43 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II forms for masculine and feminine while the difference in distance is also considered.
They are noted below: Distance Number Gender English Pronouns equivalents Near Singular Masculine This اذه Near Dual Masculine These نيذه / ناذه Near Plural Masculine These ءلاؤه Near Singular Feminine This هذه Near Dual Feminine Thes e نيتاه / ناتاه Near Plural Feminine These ءلاؤه Far Singular Masculine That كلذ Far Dual Masculine Those امكلاذ ُ Far Plural Masculine Those كَ ئلوأ ْ Far Singular Feminine That كَ ل ت Far Dual Feminine Those َ امكُ لْ ت ُ Far Plural Feminine Those كَ ئلوأ Considering the pronouns cited, it will be noted that the same demonstrative pronouns { ء لاؤَه } is shared by near plural masculine and ُ feminine.
The same is applicable to { كَ ئلوأ } which is shared by far plural masculine and feminine.
Apart from the two pronouns, other pronouns perform specific functions as outlined in Arabic grammar.
As opposed to English language where gender is not taken into consideration in its constructions, gender takes a prominent position in Arabic constructions.
In English, the word ‘this’ is applicable to both masculine and feminine in singular form.
The case is different in Arabic as you can note in the table Please note the pronouns cited in the table, you will observe that only two of these pronouns ناذاه and ناتاه have alternatives as ن يْ ذَ َه and ن يْ َتاَهrespectively.
With the exception of these two pronouns, the remaining ones fall under the category of items classified as فرصلا نم ةعونمملا “deprived of nunation” in Arabic grammar.
Pronouns under this classification maintain the same ending vowel irrespective of their positions – nominative, accusative or genitive – in Arabic constructions The two pronouns نيذه / ناذه and نيتاه / ناتاه change along with the grammatical rules affecting the positions they occupy in Arabic constructions.
44 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II The two, being duals are so treated in Arabic grammar.
Let us consider these examples ْ Nominative – ن اذَه Accusative – ن يْ ذَ َه Genitive – ن يْ ذَ َه Nominative – ناتاه Accusative – نيتاه Genitive - نيتاه Self Assessment Exercise - State the demonstrative pronouns with the numbers and genders represented by each of them If one of the demonstrative pronouns is immediately followed by the definite article, then the two combined form a demonstrative adjective.
Pls find some examples below: ْ This teacher سُ ر دَ مُ لا اذه This female student ُةَب لاطلا هذه These people سُ اّنلا ء لاؤَه That mosque دُ جسملا كَ لذ That aeroplane ُةر ئاطلا كَ لْ ت ُ Those men لُ اجر لا كَ ئلوأ Those women ءُ اس نلا ك ئَلوُأ If the word we intend to qualify by the demonstrative adjective is definite without the definite article, i.e.
if it is a proper noun or followed by a genitive, then the demonstrative adjective must follow the noun or genitive construction it qualifies, being really a pronoun in apposition.
Let us consider these examples: This ‘Abdullah اذه الل دُ بع This Fātimah هذه ُ ةمطاف Those University professors كَ ئَلوُأ ة عماجلا ُةذتاسَأ 45 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II If the predicate of a demonstrative pronoun begins with the definite article, the corresponding personal pronoun must be inserted between the two since, as noted above, the personal pronoun immediately followed by the definite article becomes the demonstrative adjective.
Let us consider some examples: This is the mosqueٍ دُ ج سْ ملا وه اذه That is the (female) teacher ُةمَ ل عَ مُ لا يَ ه كَ لْت These are the generous ones مُ اركلا مُه ءلاؤه This is the end ُةياه نلا يَ ه هذه If the predicate is definite by reason of following genitive then the insertion of the personal pronoun is optional.
Find some examples below: This is my pen يم َلق )وه( اذه This is the professor’s wife ذُ اتسْ ُلأاا ُةجوز ) يَ ه( هذه Self Assessment Exercise - Analyse the grammatical rules affecting these expressions سُ ر دَ مُ لْا اذَ َه ُ ةَب ل طلا يَ ه كَ لْ ت ىت يْ َب )وه( اذَ َه 3.2 Relative Pronouns ةلوصوملا ءامسلأأ In Arabic, there are six relative pronouns.
They represent English relative pronouns like ‘that’, ‘who’, ‘whom’ and which.
They are cited below with their usages: Usage English equivalents Singular masculine That, which, who, whom ىذ لا Dual masculine That, which, who, whom نيْ ذللا/ ن اذَ للا Plural masculine That, which, who, whom َ نَ يذ لا Singular feminine That, which, who, whom ىتل ا Dual feminine That, which, who, whom ن يْ َتللا/ ن اتللا Plural feminine That, which, who, whom ىئلالا/ىتلالا/ىتاوللا 46 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II If the subject of a subordinate relative clause is other that the noun or pronoun qualified by it then the relative must be resumed by a personal pronoun.
Let us consider few examples: The man who helped Umar ارً مَ عُ رَ صن ىذ لا لُ جُ ر لا The man whom they killed ُهوُلَتَق ىذ لا لُ جُ رَ ّلا If the noun qualified by the relative is indefinite the relative pronoun is omitted altogether.
Let us consider this example: A man whom they killed ُهوُلتق ل جُ رَ This statement is grammatically correct against ُ هوُلَتَق ىذ لا لُ جُ رَ which is unsound grammatically and is thus meaningless.
Please find more examples below: A man who struck Muhammad ًادم حَ مُ بَ رَ ضَ ل جُ ر A girl with whom I went اَهعَ مَ تْ َبَهذَ ةبلاط They are people in whom we trusted مْ ه ب انقثو س اَن مْ ثه Self Assessment Exercise - Arabic relative pronouns are six; mention them with their English equivalents 3.3 Interrogative Pronouns ةِ َيمِ اهَ فْ ِتسلإا ءُ امَ سْ لأا The most common of the interrogative pronouns are contained in the following: English equivalents Pronouns Who نْ مَ What امَ Where نَ يَْأ How فَ يْ كَ When ىَتمَ How much/many مْ كَ Which ىْ َأ What is it/that اذَ ام These should, however, not be confused with the interrogative prepositions like { لْ َه } and { َ أ } both of which means “is” or “are” depending on their usages within a sentence.
47 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II These are all, with the exception of ( ي َأ ) indeclinable, in essence, the fall within the category of the Arabic lexical items described as “deprived of nunation”.
Let us consider some examples: Who came with you?
؟كَ عَ مَ رَ ضَ حَ نْ مَ Whom did you strike?
؟تَ بْ رَ ضَ نْ مَ Whose book is this?
؟اذه نْ مَ ب اتك What did you write?
؟مْ ُتبْ َتكَ اذام Where did you get this from?
؟اذه كَ َل نَ يَْأ نْ م When did you hear that?
؟كَ لذَ مْ ُتعْ م سَ ىتمَ If the interrogative pronoun ( ام ) is shortened to ( م ), it is attached to the preposition still to serve the purpose of interrogation.
Pls find some examples beow: For what, why?
؟مَ ل Till when?
؟مَ لاإ For what?
؟مَ لاعَ From what?
؟م م Please note that two of these interrogative pronouns are very often used as relative pronouns equallingىذلا, these are نْ مَ and امَ respectively.
The status of the two pronouns therefore, will be determined by the context in which they are found in the construction.
Let us consider these examples: He who killed was killed : لَ تُق لَ َت َق نْ مَ or He who kills will be killed I understood what they wrote in their letter :مهباطخ ىف ُهوبتك ام تُ مْ ه َف دْ ق Self Assessment Exercise - State four of the interrogative pronouns in Arabic and apply them in sentences 48 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 4.0 CONCLUSION Three types of pronouns – the demonstrative, relative and interrogative pronouns respectively, received attention in this unit.
Each of the three types has its peculiar grammatical features which we have discussed with illustrative examples.
5.0 SUMMARY Demonstrative and relative pronouns consider not only the number but also the gender in their usages.
Each of the two pronouns features distinct grammatical rules.
Interrogative pronoun is not, as it has no strict grammatical rules as affecting the number and gender.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
State the demonstrative pronouns and the grammatical rules applicable unto them 2.
State the relative pronouns and their English equivalents; use them in meaningful sentences 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adetunji, B.
& Hameed, D.O.
(2009).
A New Approach to the Arabic Language for Schools and Colleges, Abeokuta, Goad Educational Publishers Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Bakr, E.Y.
(1975).
Arabic by Radio, Book 3, Part 1, Cairo, A.R.E.
Broadcasting Corporation Balogun, I.A.B.
and Oseni, Z.I.
(1985).
A Modern Arabic Course, Bk 1, Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos.
Cowan, D. (1975).
Modern Literary Arabic.
Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. 49 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 2: SINGULAR, DUAL AND PLURALS UNIT 1: SINGULAR AND DUAL 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definite and Indefinite Nouns 3.2 Singular Nouns in Arabic 3.3 Formation of Dual from Singular Nouns 3.4 Categories of Duals in Arabic 3.5 Duals in Nominative, Accusative and Genitive Cases 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In English classification system we have singular and plural, but in Arabic, there exist three classifications, viz; singular, dual and plural.
The word mufrad (singular) embraces any single figure human or non- human, masculine or feminine.
It is identified by tanwīn (Nunation) which normally occurs as the vowel of its last radical if it is indefinite and by the prefix ’al- the definite marker – if it is definite.
Dual (muthanā) as a term connotes two figure, human or non-human, masculine or feminine.
For conversion of singular nouns to dual, it is required that either the letters ( نا ) ---ani or ( ني )---ayni are added as suffixes unto them.
The position a dual noun occupies within a sentence determines which of the alternatives is applicable.
This unit will discuss two, with the grammatical rules affecting each of the two.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Identify singular nouns in Arabic and state the rules guiding their conversion to duals - Identify the categories of duals and the grammatical rules applicable to each of the category 50 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definite and Indefinite Nouns ُة رَ كْ نلا وَ ُ ة َف رِ عْ مَ لا A noun can either be definite or indefinite.
An indefinite noun does not indicate a specific person or a thing whereas a definite noun indicates a specific person or thing.
In Arabic language, nouns denoting specific persons, places or things are definite while the prefix ( لا ) ‘al is added to mark the other definite nouns.
Indefinite nouns appear without the prefix while the last letters of such nouns are given double vowels (Nunation).
The following are examples of definite and indefinite nouns Indefinite ُ ة رَ كْ نلا ُ ة َف ر عْ مَ لا Definite خ يْ شَ خُ يْ ش لا شوُبرْ َط شُ وُ ب رْ طلا ة َل قا عَ ُ ة َل قا عَ لا ة عَ ض رْ مَ ُ ة عَ ض رْ مَ لا خُ يْ ش لا ءَ اجَ خ يْ شَ ءَ اجَ The Shaykh has come A Shaykh has come اشً وُبرْ َط تُ يْ رَ َتشْ ا شَ وُب رْ طلا تُ يْ رَ َتشْ ا I bought a cap I bought the cap The terms ‘definite’ and ‘indefinite’ are applicable to singular, dual and plural nouns.
We must note that what prominently differentiates between the two is the prefix (لا) irrespective of the number involved – singular, dual or plural.
Self Assessment Exercise - Distinguish between definite and indefinite nouns in Arabic with relevant examples Let us consider few examples: Type Plural Dual Singular Indefinite نَ يم لسْ مُ نَ ومُ لسْ مُ ن يْ مَ لسْ مُ ن امَ لسْ مُ م لسْ مُ Indefinite تام لسْ مُ تام لسْ مُ ن يْ َتم لسْ مُ ن ات مَ لسْ مُ ةم لسْ مُ Definite نَ ومُ لسْ مُ لا ن يْ مَ لسْ مُ لا ن امَ لسْ مُ لا م لسْ مُ لا نَ يم لسْ مُ لا Definite تام لسْ مُ لا ن ات مَ لسْ مُ لا ةم لسْ مُ لا تام لسْ مُ لا ن يْ َتم لسْ مُ لا 51 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.2 Singular )درفم( As noted earlier, any singular figure whether it is human or non-human, masculine or feminine is regarded as درفم in Arabic.
A singular figure enjoys the application of the three cases – the nominative, accusative or genitive unless such figure falls within the classification of items designated as – denied of nunation.
Please find some examples of singular nouns as follows , مُ َلَقلا , ب اَتك , دُ عَ قْ مَ لا , ةعَ اسَ , تُ يْ َبلا , س ر دَ مُ دُ َلوَ لا , ب لْكَ , نُ ادَ يْ مَ لا , ةرَ ا ي سَ 3.3 Formation of Dual from Singular Nouns To convert a singular noun to dual, specific grammatical rules which will be treated in 3.5 below must be followed.
There are two suffixes – نا and ني which should be added to a singular noun in the process of converting it to dual.
The choice which of the two suffixes to be added to a singular noun is determined by the position of such noun within a sentence.
Please let us consider some examples: نادلولا - دلولا ن يْ دَ َلوَ لا نادلو - دلو ن يْ دَ َلوَ ناتبلاطلا - ةبلاطلا نيتبلاطلا ناتبلاط - ةبلاط نيتبلاط Self Assessment Exercise - Convert the following singular nouns to dual: ,ملعملا ,باتكلا ,دجسملا , يّ سركلا ,ةطفحم ,تيب ,بلاط ,ملق ,دعقم ملسملا 3.4 Categories of Duals in Arabic The common rule is that either of the two suffixes must be added to a singular noun while converting it to dual.
However, certain categories of singular nouns have specific rules which are enumerated as follows: 52 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (i) روصقملا ةينثت A singular noun ending with the ’alif of elongation occasionally represented by yā’ ( ي ) is described as روصقملا مسلإ ا.
The ’alif must be reverted to its origin in the process of converting the noun to dual.
The origin of such ’alif can either be wāw ( و ) or yā’ ( ي ).
This is applicable if such noun is trilateral.
After the ’alif is reverted, either of the two suffixes ني or نا should be attached depending on the context within which such dual noun is found in a sentence.
Let us consider few examples: ن اوَ صَ عَ - اصَ عَ ن يْ وَ صَ عَ ن اَيَتَف - ىَتَف ِ نيْ َيَتَف If the singular noun comprises more than three letters, the ’alif must mandatorily be converted to yā’( ي ).
Let us consider few examples: ن اَيَفَط صْ مُ - يَفَطصْ مُ ن يْ َيَفَطصْ مُ ن اَيَفشْ َتسْ مُ - يَفشْ َتسْ مُ ن يْ َيَفشْ َتسْ مُ (ii) صوقنملا ةينثت A noun is described as صوقنملا when it is suffixed by a yā’ ( ي ) of elongation (prefixed by a letter with the i-vowel ( ةرسكلا ).
Examples of nouns in this category include ىمارلا ,ىعارلا ,ىعاسلا , يضاقلا .
To convert a noun in this category to dual, the a-vowel must be applied to the letter of elongation – ( ي ) before the addition of either of the suffixes.
Let us consider these examples: ن اَيض اَقلا - يض اَقلا ن يْ يَ ض اَقلا ن اَيع اسَ لا - يع اسَ لا ن يْ َيع اسَ لا (iii) دودمملا ةينثت A noun ending with hamzah ( ء ) is described as دودمملا مسلإا.
To convert a noun in this category to dual, we must first consider the status of the hamzah.
If the hamzah is a feminine marker, it must be converted to wāw ( و ) before the attachment of either of the suffixes, e.g.
53 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II ن اوَ اَيشْ َأ - ءُ اَيشْ َأ ن يْ وَ اَيشْ َأ ن اوَ اضَ يْ َب - ءُ اضَ يْ َب ن يْ وَ اضَ يْ َب If the hamzah has its origin in yā’ ( ي ) or wāw ( و ), it could be changed to wāw before the attachment of either of the suffixes or be retained.
Let us consider the following examples: ن يْ وَ َنَب \ ن اوَ اَنَب - ء ا نَب or ن يْ ءَ اَنبَ \ ن اءَ اَنَب Both plural forms are appropriate (iv) ملالا فوذحم ةينثت A noun comprising only two letters is described as ملالا فوذحم .
Nouns in this category are of two types.
The first type are the nouns whose third letters are considered to have been erased like با and خأ .
The third letter considered to have been erased is wāw ( و ) as it is compulsorily returned when the nouns service as construct ( فاضملا ) in a sentence, e.g.دمحم وخا and ديز وبا The letter ( و ) must be returned while the suffixes should then be added to convert nouns in this category to dual.
Let us consider these examples: ن اوَ َبَ أ - بأ ن يْ وَ َبَا ن اوَ خَ َأ - خأ ن يْ وَ خَ َأ However, if the third letter assumed to have been erased is not wāw ( و ), the suffixes should just be added to the nouns falling into this category as they are.
Please let us consider these examples: ن ادَ َي - دُ َي ن يْ دَ َي (v) ىنثملاب قحلملا There are some nouns which do not fit properly under the rules guiding the conversion of singular to dual in Arabic but are actually treated as ىنثم.
These nouns actually have no singular forms.
Nouns in this category include: نينثا \ نانثا نيتنثا \ ناتنثا 54 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Self Assessment Exercise - State the various categories of duals in Arabic.
3.5 Duals in Nominative, Accusative and Genitive Cases A noun in dual form ends with the suffix ( نا ) when it occurs in the context where nominative case must be employed.
It ends with ( ني ) when it occurs in the context where accusative and genitive cases are applicable respectively.
Let us consider few examples: Nominative ن امَ لعَ مُ لا ءَ اجَ Accusative ن يْ مَ لعملا تُ يَْ أر Genitive ن يْ مَ لعملاب تُ رْ رَ م Please note ن امَ لعَ مُ لا in the first example, it is the subject which must remain in nominative case.
Consider the second and third examples, the word نيملعملا is repeated unchanged.
The applicable case in the second example is accusative because it is the object while It is genitive in the third example because of the effect of the preceding genitive particle.
In essence, the suffix ني should be added to singular noun when converting it to dual in accusative and genitive cases.
Self Assessment Exercise - Distinguish between صوقنملا مسلاا and روصقملا مسلاا , state five examples from each of the two and convert the examples to dual 4.0 CONCLUSION In English, we have singular and plural but there are three classifications – singular, dual and plural in Arabic.
We have discussed singular and how it can be converted to dual in this unit.
Singular nouns fall into different types and each type has specific grammatical rules.
These rules with appropriate illustrations have been treated in this unit 5.0 SUMMARY We have treated the singular and dual nouns with the grammatical rules affecting the two.
Types of singular nouns and the rules guiding the conversion of each type to dual have also been addressed with appropriate illustrations.
55 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT - State the grammatical rules guiding the conversion of the various types of singular nouns to dual 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adetunji, B.
& Hameed, D.O.
(2009).
A New Approach to the Arabic Language for Schools and Colleges, Abeokuta, Goad Educational Publishers Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Cowan, D. (1975).
Modern Literary Arabic.
Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, A.A. & Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān Mukhtar, I.B.
(1992).
Arabic Brighter Grammar, Bk 1, Mainasara Press, Kano.
56 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 2 UNIT 2: SOUND MASCULINE PLURAL 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conversion of Dual to Sound Masculine Plural 3.2 Categories of Sound Masculine Plural 3.3 Elision of Nūn from Sound Masculine Plural 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Plural refers to two or more figures in English usage.
In Arabic, plural refers to three or more figures, human or non-human, feminine or masculine.
There are basically three types of plurals in Arabic, these are: sound masculine, sound feminine and broken plurals.
Sound Masculine Plural م لاس لا ر ك ذَ مُ لا عُ مْ جّ is formed from the singular nouns by adding either the suffix ( نو ) --- una or ( ني ) ---- ina to the singular form.
The suffix to be added out of two alternatives will be determined by the place of the plural concerned within a sentence – based on certain grammatical rule.
The sound masculine plural will be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - state the grammatical rules guiding the conversion of dual to sound masculine plural - identify the types of nouns that can feature under sound masculine plural and the specific grammatical rules guiding each type - distinguish between sound masculine plural and other forms of plurals in Arabic 57 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Sound Masculine Plural مِ ِلاس لا رِ ك ذَ مُ لا عُ مْ جّ ملاسلا ركذملا عمجب قحلملاروصقملا مسلإا دودمملا مسلإا صوقنملا مسلإا حيحصلا مسلإا 3.1 Conversion of Dual to Sound Masculine Plural A noun is converted from singular to dual with the addition of ( نا ) or ( ني ) – depending on the position of such noun in the Arabic construction.
To convert a dual to sound masculine plural, the suffixes ( نا ) and ( ني ) should be replaced with ( نو ) and ( ني ) respectively as dictated by certain grammatical rules which we will analyse before the end of this unit.
Self Assessment Exercise - Convert the following nouns to sound masculine plural م لعم , ق ئاس , س ر دم , م ئاص , ن مؤم 3.2 Categories of Sound Masculine Plural (i) حيح ص لا مسلإا عمج A sound singular noun is converted to sound masculine plural with the addition of the suffix ( نو ) in the nominative case, whether such noun is definite or indefinite.
Please find some examples below (Nominative) نوملسملا - ملسملا (Nominative) نونمؤملا - نمؤملا (Nominative) نوملعم - ملعم (Nominative) نوقئاس - قئاس Such a noun is converted to sound masculine plural in the accusative or genitive cases with the addition of the suffix ( ني ).
Here are some examples: 58 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Accusative نيملسملا - ملسملا Genitive نيملسملا Accusative نينمؤملا - نمؤملا Genitive نينمؤملا Accusative نيملعم - ملعم Genitive نيملعم Accusative نيقئاس - قئاس Genitive نيقئاس Let us consider these constructions نوملسملا ءاج نيملسملا تيأر نيملسملاب تررم In the first example نوملسملا is the subject.
Subject is grammatically defined as a noun in the nominative case indicating the doer of an action and is commonly cited after the action.
In the second example, نيملسملا is the object.
The object is defined as a noun in the accusative case indicating the particular thing on which the action of the doer occurred.
The word نيملسملا in the third example is in the genitive case because it is preceded by a genitive case particle)ب(.
A noun appears in genitive mood when it is preceded by any of the genitive case particles Self Assessment Exercise - Convert the following dual nouns to sound masculine plural:, .
ن اب تاكَ , ن ا َظ فاحَ , ن امَ ئاصَ , ن اسَ ر دَ مُ , ن اَق ئاسَ (ii) صوقنملا مسلاا عمج A noun is described as صوقنملا when it is suffixed by a yā’ ( ي ) of elongation (prefixed by a letter with i-vowel).
Examples of nouns in this category are ىداهلا ,يعاسلا and so on.
To convert nouns in this category to plural, the last letter yā’ ( ي ) should be erased while the vowel of the letter preceding it must be changed to ةمضلا (u-vowel) if it is in the nominative case.
The vowel ةرسكلا(i-vowel) must be retained in accusative and genitive cases.
Let us consider some examples: 59 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Nominative نوداهلا - ىداهلا نوعاسلا - ىعاسلا Accusative نيداهلا - ىداهلا نيعاسلا - ىعاسلا Genitive نيداهلا - ىداهلا نيعاسلا - ىعاسلا (iii) دودمملا مسلاا عمج A noun ending with hamzah is described as دودمملا.
To convert a singular noun in this category to plural, the rule is that the hamzah should be retained while appropriate suffixes should be added ني or نو depending on the position of such plural in a sentence.
Let us consider some examples Nominative نؤانبلا - ءان ب ل نؤافولا - ءافولا نؤافرلا - ءافرلا Accusative نيئانبلا - ءان ب ل نيئافولا - ءافولا نيئافرلا - ءافرلا Genitive نيئانبلا - ءان ب ل نيئافولا - ءافولا نيئافرلا - ءافرلا (iv) روصقملا مسلاا عمج A noun ending with alif of elongation (preceded by a vowel) is described asروصقملا مسلاا .
To convert a noun in this category to sound masculine plural, the ’alif must be deleted while the letter preceding it must be retained with the original vowel ةحتفلا.
The suffixes نو and ني must be added to this letter in that form irrespective of the place of occurrence of such word in the sentence.
Let us consider some examples: 60 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Nominative نوضترم - ىضترم نوبتجم - ىبتجم نوفطصم - ىفطصم نوجترم - ىجترم Accusative نيضترم - ىضترم نيبتجم - ىبتجم نيفطصم - ىفطصم نيجترم - ىجترم Genitive نيضترم - ىضترم نيبتجم - ىبتجم نيفطصم - ىفطصم نيجترم - ىجترم Self Assessment Exercise Differentiate between صوقنملا مسلإا عمج and روصقملا مسلإا عمج with relevant illustrative examples (v) ملاسلا ركذملا عمجب قحلملا There are some nouns which do not fit properly under the rules guiding the construction of sound masculine plural but are treated as sound masculine plurals.
Some of these nouns have no singular forms.
Few of these nouns are: ,نوعبس ,نونامث ,نوعست ,نورشع ,نوثلاث ,نوعبرا ,نوسمخ ,اوذ ,ولوا ,نونب ,نولها ,نويلع .نوتسLet us consider this example Nominative نَ وُبوُبحْ مَ امً ئاد ل ضْ َفلا اوُلوُأ Accusative ل ضْ فَ لا ى لوُأ سُ ا نلا ب ح ُ ي Genitive س ا نلا سوُفُن ى ف بُ ي طلا رُ َثَلأا ل ضْ َفلا ى لوُلأ 3.3 Elision of Nūn from Sound Masculine Plural In Arabic grammar we have what is called ‘the construct’ فاضملا and ‘the genitive of the construct’هيلا فاضملا .
Let us consider the following example ‘The teacher’s pen’ سر دَ مُ لا مُ َلَق The word مُ َلَق which is in the nominative case here is the construct 61 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II The construct may appear in any of the three cases: the nominative, accusative or genitive depending on its status within the constructions.
The second word سر دَ مُ لا is the genitive of the construct.
Grammatically, it remains constantly in genitive case.
When the above rule is applied to a sound masculine plural appearing as a construct, the Nūn ( ن ) of the ending is compulsorily dropped.
Let us consider few examples: ة رَ كُ لا اوُبع َلا رَ ضَ حَ The word رضح is a verb in the past form indicating the occurrence of an action in the past.
The word اوُبع َلا is the subject in the nominative case, the case being represented by wāw ( و ) because the subject is sound masculine plural.
In addition to being the subject it is also the construct in that construction.
The last word ة رَ كُ لا is the genitive of the construct and it remains in genitive form.
Note that the original form of the construct is نوبعلا – a sound masculine plural in the nominative case.
Being the construct of ة رَ كُ لا however, it has the Nūn)ن( dropped mandatorily.
The same rule of elision of this last letter ( ن ) is applicable to the construct when it occurs in the accusative or genitive cases.
Self Assessment Exercise Identify the rules guiding the elision of Nūn from sound masculine plural and cite some examples.
4.0 CONCLUSION In English usage, the word plural refers to two or more figures or objects but in Arabic; the word refers to three or more figures or objects.
There are three types of plural in Arabic.
Sound masculine plural, one of the three types has been addressed in this unit.
The plural is formed with the addition of certain suffixes to singular nouns in Arabic as determined by certain grammatical rules.
Singular nouns ending in sound masculine plural belong to a number of categories which we have identified in this unit.
Grammatical rules affecting each of the categories have equally been dealt with 5.0 SUMMARY There are three types of plurals in Arabic – the sound masculine plural, the sound feminine plural and the broken plural.
The sound masculine plural and the grammatical rules affecting it have received adequate attention in this unit.
62 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS - State the grammatical rules guiding the conversion of dual to sound masculine plural - State the types of singular nouns ending in sound masculine plural and analyse the grammatical rules guiding each type 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, A.A. & Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān Mukhtar, I.B.
(1992).
Arabic Brighter Grammar, Bk 1, Mainasara Press, Kano.
63 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 2 UNIT 3: SOUND FEMININE PLURAL 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conversion of Dual to Sound Feminine Plural 3.2 Categories of Sound Feminine Plural 3.3 Sound Feminine Plural in Nominative, Accusative and Genitive Cases 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Sound Feminine Plural مِ ِلاسّ لا ثنؤ مِ لا Sound Feminine Plural is formed from singular feminine noun by infixing elongating ‘alif between the last and second to the last radicals of the noun while the round ta (tā’marbūtah) which is commonly added to singular feminine must be converted to ta maftūhah.
This is a common definition of this plural.
Certain types of singular nouns end up in sound feminine plural.
These types and the peculiar grammatical features of each of the types will be studied in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - explain the process of converting singular nouns to sound feminine plural - identify the types of singular nouns that end up in sound feminine plural - contrast the grammatical rules affecting the sound feminine plural from those affecting the other types of plurals in Arabic 64 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conversion of Dual to Sound Feminine Plural A noun is converted from singular to dual with the addition of ( نا ) or (ني ) depending on the position of such noun in the Arabic construction.
To convert a dual to sound feminine plural, the most common rule is that the suffixes ( نا ) and (ني ) should be dropped while the grammatical rules affecting a particular noun being converted take effect.
These will be explained in the course of this unit.
3.2 Categories of Sound Feminine Plural (i) دودمملا مسلاا A noun in this category is the type that ends with hamzah.
If the hamzah is the marker which shows that the noun is feminine, it must be converted to wāw (و ) before the addition of the suffixes (تا).
Let us consider some examples: تاوارحص - ءارحص تاوارذع - ءارذع If, however, the hamzah is originally wāw ( و ) or yā’( ي ), it should be retained while the suffixes (تا )should be added.
Here are some examples: تاءاجه - ء ا جَ ه تاءادف - ء ا دَ ف (ii) روصقملا مسلاا A noun ending with alif of elongation (preceded by a – vowel) is described asروصقملا مسلاا .
To convert a noun in this category to sound feminine plural, an ’alif in accusative case must be added to the last letter.
This must be succeeded by the suffix ( تا ).
Here are some examples: ت اَيَليْ َل -ىليْ َل ت ايملس -ىمَ لْسَ (iii) ءاتلاب موتخملا مسلاا A singular noun ending with close tā’ ( ة ) is converted to sound feminine plural by infixing elongating alif before the tā’ ( ت ) to open tā’ ( ة ).
In essence, such noun ends with the normal suffix ( تا ).
Let us consider these examples: تُ ارَ جَ شَ – ة رَ جَ شَ ت ارَ اَيسَ – ةرَ اَيسَ 65 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Self Assesment Exercise -State the grammatical rules guiding the conversion of دودمملا مسلإا and مسلإا روصقملا to sound feminine plural.
(iv) ثنؤملا ملعلا Some feminine nouns possess no signs indicating that they are actually feminine.
Converting nouns in this category to plural requires only the addition of the suffix ( تا ) to their singular forms; e.g.
تادنه - دنه تابنيز - بنيز (v) ثنؤملل ةفصلا عمج If we cite certain nouns as attributes of plural feminine, the attributes must be treated as sound feminine plural totally with the nouns to which they serve as attributes.
Let us consider few examples; the words خ م اشَ and دُ ودُ عْ مَ are actually attributes for masculine when they are used for feminine, they must be succeeded by the suffix ( تا ) as in ت اخَ م اشَ ل اَبج ت ادَ ودُ عْ مَ م اَيَأ (vi) لقاعلا ريغل رغصملا مسلاا To convert the ‘insignificant noun’ of non-living object to sound feminine plural, a – vowel ( ةحتافلا ) must be applied to the last letter of such noun before the addition of the suffix ( تا ).
Find few examples below ت َلابْ جُ - ) ل َب جَ ( – ل يْ َبجُ ت امَ يْ َلُق - ) م َل َق( - م يْ َل ق (vii) يثلاثلا قوف ام رداصم The third paradigm in the scale of verbs is known as ردصم .
It is considered to be noun and actually, it is considered as the source from which the verb and other derivatives are extracted.
To convert the ردصم of the augmented trilateral verbs to sound feminine plural, the rule is that the suffix ( تا ) must be added to such; e.g.
تارافغتسا - رافغتسا تابارطضا - بارطضا 66 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (viii) ثنؤملا نم عمجي لا ام There are certain feminine nouns to which the rules enumerated above could not be employed.
We come across nouns in this category by frequent and extensive usage of the language.
Feminine nouns in this category include ةمأ and ةفش .
We can never have تامأ and تافش respectively.
Self Assesment Exerccise - State five nouns under ثنؤملا ملعلا and convert them to feminine plural (ix) صوقنملا مسلاا عمج A noun is described as صوقنملا when it is suffixed by a yā ( ي ) of elongation (prefixed by a letter with i – vowel ةرسكلا.
This letter of elongation must vowelled with a – vowel ( ةحتفلا ) when joined with ثينأتلا ءات – open tā’ indicating that the noun is feminine.
An example of nouns in this category is تايعاسلا, the singular form of which is ةيعاس (x) ملاسلا ثنؤملا عمجب قحلملا Some nouns end with the suffix ( تا ), the sign by which the sound feminine plural is prominently identified.
These nouns are treated grammatically as such but they are actually not under the purview of sound ُ feminine plural.
Nouns in this category include تلاو أ, تاوذ, تاكرب ,تافرع (xi) Many nouns, especially foreign words, and most masculine diminutives take the sound feminine plural ending, e.g.
ت اَناوَ َيحَ - ن اوَ َيحَ ت اَتاَبَن - ت اَبَن ت اَهيْ َنجُ - هيْ َنجُ ت اَنوُ فلَْت - ن وُفلَْت Self Asssesment Exercise - Contrast ثنؤملا نم عمجي لا ام and ملاسلا ثنؤملا عمجب قحلملا with appropriate illustrations 67 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.2 Sound Feminine Plural in Nominative, Accusative and Genitive Cases Sound feminine plural takes u-vowel ةمضلا the appropriate vowel when it occurs in the context where nominative case must be employed.
It takes i- vowel ةرسكلا when it occurs in the contexts where accusative and genitive cases are applicable respectively.
Let us consider few examples: Nominative تُ اَب ل ا طلا تْ رَ ضَ حَ Accusative ت اَب لا طلا تُ رْ صَ َن Genitive ت بَ لَ ا طلا ب تُ رْ رَ مَ Please note تُ اَب لا طلا in the first example, it is the subject and as you have learnt, subjects remain in nominative case.
The second example ت اَب لا طلا , is the object and object must be in accusative case.
As you have learnt, however, the plural remains in genitive case whether it occurs in accusative or genitive case respectively.
The third ت بَ لَ ا ّطلا ب is governed by the preceding genitive particle 4.0 CONCLUSION Specific grammatical rules guide the conversion of singular to dual in Arabic grammar.
To convert a dual noun to sound feminine plural, there are also specific grammatical rules determined by the type of noun to be converted.
A common rule, however is that the sound feminine plural should end with the suffix ( تا ).
Sound feminine plural takes u-vowel (ةمضلا) when it occurs within the context where it should take the nominative case.
When it occurs where accusative and genitive cases are applicable, it takes i-vowel (ةرسكلا).
5.0 SUMMARY Sound feminine plural ends with the suffix ( تا ).
Certain types of nouns end in sound feminine plural.
These have been addressed with attention paid to the rules affecting each of the type in the course of this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS - Convert the following singular nouns to sound feminine plural .
ةمَ ط اَف , د نْ ه , ل يَْبجُ , ةعَ اسَ , م ي لكْ َت , ةَفش , ع اَط قنْ ا , ةرَ اَيشَ , د اعَ سُ , ىمَ لْسَ - Give ten sound feminine plurals and apply the three cases – nominative, accusative and genitive unto them.
68 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Bakr, E.Y.
(1975).
Arabic by Radio, Book 3, Part 1, Cairo, A.R.E.
Broadcasting Corporation Cowan, D. (1975).
Modern Literary Arabic.
Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, A.A. & Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān 69 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 2 UNIT 4: BROKEN PLURAL 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conversion of Dual to Broken plural 3.2 Categories of Broken Plural 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Broken Plural رِ يسِ كْ تلا عُ مْ جَ Unlike sound masculine and feminine plurals which are formed by adding specific suffixes to the singular forms, broken plural has no fixed grammatical rules.
Its forms or patterns are so many that it becomes impossible to forecast from singular to plural or vice versa.
Singular nouns which end up in broken plural are many and unmarked.
Learners know them by extensive research and frequent usage of Arabic language.
It is generally done by prefixing, infixing, suffixing or decreasing the number of letters making up a singular noun concerned.
Broken plural has certain paradigms upon which the plural nouns are placed and these will be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to - convert nouns in dual forms to broken plural - differentiate between broken plural and other forms of plurals - identify some paradigms of broken plural 70 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Broken Plural ِريسِ كْ تلا عُ مْ جَ عمجلا عمج عومجلا ىهتنم ةغيص ةرثكلا عمج ةلقلا عمج The table above shows the categories to which broken plural can be divided.
This will be analysed appropriately in this unit.
3.1 Conversion of Dual to Broken Plural A noun is converted from singular to dual with the addition of (نا) or (ني) – depending on the position of that noun in Arabic construction – nominative, accusative or genitive.
Plural nouns which end up in broken plural have no specific marks.
These are known by frequent use of the Arabic language as well as familiarity with grammar of the language.
3.2 Categories of Broken Plural ةلقلا عمج This category of broken plural embraces between three to ten items.
This view is shared by some Arabic grammarians while others feel it can apply to any number of items.
Featuring under this category are the four following paradigms with relevant examples: ةَلعْ ِف )يبص( ةَيبْ ص ) خ َأ( ةوَ خْ إ ) د رق( ةدَ رْ ق ) ل يف( لي ف ةَلعِ فْ أ )دومع( ةدَ م عْ أ 71 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II )فيغر( ةَفغ رْ َأ )لاؤس( ةَل ئسْ َأ )باوج( ةَبو جْ َأ ل اعَ فْ َأ )دج( د ادَ جْ َأ )رفظ( ر اَفظْ َأ )ءزج( ء ازَ جْ َأ ل ُعفْ َأ )رهن( ر ُهنَْأ )سفن( س ُفنَْأ )عارذ( ع رُ ذْ َأ (ii) ةرثكلا عمج Just as we observed under ةلقلا عمج, the present category embraces broken plurals comprising unspecified numbers.
Below are some of the paradigms featuring under this category ل ُعُف ) ب اَتك ( ب ُتكُ )ةفيجص( ف جْ صُ )لوسر( ل سُ رُ ل عْ ُف ) رُ مَ حْ َأ( ر مْ حُ ) ءُ ارَ ضَ خَ ( ر ضْ خُ ل عَ ُف )ةروص( ر وَ صُ )ةفرغ( ف رَ غُ 72 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II ل عَ ِف ) ةعَ طْ ق( ع َط ق )ةلظ( ل َلظ ةَلعْ َف )رحاس( ةرَ حْ سَ ل عُف )عكار( ع ك رُ ل اعَ ُف ) دٍ اه( د اوَ ُه ىَلعْ َف )ضيرم( ىضَ رْ مَ )حيرج( ىحَ رْ جَ ل اعَ ِف )لبج( ل اَبج )بوث( ب اَي ث )ميرك( م ارَ ك ل وُعُف )بلق( ب وُلُق )تيب( ت وُيُب )ردص( ر دُ صُ ل اعَ يِف )جات( ن اجَ ي ت )روث( ن ارَ ي ث 73 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II ل ُعفْ َأ )ناسل( ن سُ لَْأ )رهش( ر ُهشْ َأ )لجر( ل جُ رْ َأ ءُ َلاعْ َف )نبا( ءُ اَنبَْأ ن َلاعْ ِف )ملاغ( ن امَ لْغ )يبص( ن اَيبْ ص )خأ( ن اوخْ إ ءُ َلاعِ فْ َأ )يلو( ءُ اَي لوْ َأ ) يُ ب َن( ءُ اَي بنَْأ ءُ َلاعَ ُف )ملاع( ءُ امَ َلعُ )ميظع( ءُ امَ َظعُ )ليخب( ءُ َلاخَ ُب ل اعَ َف )دي( د اَيَأ ن َلاعْ ُف )بضق( ن اَبضْ َق )نطب( ن اَنطْ ُب )دلب( ن ادَ لُْب 74 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Self Assessment Exercise - Compare and contrast the ةرسكلا عمج and ةلقلا عمج with relevant illustrations (iii) عومجلا ىهتنم ةغيص This category is an extraction from the ةرثكلا عمج.
The difference between the two is the occurrence of two or more letters after the ريسكتلا فلأ in the present category.
The grammatical rule affecting the plural in this context is that it must not be vowelled.
Below are some of the paradigms featuring under this category: لُ ِئاعَ َف )ةلاسر( لُ ئ ا سَ رَ )زوجع( زُ ئا جَ عَ ىَلاعَ ُف )ناركس( ىرَ اكَ سُ )لوسك( ىَلاسَ كُ ىَلاعَ َف )ءارحص( ىرَ احَ ص )ىوتف( ىوَ اَتَف لُ يِلاعَ َف )روفصع( رُ ي فاصَ عَ )بولسأ( بُ ي لاسَ َأ )ذيملت( ذُ يم َلاَت لُ عِ اوَ َف )رهوج( ره اوَ جَ )متاخ( مُ تاوَ خَ 75 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II لُ عِ اَفَأ )عبصأ( ع باصَ َأ )لضفأ( ل ض اَفَأ ل يعِ اَفَأ )عبصأ( ع ي باصَ َأ )عوبسأ( ع ي باسَ َأ ل يعِ َفمَ )حاتفم( ح ي تاَفمَ )حابصم( ح ي باصَ مَ ل عِ اَفمَ )دجسم( د ج اسَ مَ )دبعم( د باعَ مَ Self Assessment Exercise Identify the category to which each of the following plurals occur .............. س ُفنَْأ ,ةَبو جْ َأ , مُ ارَ ك ,ىَلتْ َق , قُ يد اَنصَ , ءُ ارَ َقُف , ن دُ مُ (iv) عمجلا عمج The term عمجلا عمج indicates the conversion of a broken plural form to another broken plural form.
Few of the plurals coming under this category are the conversion of ةوخإ, ةيبص and رافظأ featuring under ةلقلا عمج to ناوخا, نايبص and رافظأ under ةرثكلا عمج respectively Self Assessment Exercise Provide the broken plural forms of the following singular nouns ميرك ,خا ,درق ,حاتفم ,دلب ,ينغ ,ةريزج ,سلجم ,ريمأ ,لوسر 76 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 4.0 CONCLUSION Unlike sound masculine and sound feminine plurals, broken plural has no fixed grammatical rules.
Broken plural can be broken into four categories with each category featuring specific paradigms.
Many words have more than one form of the broken plural but by reading extensively the student will become familiar with the form most commonly used.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have identified the four categories to which broken plural can be broken.
Broken plural is distinct from the other types of plurals in Arabic as there are certain suffixes employed to convert singular to plural in the other plurals but singulars may be suffixed, prefixed or infixed in the process of constructing broken plurals.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT - Identify the major differences between the broken plural and the other forms of plural in Arabic REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Balogun, I.A.B.
and Oseni, Z.I.
(1985).
A Modern Arabic Course, Bk 1, Islamic Publications Bureau, Lagos.
Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Mukhtar, I.B.
(1992).
Arabic Brighter Grammar, Bk 1, Mainasara Press, Kano.
77 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 3: THE VOWELS Unit 1: Primary Vowels 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Vowels/short vowels 3.2: Quiescence 3.3: Long vowels 3.4: Vowel Signs 3.5: Nunation 3.6: Doubled Consonants 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Unlike in English, Arabic lexical items are pronounceable only when they are appropriately vocalised.
Arabic vowels are placed either above or beneath the letters of the lexical items to make the pronunciation possible.
Arabic vowels are broadly divided into two – the primary and the secondary.
The primary vowels will be the focus of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - recognise the different types of primary vowels - apply the vowels to Arabic lexical items and read them appropriately 78 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vowels/Short Vowels Arabic words and expressions are pronounceable only when appropriate vowels are applied.
There are three basic vowels in classical Arabic; each occurring both long and short.
Two of these are placed above and the third one is put beneath the letters to show the relevant intonation of a letter.
All the 28 letters of Arabic language can take any of these three vowels to give different sounds.
The short ones are contained in the following: (i) Al-Fathah (the a – vowel).
It is indicated in writing by a small diagonal stroke over the consonant concerned.
The vowel sound is the neutral “a” sound; let us consider the following examples: بَ رَ ضَ سَ َلجَ (ii) Al-Kasrah (the i – vowel).
It is indicated in writing by a small diagonal stroke beneath the consonant concerned.
Its appropriate sound is “i” as in: ل ي ف ن ج س (iii) Ad-dammah (the u – vowel).
It is indicated in writing by a diacritic similar to a small waw ( و ) placed over the consonant concerned as in: ل سُ رُ ب ُتكُ 3.2 Quiescence Jazmah or sukūn means quiescence and it indicates the absence of vowel.
This absence of vowel is indicated by orthographical character written as a small circle above the quiescence consonant (o).
When quiescence is applied to a letter, it stops the continuance of sound and it occurs on either the medial or final consonants of a given Arabic word respectively.
It cannot function on a single consonant like fathah (a – vowel), kasrah (i – vowel) and dammah (u – vowel).
Its usages are given below رْ س مْ كَ لْ َه Self Assessment Exercise Given below are words of different vowel signs, read them without resorting to spellings .
م رَ كَ , مُ عَ ن , نُ س حْ مُ , لُ بْ َط , تُ رْ س , بَ ر شُ , نَ سُ جَ Note: There are two diphthongs represented by ( وْ ) “aw” and ( يْ ) “ay”.
The diphthongs are derived from quiescencing consonants ( و ) “w” and ( ي ) “ay” at the medial or final positions of a verb as shown below: 79 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II ‘ay’ ( يْ ) لُ يْ سَ بُ يْ رَ نَ يْ َب سَ يْ َل لُ يْ مَ رُ يْ َط ‘aw’ ( وْ ) رُ يْ َط لُ وْ َق نُ وْ َأ زُ وْ َف نُ وْ َل بُ وْ َث 3.3 Long Vowels There are three other vowels which can be put above or beneath any consonant to be pronounced with a special sound.
These are letters ( و ): wa; ( ي ) ya and ( ا ) alif which are called long vowels or elongation.
The vowel signs fathah, kasrah and dammah correspond with ‘alif, wa and ya respectively.
Each of the three letters elongates a vowel sign as noted below: (i) ‘alif (أ): This letter elongates fathah (a – vowel) if it occurs at either the medial or final position of a word and it is not vowelled, e.g.
اذ اد اخ اح اج اث ات اب آ (ii) ya ( ي ): This letter elongates kasrah (i – vowel) if it occurs at either the medial or final position of a word and it is not vowelled, e.g.
ىذ ىد ىخ ىح ىج ى ث ى ت ى ب ى ا (iii) wa’( و ): This letter elongates dammah (u – vowel) if it occurs at either the medial or final position of a word and it is not vowelled, e.g.
وذُ ودُ وخُ وحُ وجُ وُث وُت وُب وُأ Note: (i) If a vowel sign corresponds with the vowel letter, its sound is called ma‘rūf (active).
All the examples given above fall into this category as appropriate letters are given to elongate each of the vowels.
More examples of active ones are: (a) alif preceded by a letter bearing fathah: اَف احَ َام َلا ارَ اجَ ا كَ اسَ 80 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (b) ya’ preceded by a letter bearing kasrah: ى ف ىح ىم ى ل ىر ىج ىك ىس (c) wa’ preceded by a letter bearing dammah وُف وحُ ومُ وُ ل ورُ وجُ وكُ وسُ (ii) If a vowel sign does not correspond with the vowel letter, such vowel letter serves as a diphthong only and its sound is then called majhūl (passive).
Examples are: (a) wa preceded by a letter bearing fathah as in: وْ َف وْ حَ وْ مَ وْ َل وْ رَ وْ جَ وْ كَ وْ سَ (b) ya preceded by a letter bearing fathah as in: ىَف ىحَ ىمَ ىل ىرَ ىجَ ىكَ ىسَ Self Assessment Exercise Differentiate between the words which bear ma‘rūf (active) and majhūl (passive) sound respectively from the following examples: امً وْ صَ ل يْ خَ لا طي فحَ ب وُقُث ةَلاصَ ر وحُ م ي لحَ ًلايْ كَ ًلاوْ َق لَ اَق 3.4 Vowel Signs We have identified consonants ‘alif, wa and ya as huruful-māddah (elongating consonants).
The three of them have a substitute each.
The substitutes are alif maqsūrah (shortened alif) which substitutes alif placed on a consonant, and ya if placed beneath a consonant.
Inverted dammah substitutes wa: Alif maqsūrah (shortened alif) is a small diagonal hanging alif ( ا ) while inverted dammah is similar to turning the real dammah upside down.
They perform the functions of consonants they represent in Arabic words.
Examples are as follows: (i) alif maqsūrah on Arabic consonants اجَ ا جَ ,اَت ا تَ ,اَب ا بَ , اآ (ii) alif maqsūrah beneath Arabic consonants ىج ى ج ,ى ث ى ث ,ى ب ب ,ى ا ا 81 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (iii) Inverted dammah on Arabic consonants وجُ جُ ,وُث ثُ ,وُت تُ ,وُب بُ ,وُاُأ 3.5 Nunation The vowel marks ‘a’, ‘i’, and ‘u’ are usually followed by ‘n’ in indefinite nouns, even though the sound ‘n’ is not rendered in writing.
It is indicated in writing by marking the vowel signs twice above or beneath the last consonant of the affected Arabic word.
This is known as tanwin in Arabic.
Examples of nunated letters are the following: ج ٍج جً , ث ثٍ ثً , ت تٍ تً , ب بٍ بً , ا ٍ ا ً ا 3.6 Doubled Consonants It is possible that two identical letters occur on a single word in Arabic.
When two letters follow each other in Arabic and they are not separated by a vowel (such as diphthongs ‘ay’ and ‘aw’), only one of the letters is written but with a mark known as shaddah (strengthening) written on top of it, while the letter should be read with the preceding letter which must be a vowelled one.
A doubled consonant is known as mushaddad and it is obtained from merging two identical letters – one silent and the other bearing a vowel – together.
Examples of doubled consonants are .
لَ َططْ عَ : لَ طعَ , دَ دْ مَ : د مَ , دَ دْ شَ : د شَ , رَ سَ سْ كَ :رس ك Note: (i) Consider the examples above; when doubling is applied to Arabic words, it takes different positions depending on the initial vowel of the doubled consonant in a particular word.
If the doubled consonants bear either fatha (a – vowel) or dammah (u – vowel) the vowels are put on top while the shaddah comes beneath them.
They are then put on the consonant concerned, e.g.
رَ كّ ذَ , م ُأ , ل كُ , ر سٍ , و جَ (ii) If the doubled consonants bear kasrah (i – vowel), shaddah is placed on top of the consonant while the vowel takes its normal position, e.g.
َ ظ فحَ , ب رَ , مَ ر جُ , و جَ 82 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 4.0 CONCLUSION You must have learnt the following in this unit - The Arabic short vowels and their pronunciation on Arabic lexical items.
The short vowels are: ةحتفلا - a – vowel, ةرسكلا - i – vowel and ةمضلا - u- vowel.
- How Jazmah or sukūn stops the continuance of sound when applied to a letter.
You have also learnt about the diphthongs with relevant illustrations - How to recognise the long vowels and examination of the ma‘rūf (active) and majhūl (passive) sound under the long vowels - The vowel signs, nunation and doubled consonants with relevant illustrations.
- The fact that Arabic word cannot be produced appropriately until appropriate vowels are applied.
5.0 SUMMARY We have dealt with a significant aspect of Arabic language – the vowelization of its lexical items.
Arabic word becomes pronounceable and meaningful when vowelised.
Vocalization is an important aspect of Arabic grammar as it guides in determining the appropriate status of a word within a sentence.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differentiate between ma‘rūf and majhūl sounds with relevant illustrations 2.
Discuss doubled consonants with appropriate examples 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adetunji, B.
& Hameed, D.O.
(2009).
A New Approach to the Arabic Language for Schools and Colleges, Abeokuta, Goad Educational Publishers Folorunsho, M.A.
(1996) .A Modern Approach to Arabic Reading, Moyanjuola Publishers, Ede Maqbul, A.A. & Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān 83 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 3 UNIT 2: SECONDARY VOWELS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Secondary Vowels Applicable to Dual 3.2 Secondary Vowels Applicable to Sound Masculine Plural 3.3 Secondary Vowels Applicable to Sound Feminine Plural 3.4 Secondary Vowels Applicable to the Five Names 3.5 The Diptotes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have dealt with the primary vowels in the previous unit.This unit deals with the secondary vowels.
Each of the primary vowels is represented by some letters under certain grammatical conditions which we will examine in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - identify the secondary vowels and the primary vowels represented by each of them - apply the secondary vowels to Arabic lexical items and use them in simple constructions 84 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Secondary Vowels Applicable to Dual The position of a dual noun within a sentence determines the type of secondary vowel to be employed.
In the context where nominative case is applicable to a dual noun, the secondary vowel to be applied is ’alif; for instance نَ امَ لسْ مُ لْا رَ ضَ حَ )لعفلا( Please note that ) رَ ضَ حَ ( is a verb succeeded by the subject ( لعافلا ).
The subject, as you have learnt is a noun in nominative case indicating the doer of an action and it is usually cited after the action.
The word ) ن امَ لسْ مُ لا( is the subject in the nominative case and the secondary vowel indicating the case ْ is ’alif ( ا ).
Let us consider more examples: ة سَ رَ دْ مَ لْا ىَل إ ن اَب لاَطلا بَ َهذَ د ج سْ مَ لْا ى ف ن امَ لسْ مُ لْا ى لصَ ق وس لا ىَل إ ن ارج ا تلا بُ َهذْ َي In the context where accusative and genitive cases are applicable to a dual noun, the secondary vowel to be applied is ya’ ( ي ).
Please note the following examples: ل صْ َفلْا ى ف ن يْ َب لا طلا تُ يَْأرَ The word comprises the verb and the subject ( لعافلا و لعفلا) the word ( ن يْ َب لا طلا ) is the object.
As you have learnt, object is grammatically defined as a noun in the accusative case indicating the particular thing on which the action of the doer occurred.
The word( ن يْ َب لا طلا ) , therefore, as the object has ya’ ( ي ) as the secondary vowel indicating that the word is in accusative case.
Furthermore, where the genitive case is applicable to dual noun, it is the same letter ya’ ( ي ) that is employed.
Let us consider the following example: ن يْ َبل ا طلا ب تُ رْ رَ مَ The word comprises the verb and the subject.
The word comprises the genitive particle ( ب ) and the dual ( ن يْ َب لا طلا ).
A noun appears in genitive mood when it is preceded by any of the genitive case particles.
The word( ن يْ َب لا طلا ) is therefore in genitive case because of the particle preceding it.
The secondary vowel applicable is the letter ya’ ( ي ) as notable in the example.
Let us consider more examples Accusative: ن يْ ذَ يم لْ تلا ذُ اَتسْ ُلأا بَ رَ ضَ ن يْ رَ يق َفلْا تُ رْ صَ َن 85 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Genitive: ن يْ َباَتك لْا ىَلإ تُ رْ َظَن ن يْ مَ لعَ مُ لْا نَ م تُ مْ لعَ َت If a dual noun occurs as the construct in a sentence (فاضملا ), the ending nūn ( ن ) must be dropped irrespective of the case applicable to such noun.
Let us consider few examples: ء ارَ ض لا وَ ء ارَ س لا ىَتَلاحَ ى فَهللا ر كُ شُأ ة ر كُ لا اَبع َلا رَ ضَ حَ In addition, some nouns such as نانثا ,ناتنثا are treated as dual though the grammatical rules guiding the conversion of singular to dual are not applicable unto them.
The grammatical rules affecting the application of secondary vowels to dual are applicable also unto these nouns Self Assessment Exercise Convert the following singular nouns to dual and apply the secondary vowels in the three cases unto them: ر َتفْ دَ , م َلَق , ب اَتك , م لسْ مُ , ذ يم لْ ت 3.2 Secondary Vowels Applicable to Sound Masculine Plural The context within which a sound masculine plural is used in a sentence determines the secondary vowel to be employed.
In the context where nominative case is applicable to a sound masculine plural, the secondary vowel to be applied is wāw ( و ); for instance: نَ ومُ لسْ مُ لْا ءَ اجَ The word ءَ اجَ is a verb succeeded by the subject ( لعافلا ).
As you have learnt, the subject is a noun in the nominative case indicating the doer of an action.
The word نَ ومُ لسْ مُ لْا is the subject in the nominative case and the secondary vowel indicating the case is wāw ( و ).
Let us consider more examples: د ج سْ مَ لْا ى ف ن امَ لسْ مُ لْا ى لصَ ق وس لا ىَل إ ن ارج َ ا ّتلا بُ َهذْ َي In the context where accusative and genitive cases are applicable to a sound masculine plural, the secondary vowel to be applied is yā’ (ي ).
Let us consider these examples: نَ يْ م لسْ مُ لْا تُ يَْأرَ نَ يم لسْ مُ لْا ىَلإ تُ رْ َظَن 86 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II The word نَ ي م لسملا in the first example is the object in accusative case whereas in the second example, the word ني م لسملا is in genitive case because it is preceded by a genitive case particle.
The secondary vowel applicable in the two contexts as you can see is yā’ ( ي ).
If a sound masculine plural occurs as a construct فاضملاin a sentence, the nūn ( ن ) of the ending must be dropped, irrespective of the case applicable to such sound masculine plural.
Let us consider few examples: ة ر كُ لْا اوُبع َلا رَ ضَ حَ ة ر كُ لْا ى بع َلا تُ يَْأرَ ة ر كُ لْا ى بع َلا ب تُ رْ رَ مَ Furthermore, there are some nouns which do not fit properly under the rules guiding the construction of sound masculine plural but are actually treated as sound masculine plurals.
The rules guiding the application of secondary vowels to sound masculine plural are also applicable unto these nouns also.
Self Assessment Exercise Convert the following singular nouns to sound masculine plural and apply the secondary vowels in the three cases unto them ق ر اس , س ر دَ مُ , مُ ئاص لا , دُ ه َتجْ مُ لَا , نُ م ؤْ مُ لَا 3.3 Secondary Vowels Applicable to Sound Feminine Plural Sound feminine plural takes ةمضلا –u-vowel when it occurs in the context where nominative case must be employed.
It takes ةرسكلا –i-vowel when it occurs in the contexts where accusative and genitive cases are applicable respectively.
Let us consider some examples: تُ امَ لسْ مُ لْا ت رَ ضَ حَ ت امَ لسْ مُ لْا تُ رْ صَ َن ت امَ لسْ مُ لْا ب تُ رْ رَ مَ Note that تاملسملا in the first example is the subject and as you have learnt, subject remains in nominative case.
In the second example, تاملسملا is the object and the object must be in accusative case.
What could be described as a ‘secondary’ vowel is however employed here as ةرسكلا i-vowel represents ةحتفلا a-vowel in this usage.
The third تاملسملا is governed by the preceding genitive particle and is thus in genitive case.
87 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.4 Secondary Vowels Applicable to the Five Names In Arabic grammar, there are five spectacular nouns tagged ةسمخلا ءامسلأا – the five names.
The names are وذُ ,وُف ,ومُ ح ,وخُ َأ ,وبا.
The context within which each of the five is used in a sentence determines the applicable secondary vowel.
Three letters wāw ( و ), ’alif ( ا ) and yā’ ( ي ) representing ةمضلا – u-vowel, ةحتفلا-a-vowel and ةرسكلا –i-vowel, are applicable in nominative accusative and genitive cases respectively, to the five names.
Let us consider these examples Genitive Accusative Nominative ى بَأ ابا وبا ىخأ أخَأ وخُ َأ ىمح امح ومح ىف اف وف ىذ اذ وذ 3.5 The Diptotes The term diptote refers to a noun having only two case endings.
Nouns in this category are grammatically described as فرصلا نم ةعونمملا ءامسلاا ‘nouns deprived of nunation’.
The grammatical rules affecting the nouns in this category are analysed as follows: نَ امَ يْ َلسُ ه يخ َلأ م ث ي لعَ ن بْ ىسَ يع ل بَ َتكَ (1) The proper noun ي لعَ ends with nunation ( ن يو نْ َت ) but the proper noun does not end with nunation.
Proper nouns which do not end with nunation belong to a certain category of nouns called: ف رْ ص لا نَ م ُةعَ وُن مْ مَ لْا ءُ امَ سْ َلأا ‘nouns deprived of nunation’; فُ رْ ص لا is synonymous with.
ن يونْ َتلا (2) Unless they have the definite article لا or stand in the construct (with a following genitive), ‘nouns deprived of nunation’ have only two vowel- endings: (a) ُةمَ ض لا (without nunation) in the nominative case: نُ امَ يْ لسُ ءَ اجَ “Sulayman came” ( نُ امَ يْ َلسُ ) is the subject of this verbal sentence.
88 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (b) ُةحَ تْ َفلَْا (without nunation) for either the accusative or genitive case: نَ امَ يْ لسُ تُ لَْباَق “I met Sulayman”; ( نَ امَ يْ َلسُ ) is in the accusative case, being a direct object, نَ امَ يْ لسُ نْ م بَ اَتك لْا تُ ذْ خَ َأ “I took the book from Sulayman” نَ امَ يْ لسُ ; is governed in the genitive case by the preposition نْ م .
In the sentence of paragraph (1), نَ امَ يْ لسُ is in the genitive case, being a substitute of ىخ َأ in ه يخ َلأ .
The genitive case of نَ امَ يْ ل سُ is indicated by an a- vowel.
On the other hand, the genitive case of ي لعَ in the same sentence is indicated as usual by an i-vowel (followed by nunation).
(3) Since ‘nouns deprived of nunation’ have only two case-endings ُةمَ ض لا for the nominative case and ُةحَ تْ َفلْا for the accusative or genitive case, they are called ‘diptotes’.
Other nouns which end, as usual, with ُةمَ ض لا (ُ_ ) for the nominative case, ُةحَ تْ َفلْا ( َ_ ) for the accusative case and ُ ةرَ سْ كَ لا ( ِ - ) for the genitive case are named ‘triptotes’.
The prefix di- denotes ‘two-’, and the prefix tri- denotes ‘three’.
(4) Diptotes include proper nouns ( مُ لاعْ َلأَْا ) as well as certain other kinds of nouns.
We deal in this unit with diptotes which are proper nouns.
(5) The following kinds of proper nouns are treated as diptotes: (a) Feminine proper nouns which end in ة _ َِ (as ُةمَ ط اَف ,ُ ةك مَ ) or not ( as بُ َنيْ زَ , دُ اعَ سُ ).
Masculine proper nouns which end in ة َِ - are also treated as diptotes, e.g.
ُة يمَ ُأ ,ُ ةَيو اعَ مُ ,ُ ةَبيْ َتُق.
The two proper nouns: ُةَلي لكَ and ُ ةَنمْ د , names of two jackals ( ىوَ آ اَنبْ ا ), belong here as well as to (b).
(b) Foreign proper nouns, as مُ يه ارَ بْ ا ‘lbrahim’ لُ يع امَ سْ إ ‘Ismail’, قُ احَ سْ ا ‘Ishaq’, بُ وُقعْ َي ‘Yaqub’, نُ ورُ اَه ‘Harun’,نَاميْ َلسُ ‘Sulaiman’ (c) Proper nouns with the suffix نا (which does not belong to the root), as نُ اوَ رْ م , نُ امَ ثْ عُ , نُ ا فعَ , نُ اَيفْ سُ , نُ اسَ حَ (d) Proper nouns which resemble verbal forms in form, as دُ مَ حْ َأ‘Ahmad’ (literally: “I praise”), دُ يز َي (masculine personal name) (literally: “He increases”), بُ لغْ َت (name of an Arab tribe) (literally: “She conquers”).
89 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (e) Proper masculine nouns of the form ل عَ ُف, as ر مَ عُ (masculine personal name), ل حَ زُ ‘(the planet) Saturn’, ل بَ ُه (name of a pagan Arab idol).
(f) Compound proper nouns ( اًيج زْ مَ اًبيك رْ َت بُ كَ رَ مُ لْا مُ َلاعْ َلأَْا ), as تُ وْ مَ رَ ضَ حَ ‘Hadramaut’ (region in Southern Arabia), كُ َبَلعْ َب ‘Bealbeck’ (Lebanese town known for its Roman monuments).
Foreign proper nouns of this category also belong to (b), as كُ رْ وُيوُيُن ‘New York’, جُ ر َبسْ ناَهوجَ ‘Johannesburg’, دارج نْ ي ني ل ‘Leningrad’.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have learnt in this unit the secondary vowels representing each of the primary vowels and the contexts within which each of the representations occur.
Certain letters of the Arabic alphabet are employed as the secondary vowels.
5.0 SUMMARY Vowelization of lexical items is an integral aspect of Arabic grammar as it guides in determining the appropriate status of a word within a sentence.
Arabic primary vowels are represented by certain letters which actually indicate the status of a word when used with a sentence.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify the primary vowels represented by each of the following letters with appropriate illustrations: alif, waw, yaw.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bakr, E.Y.
(1975).
Arabic by Radio, Book 3, Parts 1&2, Cairo, A.R.E.
Broadcasting Corporation Folorunsho, M.A.
(1996) .A Modern Approach to Arabic Reading, Moyanjuola Publishers, Ede Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, A.A. & Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān 90 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 4: ARABIC NUMBERING SYSTEM, THE PARTICLES AND FORMATION OF SENTENCES UNIT 1: ARABIC NUMBERS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Cardinal Number 3.2 The Ordinal Number 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Arabic numbering system has certain peculiarities which the present unit intends to address.
Unlike the numbering system in English Language, Arabic numbering takes care of the gender and its applicable grammatical rules.
This unit focuses the two types of numbering – the cardinal and the ordinal with the grammatical rules guiding the two types.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: - compare and contrast the numbering systems in Arabic and English language respectively - state the cardinal numbers and the grammatical rules applicable into them 3.0 MAIN CONTENT ARABIC NUMBERS 3.1 The Cardinal Number ىلصلأا ددعلا Arabic language is a gender language.
Numbering or counting system in the language takes care of both masculine and feminine with their specific rules as in the following table.
91 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II English Arabic Number Arabic Numbers in Words Equivalents in Figure Masculine Feminine 1.
١ د حاو د لو ةدحاو تُ نب 2.
٢ ن انثا ن ادلو ناتنثا ناتنب 3.
٣ د لاوأ ةثلاث ت انب ثلاث 4.
٤ د لاوأ ةعبرأ تٍ انب عُ َبرْ َأ 5.
٥ دٍ لاوأ ُةسمخ تٍ انب سمخ 6.
٦ دٍ لاوأ ُةتس تٍ انب تس 7.
٧ دٍ لاوأ ُ ةعبس تٍ انب عُ بس 8.
٨ دٍ لاوأ ةينامث تٍ انب نُ امث 9.
٩ دٍ لاوأ ُةعست تٍ انب عُ ست 10.
١١ دٍ لاوأ ُةرَ شَ ع تٍ انب رَ شَ ع (a) The first two numbers (1 and 2) agree with their subjects.
While the subject is masculine ( دلو ) the numbers are in the masculine form and the numbers are converted to feminine forms when the subject is changed to feminine ( تنب ) (b) Numbers from three to ten do not agree with their subjects – in gender ثلاث which is without the feminine marker – tā marbūṭah (round ta) is used for feminine as تانب ثلاث whereas ةثلاث to which feminine marker is suffixed is used for masculine as دلاوأ ةثلاث (c) The subjects must be stated after numbers three to ten in plural forms, ending in genitive case Self Assessment Exercise (i) Apply these numbers ٩ ٧ ٥ ٣ ١ to ةَب لاَط (ii) Apply the numbers in (i) above to ب لاَط (iii) Identify the main differences between the illustrations in (i) and (ii).
11.
١١ ً ادلو رشَ ع دَ حَ َا ً اتنب رَ شَ عَ ىدحْ ا 12.
١٢ ً ادلو رَ شَ ع انثا ً اتنب َةرَ شْ ع اتنثا 13.
١٣ ً ادلو رَ شَ ع َةثلاث ً اتنب َةرَ شْ ع ثَ لاث 92 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 14.
١٤ ً ادلو رَ شَ ع َةعبرْ ا ً اتنب َةرَ شْ ع عَ برا 15.
١٥ ً ادلو رَ شَ ع َةسمْ خ ً اتنب َةرَ شْ ع سَ مخَ 16.
١٦ ً ادلو رَ شَ ع َة تس ً اتنب َةرَ شْ ع ت س 17.
١٧ ً ادلو رَ شَ ع َةعبس ً اتنب َةرَ شْ ع عَ بْ سَ 18.
١٨ ً ادلو رَ شَ ع َةينامث ً اتنب َةرَ شْ ع يَ نامث 19.
١٩ ً ادلو رَ شَ ع َةعست ً اتنب َةرَ شْ ع عَ ست 20.
٢١ ً ادلو نَ ورُ شْ ع ً اتنب نَ ورُ شْ ع (a) Numbers from eleven to nineteen comprises two Arabic words each in accusative case.
(b) Numbers eleven and twelve agree in gender with the subjects.
The subjects must be stated after two numbers in singular forms, in accusative case.
(c) From numbers thirteen to nineteen, it is only the segment of the two words comprising a number that agrees with its subject genderwise as we can see from the above.
(d) Subjects which must be in singular forms must be stated after each number in accusative case.
(e) Numbers like twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety and one hundred remain unchanged whether they are applicable to masculine or feminine.
The same is applicable to thousand, million and so on 21.
٢١ ًادلو نورشع و دُ حاو ً اتنب نَ ورَ شَ ع و ىدحْ ا 22.
٢٢ ادلو نورشع و نانثا ً اتنب نَ ورَ شْ ع و ناتنثا 23.
٢٣ ادلو نورشع و ةثلاث ً اتنب نورَ شْ ع ثَ لاث 24.
٢٤ ادلو نورشع و ُةعبرْ أ ً اتنب نورَ شْ ع عَ برا 25.
٢٥ ادلو نورشع و ُةسمخ ً اتنب نورَ شْ ع سَ مخَ 26.
٢٦ ادلو نورشع و ُة تس ً اتنب نورَ شْ ع ت س 27.
٢٧ ادلو نورشع و ُةعبس ً اتنب نورَ شْ ع عَ بْ سَ 28.
٢٨ ادلو نورشع و ُةينامث ً اتنب نَ ورَ شْ ع يَ نامث 29.
٢٩ ادلو نورشع و ُةعس ت ً اتنب نَ ورَ شْ ع عَ ست 93 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (a) When a number from one to nine is added to any number from twenty – one to ninety- nine, the letter ( و ) indicating “and” should be infixed, it should then be followed by the number to which the addition is made.
(b) Numbers twenty – one and twenty – two agrees with their subjects in gender, particularly the first segments of the two numbers (c) The remaining numbers (thirteen to nineteen) disagree with their subjects (d) Subjects which must be in singular form must be stated after each number in accusative case.
Self Assessment Exercise - State the grammatical rules guiding the formation of numbers between 21 and 29 with relevant illustrations 20.
٢١ ًلاجُ ر نورشع ً اتنب نَ ورُ شْ ع 30.
٣١ ًلاجر نوثلاث َ اتنب نَ وثلاث 40.
٤١ لاً جر نوعبرْ أ ً اتنب نَ وعبرْ َأ 50.
٥١ ًلاجر نوسمخ اتنب نَ وسمخ 60.
٦١ ًلاجر نَ وتس ً اتنب نَ و تس 70.
٧١ ًلاجر نوعبس ً اتنب نَ وعبس 80.
٨١ لاً جر نونامث ً اتنب نونامث 90.
٩١ ًلاجر نوعست ً اتنب نوعست (a) The numbers 20 through 90 are applicable to both masculine and feminine (b) The subject should be in singular form, in accusative case.
100 ١١١ دٍ لو ةئام تٍ نب ةئام 1000 ١١١١ دٍ لو فُ لا تٍ نب فُ لا ْ ْ 1,000,000 ١,١١١,١١١ دٍ لو نَ وُيلم تٍ نب نَ وُيلم (a) The numbers hundreds, thousands and millions are applicable to both masculine and feminine (b) The subject should be in singular form, in the genitive case.
94 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.2 The Ordinal Number ىِبيِترْ تلا ددعلا Ordinal number takes care of classifying items into their appropriate positions.
Like cardinal numbers, gender is also taken into consideration.
Let us consider this table.
Ordinal Number Masculine Feminine 1st لولأا ىلولأا 2nd ىناثلا ةيناثلا 3rd ثلاثلا ةثلاثلا 4th عُ بارلا ةعبارلا 5th سُ ماخلا ةسماخلا 6th سُ داسلا ةسداسلا 7th عُ باسلا ةعباسلا 8th نُ امثلا ةنماثلا 9th عُ ساتلا ةعساتلا 10th رُ شاعلا ةرشاعلا 11th رشع ىداحلا رَ شع ةيداحلا 12th رشع ىناثلا رَ شع ةيناثلا 13th رشع ثلاثلا رَ شع ةثلاثلا 14th رشع عبارلا رَ شع ةعبارلا 15th رشع سماخلا رَ شع ةسماخلا 16th رشع سداسلا رَ شع ةسداسلا 17th رشع عباسلا رَ شع ةعباسلا 18th رشع نماثلا رَ شع ةنماثلا 19th رشع عساتلا رَ شع ةعساتلا 20th نورشعلا نَ ورشعلا 21st نورشعلاو ىداحلا نَ ورشْ علاو ُةيداحلا 22nd نورشعلا و ىناثلا نَ ورشعلا و ةيناثلا 23rd نورشعلا و ثلاثلا نورشعلاو ُةثلاثلا 95 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (a) Ordinal numbers agree in gender with the qualified nouns (b) The position of numbers one to ten within a sentence determines their cases -nominative, genitive or accusative.
The same rule is applicable to numbers like thirty, forty, fifty and so on.
(c) The ordinals from ‘eleventh’ to ‘nineteenth’ also agree in gender with the qualified noun.
They are indeclinable, remaining in accusative case at the end two components irrespective of the grammatical case of the qualified noun.
(d) The ordinals from ‘twentieth’ to ‘ninetieth are identical in form and are invariably used with masculine and feminine nouns.
(e) If the ordinals from ‘twentieth’ to ninetieth are joined to the ordinals of the units.
These latter precede, and the two are joined by the conjunction ( وَ )’and’.
Self Assessment Exercise State the Arabic equivalents of the following ordinal numbers for masculine and feminine: 5th, 10th, 12th, 20th, 23rd, 30th, 31st, 45th 4.0 CONCLUSION Numbering or counting system in Arabic language takes care of genders – masculine or feminine with the appropriate grammatical rules affecting the two.
There are two types of numbering system – the cardinal and the ordinal.
Each of the two types has its peculiar grammatical features which we have dealt with in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY There are two types of numbering system in Arabic and each of the two types features specific grammatical regulations.
The two types received adequate attention in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the grammatical rules affecting the cardinal numbers from 11-29 with relevant illustrations 2.
Identify the grammatical rules affecting the ordinal numbers 96 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, IraqiMinistry of Education, Baghdad .
Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, A.A. & Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān Mukhtar, I.B.
(1992).
Arabic Brighter Grammar, Bk 1, Mainasara Press, Kano.
97 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 4 UNIT 2: ARABIC PARTICLES 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Particles Defined 3.2 Jussive Particles 3.3 Subjunctive Particles 3.4 Genitive Particles 3.5 Inna and its Associates 3.6 Kāna and its Associates 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION فُ يرِ عْ تلا Noun, verb and particles are considered as parts of sentence(s) in Arabic.
The present lesson focuses the particles in Arabic, drawing attention to the types of particles and how each type of particles and how each type functions in Arabic constructions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to - identify the difference between the noun, verb and particle in Arabic - discover how particles function when they occur in sentences - identify the types of particles in Arabic 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction Particles are utterances which bear no meaning in isolation until they are added to other words – nouns or verbs.
They function as parts of Arabic sentences which are three, namely ism(noun) fi’l(verb) and harf(particle).
98 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Some of the particles are applicable only to verbs, e.g.
hurūf ‘an-nasb (subjunctive particles) and huruf ‘al-jazm (jussive particles).
Genitive particles hurūf ‘an-jarr are restricted to nouns while inna and kāna with their associates function when they are applied to nominal sentences.
3.2 Jussive Particles عراضملا لعفلا مزج (The Jussive Mood of the Present Tense) .
ي هْ نلا مُ لا , ر مْ لأا مُ لا ,ام َلَأ ,ام َل , مْ َلَأ , مْ َل : ةيتلآا مزجلا فورح نم فرح هقبس اذإ عراضملا لعفلا مزجي The present tense verb assumes the jussive mood when it is preceded by any of the jussive particles mentioned above; e.g.
‘Zayd did not read his lesson ُ هسَ رْ دَ د يْ زَ ْأرَ قْ َي مْ َل ‘Do not sit on the bed’ ر ير س لا ىَلعَ سْ لجْ َت َلا The verbs succeeding the jussive particles in the two sentences are in the jussive mood because they are preceded by the particles.
Sukun, an orthographical character written as a small circle above the quiescence constant is used for this mood.
Furthermore, some jussive particles cause declension of two present tense verbs, and entails that the doing of the first action is a condition that precipitates the second action.
These are known as conditional particles and they include , نَ ا يَأ ,امَ َنيَْأ ,امَ ذْ إ ,امَ هْ مَ ,امَ َفيْ كَ ,امَ َنيْ حَ , ي َ أ ,ىَتمَ , نْ مَ ,امَ , نْ ا Here are some examples: If you work hard, you will be successful حْ جَ نْ َت دْ ه َتجْ َت نْ إ Whoever does good will get better rewards ُهَباوَ َث دْ ج َي ارً يْ خَ لْ عَ فْ َي نْ مَ The first sentence is commenced with a conditional jussive particle and it is followed by a present tense verb in a jussive mood indicated by Sukūn(quiescence).
If we stop on the first verb, the meaning of the sentence remains incomplete until the second verb is added.
The verb following the conditional particle is the protasis (conditional verb) and the action in it precipitates the action in apodosis (the reply of the conditional verb).
The combination of the three – the particle, the protasis and the apodosis gives a meaningful statement.
99 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Self Assesment Exercise - Use the following particles in sentences with appropriate ilustrations: امنيا ,فيك ,ام ,رملأا ملا ,مل 3.3 Subjunctive Particles عراضملا لعفلا بصن (The Subjunctive Mood of the Present Tense) ,ىكَ ل ,ى تحَ , نْ ذَ إ ,ىك , نْ ل , نْ َا : ةيتلآا بصنلا فورح نم فرح هقبس اذ إ عراضملا لعفلا بصني .دوحجلا مُ لا The present tense verb assumes the subjunctive mood when it is preceded by any of the subjunctive particles mentioned above; e.g.
I want to go to the school ة سَ رَ دْ مَ لْا ىَل ا بَ َهذْ َأ نْ َا دُ ير ُ أ I study/ am studying in order to serve the country نَ َطوَ لْا مَ دُ خَأ ىكَ مَ لعَ َتَأ The first sentence consists two present tense verbs.
The first is in the nominative case because it is not preceded by any particle while the second is in the accusative or subjunctive mood because it is preceded by one of the subjunctive particles.
The same explanation is applicable to the two present tense verbs featuring in the second sentence.
The sign for this mood is (-) indicating fathah.
Self Assesment Exercise - Construct sentences featuring دوحجلا ملا ,نذا ,نل , ىتح 3.4 Genitive Particles ر جَ لْ ا فُ ورُ حُ (The Genitive Mood of a Noun) , فُ اكَ لْا , ءُ اَبلْا , ب رُ ,ى ف ,ىَلعَ , نْ عَ ,ىَل ا , نْ م :ةيتلآا ر جلا فورح نم فرح هقبس اذا مسلإا رّ جي A noun appears in genitive mood when it is preceded by any of the genitive case particles mentioned above; e.g.
I write/ am writing the lesson in the note book .
ر َتفْ د لا ى ف سَ رْ د لا بُ ُتكْ َأ The farmer is going to the farm ن اَتسْ ُبلْا ىَل ا حُ َلاَفلْا بُ َهذْ َي 100 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II On the first sentence, the last noun is in the genitive mood because of the particle preceding it.
The same is applicable to the last noun on the second sentence.
The sign (-) is used to show this mood.
3.3 Inna and Its Associates اهَ ُتاوَ خْ َأ وَ ن ِا اَهرَ َبخَ ىمَ سَ ُي وَ رَ َبخَ لْا عُ َفرْ َت وَ اَهمُ سْ ا ىمَ سَ ُي وَ َأدَ َتبْ مُ لْا بَ ص نْ َتَف ر َبخَ لْا وَ إدَ َتبْ مُ لْا ىَلعَ اَهُتاوَ خْ َأ وَ ن ا لخدت Inna and its associates function on subject and predicate.
When the particle or any of its associates precedes a nominal sentence, it changes the subject from nominative into accusative case and retains the predicate in the nominative case.
The associates of inna are: ن أك , ل عَ َل , تَ يْ َل , ن ك َل , ن َا , ن إ The lady is really patient ةرَ وُبصَ تَ نْ بلْا ن ا I know that the student is hardworking د ه َتجْ مُ بَ لا طلا ن َا تُ مْ لعَ Let us consider more examples i) د ه َتجْ مُ دَ َلوَ لْا The sentence was originally د ه َتجْ مُ دُ َلوَ لَْا , consisting a subject ( دُ ُ لوَ لْا) in the nominative case indicated by (ةمضلا) and a predicate ( د ه َتجْ مُ ) in the nominative case also indicated by (ةمضلا).
When the emphatic particle ( ن ا) begins the nominal sentence, the subject ( دُ َلوَ لْا) becomes accusative ( دَ َلوَ لْا) but the predicate remains nominative.
The accusative is indicated by (ةحتفلا) since the subject is singular.
If any of the particles begins a nominal sentence consisting a subject and a predicate both of which are dual, the subject which was originally in the nominative case indicated by (فللأا) assumes the accusative case indicated by (ءايلا) and the predicate remains in the nominative case indicated by (فللأا) as you have learnt while treating the secondary vowels (Module 3, Unit 2).
Let us consider few examples: ن ادَ ه َتجْ مُ ن يْ دَ َلوَ لْا ن إ - ن ادَ ه َتجْ مُ ن ادَ َلوَ لَْا ن اتَ رَ يغ صَ ن يْ َتَبي قحَ لْا ن إ – ن اَترَ يغ صَ ن اَتَبي قحَ لَْا If any of the particles begins a nominal sentence consisting a subject and a predicate both of which are sound masculine plurals, the subject which was originally in the nominative case indicated by (واولا) assumes the 101 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II accusative case indicated by )ءايلا( and the predicate remains in the nominative case indicated by )واولا(.
Let us consider few examples: نَ وُطي ش َن نَ يم لسْ مُ لْا ن إ – نَ وُطيش َن نَ ومُ لسْ مُ لَْا نَ ورُ ه امَ نَ يس د نْ َهمُ لْا ن إ – نورُ ه امَ نَ وسُ د نْ َهمُ لَْا If any of the particles begins a nominal sentence the subject of which is a sound feminine plural, the subject assumes the accusative case indicated by (ةرسكلا).
Let us consider these examples: ت ارَ ه امَ ت احَ َلاَفلْا ن إ – ت ارَ ه امَ تُ احَ َلاَفلَْا ت ادَ يد جَ ت اَبي قحَ لْا ن إ - ت ادَ يد جَ تُ اَبي قحَ لَْا Self Assesment Exercise - Begin each of these sentences with ( ن إ) or any of its asociates: رُ ه امَ بُ لا طلا - ١ ن اَتدَ ه َتجْ مُ ن اَتنْ بلَْا -٢ نَ وُطيش َن نَ ومُ لسْ مُ لَْا -٣ ت ادَ يد جَ تُ اَبي قحَ لَْا -٤ 3.4 Kāna and its Associates اهَ ُتاوَ خْ َأ وَ نَ اكَ اَهرَ َبخَ ىمَ سَ ُي وَ رَ بَ خَ لْا بَ ص نْ َت وَ اَه مَ سْ ا ىمَ سَ ُي وَ َأدَ َتبْ مُ لْا عُ َفرْ َتَف ر َبخَ لْا وَ إدَ َتبْ مُ لْا ىَلعَ اَهُتاوَ خْ َأ وَ نَ اكَ لخدت Kāna and its associates function on subject and predicate.
When the particle or any of its associates precedes a nominal sentence, it retains the subject in the nominative case and converts the predicate into accusative case.
The associates of Kāna are .
ل َظ ,ىسَ مْ َا , تَ اَب ,ىحَ ضْ َا , حَ َبصْ َا , رَ اصَ , نَ اكَ The student was hardworking ادً ه َتجْ مُ ذُ يم لْ تلا نَ اكَ The cold became severe.
ادً يد شَ دُ رْ َبلْا رَ اصَ Let us consider more examples: (i) ادً يد شَ دُ رْ َبلْا نَ اكَ – د يد شَ دُ رْ َبلَْا 102 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II The first sentence is nominal.
It consist a subject and a predicate, both of which are in the nominal case.
The second sentence consist the same subject and predicate but begins with ( نَ اكَ ).
The particle has changed the case of the predicate from the nominative (ديد شَ ) to the accusative (ادً يد شَ ) (ii) ةدَ ه َتجْ مُ ُةَب لا طلا ت َناكَ - ُةدَ ه َتجْ مُ ُةَب لا طلَا The first sentence consist a subject and a predicate.
The second sentence consist the same subject and predicate but begins with (ناك) which has made the predicate accusative.
Note that the feminine ending (ءاتلا) is suffixed to (ناك) because the subject ( ُةَب لا طلَا) is feminine Self Assesment Exercise - Begin each of the following sentences with )ناك ( or any of its associates: ع س اوَ نُ ادَ يْ مَ لَْا -١ ةدَ يد جَ ُةسَ رَ دْ مَ لَْا -٢ ع ير سَ رُ اَط قلَْا -٣ د ه َتجْ مُ ذُ يم لْ تلَا -٤ ةَي فاصَ ءُ امَ س لَا -٥ 4.0 CONCLUSION Particles in Arabic are joined with the other components of Arabic sentence(s) – verb or noun to make each sentence(s) become meaningful.
There are various types of particles in Arabic, each type performs specific function in Arabic constructions.
Some of these particles function when applied to Arabic verbs while others function when applied to Arabic nouns.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt about particles in Arabic in this unit.
You are now familiar with the types of particles and how each type functions in Arabic constructions 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Use the following particles in sentences ىَتمَ , تَ يْ َل , ن َأكَ , ن َأ , فُ اكَ لا , نْ م , تَ اَب ,ىسَ مْ َا , نَ اكَ , رَ اصَ 103 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adetunji, B.
& Hameed, D.O.
(2009).
A New Approach to the Arabic Language for Schools and Colleges, Abeokuta, Goad Educational Publishers Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Maqbul, A.A. & Zakari, A.M. (1427 A.H/ 2006 C.E) Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al -‘arabiyyah, Bk.. 2, Qabrus, Dār ’al-’ ān Maqbul, S.A. & Marshān, S.M.
(1427 A.H./ 2006 C.E.)
‘An-nahw wa ’s-sarf, Bk.
3, Qabrus Dar ’al-’ān Mukhtar, I.B.
(1992).
Arabic Brighter Grammar, Bk 1, Mainasara Press, Kano.
104 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II MODULE 4 UNIT 3: ARABIC SENTENCES 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Complete Sentence 3.2 Nominal Sentence 3.3 Verbal Sentence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION فُ يرِ عْ تلا In the Arabic language, there are three basic parts of speech as recognised by orthodox Arabic grammarians.
These are verbs, nouns and particles.
The Arabic verb, like its English counterpart, expresses different aspects of action.
The Arabic noun is however, wider in concept than the English noun.
Hence in Arabic, the noun includes the English concepts of nouns, pronouns, adjectives and adverbs while Arabic particles include conjunction, preposition and interjection.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to - define a complete sentence in Arabic - identify a nominal sentence and the various types of constructions under this heading - identify a verbal sentence and the various features of a verbal sentence 105 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II 3.1 Complete Sentence ةدَ يِفمُ ةَلمْ جُ .ا مً لاك اضيأ ىمسي و ًةديفم ًةلمج ىمسي ًةمات َةدئاف ديفي ىذلا بيكرتلا A synthesis that gives a full meaning is called a complete sentence.
A complete sentence in Arabic consist components which embrace nouns, verbs and particles.
The combination of these components gives a complete statement.
Some sentences may be complete with two of the components while some may be adequate with just a component.
Statement like ي لعَ بَ َهذَ ة سَ رَ دْ مَ لْا ىَل ا“Ali went to school” is complete.
It embraces noun ( ة سَ رَ دمَ لا) and ( ي لعَ ) as well as verb ( بَ َهذَ ) and particle ( ىَل ا).
Equally, statement like ذُ اَتسْ ُلأا مَ اَن “The teacher (has) slept” is complete as it s made up of a noun ( ذُ اَتسْ ُلأا ) and a verb ( مَ اَن) Imperative verb like مْ ُق “stand up” سْ لجْ ا , “sit down” and ْبتكُْا “write” ْ ُ which obviously seem to be one word each, are indeed enough for a speech.
This is because actually they are not single words as they appear to be.
Rather, they are sentences comprising two words, one of which is expressed but the other one is implied ( تَ نَْا) which the listener understands from the command, even though it is not expressed verbally.
Self Assesment Exercise - State the basic parts of speech in Arabic with appropriate illustrations.
3.2 Nominal Sentence ُةَيمِ سْ لاِ ا ُةَلمْ جُ لَْا Basically, there are two types of sentences in Arabic.
These are the nominal and the verbal sentences.
Nominal sentence is defined as: ً ة يم سْ ا ًةَلمْ جُ ىمَ سَ ُت رٍ َبخَ وَ ٍادَ َتبْ مُ نْ م بُ كَ رَ َتَت ةٍ َلمْ جُ ل كُ Any sentence comprising subject and predicate is a nominal sentence.
This in essence, connotes that nominal sentences commence with a noun.
Examples of nominal sentences are: The hardworking one is successful ح ج اَن دُ ه َتجْ مُ لَْا The female student is gentle ةرَ وُبصَ ُةَب لا طلا Zaynab is intelligent ةَل قاعَ بُ نَ يْ زَ Ibrahim is just ل د اعَ مُ يه ارَ بْ ا The first words of the four examples given in Arabic above are nouns, so the sentences are nominal.
The examples contain subjects and predicates which are the basic components of nominal sentences.
These are simple 106 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II nominal sentences.
Sentences in this category may be longer but no matter the length, subject and predicate will eventually emerge as the basic components of such sentences.
In addition, both the subject and the predicate should be in the nominative case as noted in the given examples.
When a nominal sentence is constructed, the predicate of its subject may be one of the five varieties noted below: (i) A Simple Noun The man is an engineer س د نْ َهمُ لُ جُ ر لا The woman is a trader ةرَ ج اَت ُةَأرْ مَ لَْا The second word in each of the two examples given above is a simple noun, in the nominative case.
It is the predicate of the sentence (ii) An Adjective The student is dutiful د ه َتجْ مُ بُ لا َطلا The room is large ةعَ س اوَ ةرَ جْ حُ لَْا The second word in each of the examples given above is an adjective.
It is the predicate of the sentence, in the nominative case.
(iii) Prepositional Phrase The cat is under the bed ر ير س لا تَ حْ َت ط قلَْا The book is on the table ب َتكْ مَ لْا ىَلعَ بُ اَتك لَْا The second and third words in each of the examples given above are the combinations of a prepositional particle and a definite noun.
The combinations serve as the predicate of the sentence in a nominative case.
(iv) Verbal Clause The student went to the market قوش لا ىَل ا بَ َهذَ ذُ يم لْ تلا The teacher sat on the chair ر ير س لا ىَلعَ سَ َلجَ مُ لعَ مُ لا In the first example, the expression is a verbal clause because it starts with a verb.
The clause is the predicate of the sentence in a nominative case.
The same is applicable to ي س رْ كُ لْا ىَلعَ سَ َلجَ in the second example.
(v) Nominal Clause The woman is sleeping on the bed ر ير س لا ىَلعَ ةمَ ئاَن ُةَأرْ مَ لَْا The man is sitting on the chair ي س رْ كُ لْا ىَلعَ س لاجَ لُ جُ ر لا Note that the word ُةمَ ئاَن (a sleeper, somebody sleeping) is translated in this context as “is sleeping”.
Literally, the sentence would mean “The woman is a 107 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II sleeper on the bed” or “The woman sleeps in the bedroom”.
The word is derived from the verb مَ اَن (to sleep).
Using the common paradigm of لعف as basis then the derived will take the form of ةمَ ئاّن .
This form represents the active participle of a verb in Arabic.
The clause ر ير س لا ىَلعَ ةمَ ئاَن is nominal.
It is the predicate of the sentence in the nominative case.
This same explanation goes for the second sentence Self Assesment Exercise - When a nominal sentence is constructed, the predicate of its subject may be one of the five varieties noted above.
Cite relevant illustrations for each of the varieties.
- What are the basic components of nominal sentences?
3.3 Verbal Sentence ُةَيِلعْ ِفلْ ا ُةَلمْ جُ لّْا ً ةَي لعْ ف ًةَلمْ جُ ىم سَ ُت لٍ ع اَف وَ ل عْ ف نْ م بُ كَ رَ َتَت ةٍ َلمْ جُ ل كُ Having noted that a nominal sentence is the one which commences with a noun, we should now consider the verbal sentence.Verbal sentence is the one which begins with a verb, which is succeeded by its doer (subject) such a verb may be past tense or present tense verbs.
Examples of verbal sentences are: The student went to the school ة سَ رَ دْ مَ لْا ىلَ ا بُ لَ اّطلا بَ َهذَ The girl sat on the seat د عَ قْ مَ لْا ىَلعَ تُ نْ بلْا ت سَ َلجَ The student goes to the school ة سَ رَ دْ مَ لْا ىَل ا بُ لا طلا بُ َهذْ َي The girl sits on the seat د عَ قْ مَ لْا ىَلعَ تُ نْ بلْا سُ لجْ َت The first word of each of the four examples given in Arabic above is a verb.
The first two are in the past form while the remaining two are in the present form.
When constructing verbal sentences, however the following rules should be considered.
(a) When the preceding verb to the subject is on the third person, the verb must always be singular whether the subject itself is singular, dual or plural; e.g.
(i) The Muslim prayed in the mosque د ج سْ مَ لْا ى ف مُ لسْ مُ لْا ى لصَ The (two) Muslims prayed in the mosque د ج سْ مَ لْا ى ف ن امَ لسْ مُ لْا ى لصَ The (many) Muslims prayed in the mosque د ج سْ مَ لْا ى ف نَ ومُ لسْ مُ لْا ى لصَ 108 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II (ii) The female student sat in the classroom ل صْ َفلْا ى ف ُةَب ل ا طلا ت سَ َلجَ The (two) female student sat in the classroom ل صْ َفلْا ى ف ن اَتَب ل طلا ت سَ َلجَ The (many) female students sat in the classroom ل صْ َفلْا ى ف تُ اَب ل ا طلا ت سَ َلجَ Each of the three sentences in group (i) is commenced with a verb in singular form in spite of the fact that the construction is referring to dual in the second example while it is referring to plural in the third example.
The same explanation is applicable to the three examples in group (ii).
(b) The verb must agree with its subject in gender; e.g.
The teacher has arrived ذُ اَتسْ ُلاا رَ ضَ حَ The child has slept مُ َلاغُ لْا مَ اَن From the examples above, it will be noted that the verbs agree with the subjects because the subjects are masculine so the verbs are also in masculine usage.
Let us consider more examples: Hind has closed the door بَ اَبلْا دُ نْ ه تْ َقَلغَ The (female) Principal has travelled ُ ةرَ يد مُ لا ت رَ َفاسَ Verbs here are different from the ones cited earlier because of the addition of the suffix (ت ) which indicates that the subjects in the sentences are feminine.
As opposed to English usage where the same verbs are used for both masculine and feminine, differences between the two are noted in Arabic, as contained in the examples given above.
(c) The subject of the verbal sentence must always be in the nominative case.
From the examples given so far, it will be noted that the subjects are all in the nominative case.
This is based on the grammatical rule which states that subjects should always be in nominative case, either by the application of direct vowel or any of its substitutes.
(d) The object of the verb should always be in the accusative case.
This is also as a result of certain grammatical rules which states that object occurring in a sentence should always be in the accusative case, either by applying direct vowel or any of its substitutes; e.g.
Mahmud cut a tree ًةرَ جَ شَ دُ و مُ حْ مَ عَ َطَق Fatimah wrote a letter ًةَلاسَ ر ُةمَ ط اَف تْ َبَتكَ 109 ARA 382 Arabic Grammar II Self Assesment Exercise - State the grammatical rules guiding the construction of verbal sentences 4.0 CONCLUSION A synthesis that gives a full meaning is called a complete sentence.
A complete sentence in Arabic consists of nouns, verbs and particles.
Some sentences may be complete with two of the components while some may be accurate with just one of the three.
Basically, there are two types of sentences in Arabic.
These are the nominal and the verbal sentences.
You have learnt about these two basic types and the various classifications coming under the two types in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt what a complete sentence is, in this unit.
The unit has also discussed the two types of sentences in Arabic with relevant illustrations.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT - Differentiate between nominal and verbal sentences with relevant examples 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adetunji, B.
& Hameed, D.O.
(2009).
A New Approach to the Arabic Language for Schools and Colleges, Abeokuta, Goad Educational Publishers Amin, A.Q.H.
and Kazim, Y.
(1977).
Qawā‘id ’al-lughah ’al-‘arabiyyah, Iraqi Ministry of Education, Baghdad Folorunsho, M.A.
(2000).
The Basis of Arabic Grammar, Osogbo, Harmony Publications (Nig.)
Ltd. Mukhtar, I.B.
(1992).
Arabic Brighter Grammar, Bk 1, Mainasara Press, Kano.
110
