 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: FRE 392 COURSE TITLE: ADVANCED STUDIES IN TRANSLATION FRE 392: ADVANCED STUDIES IN TRANSLATION Course Developer: Dr. Isaiah Bariki Department of French University of Ilorin Ilorin – Nigeria Unit Writer: Dr. Isaiah Bariki Department of French University of Ilorin Ilorin – Nigeria Programme Leader: Dr. Olu Akeusola National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Ms Lucy Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
2 UNIT I THE IMPORTANCE OF TRANSLATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 A Short History of Translation 3.1 The Importance of Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit is to further stress the importance of translation.
This will be preceded by a short history of translation dating back to the days of Pharaoh in Egypt.
You will read general ideas on the relevance of translation.
The relevance of translation is not far- fetched.
You observe it in your daily life.
2.0.
Objectives On the successful completion of this unit, you should be able to appreciate: - a brief history of translation - the usefulness of translation in general - the usefulness of translation as a tool for teaching languages - the role of translation in portraying Nigeria’s literary greatness - the role of translation in international conferences and meetings 3.0 A Short History of Translation Translation in the form of interpretation is believed to be as old as man.
Its origin dates back to the origin of different 3 languages.
In the Western world (i.e.
Europe and America), the story of the tower of Babel as told in the Bible (Genesis chapter eleven) is used in relating to the genesis or beginning of translation.
That is why you have one of the most important translation journals known as Babel.
George Steiner titled his seminal and very useful book on translation as After Babel.
Interpreters were well known in Pharaoh’s Egypt.
The first known instances of translation (written as opposed to oral) originated from the Middle East.
Three civilizations in Mesopotamia – Sumer, Babylon and Assyria – successively undertook translation activities.
At Nineveh, there were 30,000 tablets with inscriptions in three different languages.
The Mesopotamian culture was one of translation.
It thrived on translation, for in Babylon of Hammurabi, the scribes were charged with translating the edicts into many languages.
In today’s world, the vast movement of people for various reasons such as trade, migration, wars, diplomacy, religion have encouraged translation.
Over the years, biblical translation has contributed immensely to translation theory and practice.
The Bible is the most translated book.
Eugene Nida (1964), a renown translator and linguist, gave the following reasons among some others to buttress the importance of biblical translation to translation generally: 1.
Biblical translation involves a great variety of languages and cultures.
2.
The Bible touches on various themes and topics e.g.
proverbs, poetry.
3.
Bible translators have recourse to a variety of principles, procedures and theories.
4.
Bible translation usually involves people of different invaluable expertise, thus leading to numerous, healthy and enriching debates.
5.
The Bible has the greatest number of volumes of manuscripts.
4 Translation is really experiencing a boost as globalization brings human beings of different languages closer by the day.
3.1 The Importance of Translation.
Translation helps in interaction among people of different languages.
It is an activity you carry out very regularly.
Perhaps, you are not very conscious of the fact that you may have been involved in translation in a practical way.
At one time or the other you must have translated from your language into English or vice versa.
In this course, the translation involves two European languages: English and French.
Both languages are of great universal importance and should be mastered for effective communication and translation.
English is the most widely spoken language in the world.
It is also Nigeria’s official language.
Its mastery is therefore an obligation for you.
As for French, it is the official language of Nigeria’s neighbours.
And very importantly, you have either opted to have a degree in French or have taken it as a course; hence the need for you to write and speak it appreciably well.
Very often, communication is grounded to a halt or at least hindered when people from different linguistic communities have to interact.
For successful communication, a translator or interpreter may be needed when there is no mutual linguistic intelligibility in the languages used.
Translation is a very important course.
Translation also offers an excellent opportunity for the study of foreign languages.
In this course, you will use translation to study French.
When you use translation to study a language, you call it pedagogical translation (la traduction pédagogique).
As you learnt in FRE 301, there is le thème and la version.
It may be necessary to recall what these words stand for.
Le thème involves the translation of a text or passage from the mother tongue into the foreign language.
For instance, when a Frenchman translates a text from French into another language (e.g.
English), it is le thème (theme).
On the 5 contrary, when the Frenchman translates from English into French, it is version (version) In our own situation in Nigeria where English and French are both foreign languages, the terms do not really apply.
We cannot talk of thème and version as such because both languages are foreign to us.
However, Bariki (2000) created the terms “para- thème” and “para-version”.
He used “para-thème” when Nigerian students are translating from English into French.
On the other hand, he used “para-version” to describe a text that is translated from French into English.
The reasoning is this: For a Nigerian student, English has some elements of “version”.
That is, the average Nigerian student is very much at home with English which is his official language.
He speaks English very fluently and habitually.
English therefore has – remotely though – some traits of mother tongue; hence the term “para-version”.
Most students find it easier to translate from French into English because English is the habitual language i.e.
a language they use very regularly.
The two terms are created in line with terms like “paramedical” and “paramilitary”.
“Para” means “similar to” and is used with adjectives and nouns.
In other words, “paramilitary” means, “organized and operating like an army” (Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners 2007).
In the same vein, we may say that “para-thème” (para-thème) is similar to “thème" and para-version is similar to “version”.
You can, however, talk of theme and version where the translation involves a mother tongue and a foreign language.
For instance, it is very appropriate to use these terms in an Hausa class where an Hausa text is translated to English or French.
You appreciate the relevance of translation when you keep in view the numerous languages in the world.
Experts are not sure of the exact number.
Some experts give the number as 4200.
Our world is a multilingual one.
That is to say, the world has many languages.
It is through translation that you can appreciate the literature as well as social and cultural values of people who do not speak your language.
For instance, through translation, the world 6 enjoys the literary greatness of Nigerian authors like Wole Soyinka and Chinua Achebe.
Translation has made us to be proud of our cultural and literary legacy.
Chinua Achebe’s famous novel Things Fall Apart has been translated into over 30 languages.
The French version is Le monde s’effondre.
Try and get a copy and read it.
Compare it with the original work.
It is also through translation that we know details of developments in science, technology, medicine and other fields of knowledge.
Without translation, most of the link with ancient civilizations such as Greece, Egypt and China would have been lost.
In the contemporary world, translators and interpreters are in high demand.
They are useful at international meetings and conferences.
Given the diversity of languages, translators and interpreters are indispensable in diplomatic circles.
Take for instance, various meetings at the United Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS.
The nations represented in these international bodies speak different languages.
So, the presence of translators and interpreters is indispensable.
At the United Nations, French is one of the official languages.
The same thing applies to the African Union and ECOWAS.
In fact, at ECOWAS, the French speaking countries outnumber their English speaking counterparts.
English and Portuguese are also spoken at ECOWAS meetings.
4.0 Conclusion Translation is needed in many international organizations.
Translators are needed in such organizations.
In this unit, you have learnt of the history of translation and the importance of translation.
You have known that translation is an age-long tool for communication and teaching of foreign languages.
You appreciate the unavoidable need to master English and French.
In our French classes the terms “thème” and “version” are not very appropriate terms.
“Para-thème” and “para-version” may be considered.
7 5.0 Summary This unit has equipped you with the significance of translation.
The knowledge you have acquired here will inspire you to work harder on this course.
If you desire to be translator or interpreter, you may pursue courses in these areas later.
You also know the names of a few schools where translation and interpretation are taught.
You may want to go to any of these schools if you have a flair for the subjects.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.
Write a very short history of translation in your own words 2.
Give two reasons why translation is important.
3.
What is the difference between “thème” and “version”?
4.
Why are the terms “para-thème” and “para-version” used for translation classes in Nigeria ?
5.
What is the meaning of paramilitary?
6.
Name two international organizations where interpreters and translators can work.
7.
Name five official languages of the United Nations.
8.
Identify three schools where translators and interpreters are trained.
9.
Do you consider yourself qualified to work as a translator at the end of this course?
10.
Find out the different languages spoken by the different countries of ECOWAS.
7.0 References Bariki, K. O (1999): La traduction appliquée et le français dans les universités nigérianes Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. Nida, E (1964): Towards a Science of Translating, Leiden E. J. Brill 8 UNIT 2 SCOPE OF TRANSLATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Definition of Scope 3.1 Scope of Translation 3.2 Recall of Procedures of Translation 3.3 Beyond the Dictionary 3.4 The Importance of Context 3.5 Creativity and Adaptation 3.6 Beyond Bilingualism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.1 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, you learnt a lot on the importance of translation and translators.
This unit introduces you to a general overview of the requirements in translating.
You will learn the definition of scope.
You will also learn a few general notions on translation.
2.0 Objectives As you successfully complete this unit, you should be able to: - talk about the scope of translation generally.
- talk about the usefulness and limits of dictionaries in translation.
- know the names of some good bilingual and unilingual languages (langues bilingues et unilingues).
- discuss the importance of context in translation.
- discuss creativity in translation.
9 3.0 Definition of Scope 3.1 Scope of Translation The word “scope” simply means “the range of things that a subject, activity, books, etc.
deals with.” (Longman Dictionary of English 2003:1275).
Scope of translation therefore means the various aspects or issues translation deals with.
Translation means reproducing the meaning in a text from one language (known as the source language) into another (the target language).
The source language in French is langue source or langue de départ while the target language is called langue cible or langue d’arrivée.
A translator must be functionally bilingual; that is, he must be able to write and speak two different languages.
It is, however, not enough to be bilingual.
You must have a good command of the languages.
If you do not have a good grasp of the language, you will make many mistakes.
That will tell negatively on your personality just as it can cause communication and/or comprehension problems.
Just imagine someone speaking your language badly.
How do you feel?
Besides, you should be familiar with the subject matter.
If you are not familiar with the subject matter, you may not understand the text you are translating.
That automatically means you will be giving wrong translations.
In the translation class, you will be given a variety of texts to translate.
This will enable you to acquire words and expressions on different aspects of life.
You will also be exposed to different grammatical structures.
In order to translate from English to French and vice versa, you should write good English and French.
That is why you should take this course very seriously.
You need also to do a lot of practice on your own.
The saying that “practice makes perfect” is very true in relation to translation.
The more you translate texts, the more you sharpen your ability to translate.
While translating, you will observe that you may not get an exact meaning or equivalent in some cases.
You simply get to the nearest equivalent.
Ex.
J’ai mangé la baguette – I have eaten 10 bread.
The English translation does not give you a clear idea of the type of bread.
“Baguette” is found in the English dictionary, but if you use it most Nigerians are not likely to understand you.
“Baguette” is a “long thin loaf of bread made in the French style, soft inside and hard outside” Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners (2007:98).
There are even instances where you cannot get an equivalent.
This is common in cultural issues like food, dance, institutions, etc.
There are no direct equivalents of gari, amala, tuwo, akpu, osun, gbegiri, afan, etc.
in French.
You may therefore have recourse to emprunt (borrowing).
That means you use the same word.
In addition, you may explain the type of food.
You put the explanation in brackets or at the end of the chapter or book.
In other words you may use footnotes.
The other way out is for you to use the method of adaptation as you have earlier learnt in FRE 301 3.2 Recall of Procedures of Translation Remember the translation procedures you learnt in FRE 301.
Please, revise the notes.
They will be useful.
Take, for instance, if you have to translate fufu, amala, tuwo and other Nigerian food items into French.
You cannot get any French equivalent; you may just use the adaptation procedure or explain what the food is like.
Alternatively you use the word “pâte”.
Similarly, “le beignet” can be used for doughnut, puff puff, etc.
Briefly review your notes on traduction littérale, calque, emprunt, transposition, modulation, équivalence and adaptation.
You treated them in FRE 301.
3.3 Beyond the Dictionary It is necessary to recall the usefulness of dictionaries – bilingual dictionaries (dictionnaires bilingues) and monolingual dictionaries (dictionnaires monolingues).
Bilingual dictionaries are written in French and English and monolingual dictionaries are either wholly French or English.
Buy fairly big dictionaries.
The smaller ones do not contain enough words.
11 There are different types of dictionaries.
Some simple explanations are very good for daily use.
Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English and Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners are such good monolingual English Dictionaries.
For good monolingual French dictionary, you may buy Le Petit Larouse or Le Petit Robert.
You can also find the following bilingual dictionaries very useful: Collins Robert French Dictionary and Harraps French/English Dictionary.
Make sure you buy very current editions.
The more current the better.
The reason is that the older edition may not have some new or current words in them.
Besides, language being very dynamic, words change slightly or wholly in meaning over the years.
You should have access to many dictionaries in order to compare definitions.
With time you should aspire to have dictionaries dedicated to specialized or technical words.
Good as dictionaries are, they cannot translate for you.
Translation is not mechanical.
You cannot just look up a word and write down the equivalent.
If you do that, you will end up with a bad translation.
As an example, let us examine and translate the following sentence: I am eating- je mange.
or je suis en train de manger If you look up for « eating » separately in the dictionary you may write « je suis mangeant ».
That would be very wrong.
In order to translate well, you should have a good grasp of your grammar and a rich store of vocabulary, not only of French but of English too.
Remember that you will translate some texts from French into English as well.
Moreover, you are in an English-speaking country.
You must write and speak very good English.
3.4 The Importance of Context Another crucial thing to remember while translating is context.
The context will determine the meaning of a word.
When you look up for a word in the dictionary, you may find many 12 equivalents or synonyms.
It is now left for you to choose the appropriate or correct equivalent.
It is the context that will tell you which word or expression is appropriate.
Take for instance, the following sentences: The man kicked the bucket yesterday.
He is going to be buried today.
From the context, it is clear that the man did not physically kick the bucket in the sense of using his leg to strike a bucket.
The second sentence which talks about burial gives you the clue to the contextual meaning.
It means “the man died”.
In fact “to kick the bucket” is an idiomatic expression meaning “to die”.
In the light of this, the correct translation is “L’homme est mort hier.
Il va être enterré aujourd’hui”.
Still talking about context, the following sentences have different meanings.
La femme est grosse “Grosse” means either “fat” or “pregnant”.
Thus, if you have to translate “Cette femme est grosse” out of context, you have two options.
You either translate it as “This woman is fat” or “This woman is pregnant”.
But in “Cette grosse femme est grosse”, you are NOT likely to have the two meanings.
You may render the sentence as “This fat woman is pregnant”.
To avoid confusion or possible misunderstanding, you may simple write or say “Cette femme est enceinte”.
“Enceinte” means pregnant.
In this last example, there is no room for ambiguity.
Ambiguity means “something that is not clear because it has more than one possible meaning” (Macmillan English Dictionary, 2007:45).
A final example may be helpful.
How do you translate “honey” into French ?
In the context of food or a meal, honey is “le miel”.
Honeymoon is “la lune de miel”.
But if a man calls his wife “honey”, the correct equivalent will be chérie (The woman will address her husband as chéri).
13 3.5 Creativity and Adaptation The translator should be creative too.
This will be necessary as you come across words and expressions that you cannot translate literally.
You have learnt of adaptation.
Another word for adaptation is accommodation.
There are different types of adaptation or accommodation: cultural, political, religious, etc.
You can find elements of accommodation in literary translations.
Look at the titles of the following books and their translations.
Beautyful Ones Are Not Yet Born - by Ayi Kwei Armah L’âge d’or n’est pas pour demain - The literal translation of the French version means « Golden age is not for tomorrow » Mission Terminée - by Mongo Beti Mission to Kala - (translated by Peter Green) Girls at War - by Chinua Achebe Femmes en guerre - translated by Grandsaigne The word “girls” is translated as “filles” or “jeunes filles” but the translator opts for “femmes” which means “women”.
This translation can be tolerated because it is literary translation.
It is not rare to find literary translators adopt this approach as you can see in the examples given above.
3.6 Beyond Bilingualism Bilingualism involves two languages.
Someone who is bilingual is able to speak or write two languages.
We have seen that it is not enough to be bilingual in order to translate.
Language involves elements of culture.
You cannot understand some aspects of a language if you do not understand the culture of the people.
For this reason, a translator should, ideally, be bicultural too.
That means the person should have a good knowledge of the two cultures in question.
14 In the case of a Nigerian student of French, the person should understand the French culture in order to translate well.
You see how translation is not limited to words, expressions and grammar.
This is another reason why you should take all other French courses very seriously.
The courses are interrelated.
If you are good in one, it will consciously or unconsciously help you in another one.
4.0 Conclusion You now have a general idea of the scope of translation.
You have learnt that translation goes beyond bilingualism and the use of dictionaries.
You have also learnt the importance of context in translation.
5.0 Summary You have been reminded of translation procedures.
You will now use the dictionary more wisely in translation.
You are also more adequately equipped to translate words that do not have direct equivalents.
Emprunt and adaptation can be very useful.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.
Define “scope” in English.
2.
Write briefly on the importance of dictionaries and context in translation.
3.
What is emprunt?
When can it be used?
4.
What are the limits of the use of dictionaries in translation?
5.
What do you understand by the translation procedure called “adaptation”?
6.
What is another word for “adaptation”?
7.
Look up for the French word “cousin” in your dictionary.
Make two different sentences in French according to their different meanings.
8.
Why is understanding culture necessary for good translation?
9. Who wrote Arrow of God?
15 10.
What is the French translation of Arrow of God?
7.0 Reference Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners (New Edition) (2007): London: A & C Black Publishers Ltd. 16 UNIT 3 TYPES OF TRANSLATION (I) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Types of Translation 3.1 Written Translation 3.2 Oral Translation or Interpretation 3.2.1 Phases of Interpretation 3.2.2 Professional Status or Organization of Interpretation 3.2.3 Simultaneous Interpretation 3.2.4 Consecutive Interpretation 3.2.5 Whispered Interpretation 3.3 Differences between Translation and Interpretation 3.4 Linguistic Requirements in Interpretation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction You have learnt a lot on translation.
The first unit dealt with the importance of translation, a situation that you observe practically on a daily basis.
You, thereafter, saw the scope of translation.
That means you saw the different areas that are treated in translation.
Now, you will see various types of translations.
In other words, there is not just one type of translation.
You will learn in this unit the difference between interpretation and translation and the three different phases of interpretation.
You have translated many texts from English to French and vice versa.
You will now learn about the different types of translation.
17 2.0 Objectives The objective is to teach you the different types of translation.
You will learn the differences between translation proper and interpretation.
You will also learn the following types of interpretation: - simultaneous interpretation - consecutive interpretation - whispered interpretation or le chuchotage.
3.0 Types of Translation Translation is a very rich course.
That is why there are many types of translation.
MacMillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners (2007) defines translation as “spoken or written words that have been changed into a different language”.
The key words you should notice in this definition are spoken and written.
In other words, translation can be spoken or written.
Let us treat the written one first.
3.1 Written Translation Written translation is the translation you see on paper.
It is the translation that you write.
This type differs from oral translation, which is better known as interpretation.
The similarities and differences will be highlighted as the unit expands.
3.2 Oral Translation or Interpretation In “oral translation”, the words are spoken, not written.
The translation you hear in the church or mosque is oral translation.
It is spoken.
The pastor or imam speaks in one language and someone relays it into another.
This type of translation is called interpretation.
The person who does oral translation is called an interpreter.
As noted earlier, the profession of an interpreter and that of a translator resemble in many varied ways.
Both are the consequences of human language that got diversified in the course of history.
The example often cited for the dispersion of human 18 habitat leading to a multiplicity of languages is in the eleventh chapter of Genesis in the Bible.
The story or “myth”, as J.R Ladmeral (1979) prefers to call it, started when man tried to build the tower of Babel.
The idea was to prevent the people from scattering all over the surface of the earth.
But God felt that the people could do whatever they imagined to do as they all spoke one language.
God therefore decided to confound them and they all started speaking different languages.
From that period there was need for interpretation.
Of course, interpretation started before translation, since speech precedes writing.
Interpretation is therefore an old profession.
Some people consider it to be the oldest trade or profession on earth.
3.2.1 Phases of Interpretation The term “interpretation” is derived from Latin.
It can be divided into three main phases: i) The listening phase.
The interpreter listens attentively to the orator.
He then reproduces the same message in a language that is different from that of the orator.
The target language (TL) is that of the audience.
ii) The comprehension phase.
The interpreter has to assimilate or properly understand the message.
He cannot interpret what he does not understand.
He has to understand the message correctly.
A wrong understanding naturally leads to a wrong message.
iii) The re-expression phase.
The message is reproduced faithfully, precisely and completely.
In history there have been very many cases of infidelity or unfaithfulness in translation or in interpretation.
That means he is unfaithful.
This old saying is not necessarily true, but it goes to stress the importance of faithful translation.
The translator has to adequately equip himself or herself linguistically.
In other words, he should master the two languages 19 he/she is working with.
Or else, he cannot be a good interpreter.
The interpreter is also required to have a rich and wide variety of knowledge.
Speeches made during meetings or conferences are varied.
Some are political, literary or scientific.
Others may dwell on issues bordering on economics, social life, medicine or some other technical areas.
But do not be scared.
If you want to be an interpreter, make up your mind and be determined to build yourself up through reading.
Have very good dictionaries and books dealing with different terminologies.
Know the terms at the tip of your finger.
There are good schools for interpretation and translation.
If you have the financial means, you may go to either ESIT or ISIT in France.
ESIT means L’Ecole Supérieure d’Interprètes et de Traducteurs and ISIT is Institut Supérieur d’Interprètes et de traducteurs.
To qualify for admission in these schools, you should have a first degree (i.e.
B.A).
In ESIT, you are required to master three European languages.
In other words, you will need languages like German or Spanish in addition to English and French.
The various training will help the interpreter to acquire the much needed general culture, openness of spirit or mind, rapidity and capacity for adaptation.
An interpreter should have an insatiable curiosity that will push him/her to further research.
3.2.2 Professional Status or Organization of Interpretation As a profession, interpreters are either permanent interpreters (interprètes permanents) or freelance interpreters (interprètes indépendants or interprètes freelance).
Permanent interpreters are paid by an organization; they are often employees of big organizations like the United Nations or UNESCO.
They receive regular salaries.
Freelance interpreters are independent.
They are employed for specific assignments in international congresses of diverse kinds.
The range of interest covered can be scientific, technical, medical, economic, cultural, diplomatic, etc.
20 In French, oral translation or interpretation is called interprétation.
The interpreter is l’interprète.
Interpreters are in high demand in the world.
If you study very hard and can interpret very well, your opportunities in life are great.
There are also different types of interpretation.
They are simultaneous interpretation, consecutive interpretation and whispered interpretation (le chuchotage).
3.2.3 Simultaneous Interpretation As the name suggests, in simultaneous interpretation, the speaker or orator and the interpreter speak almost at the same time.
As the speaker is talking, the interpreter tries to produce the target language message immediately.
In modern times, simultaneous interpretation started in Nuremberg in 1945/1946 when interpreters did their work in cabins.
In advanced countries like America, Britain and France, simultaneous interpretation is a very serious business.
It requires highly skilled people.
Interpreters generally stay in a booth where they can work undisturbed.
They work on the message, bit by bit, as the speaker goes on, for the benefit of those who need to wear a headphone to understand.
What happens in our churches and mosques is quite close to simultaneous interpretation.
However, the interpreters in our mosques and churches are not in a booth.
Moreover, the Nigerian interpreter generally waits for the speaker to finish an idea.
The speaker, in turn, tries to wait for the interpreter to finish his interpretation before he goes on.
In conference setting, interpreters interpreting simultaneously do not wait till the end of the sentence.
Simultaneous interpretation is l’interprétation simultanée or la simultanée.
Simultaneous interpreters are in high demand.
It pays to be one.
3.2.4.
Consecutive Interpretation In consecutive interpretation, the interpreter waits for the speaker to finish before he or she starts interpreting.
The 21 interpreter starts after a good “chunk” of the message is given or waits till the end of the whole message.
The waiting interval could range from one to fifteen or even thirty minutes.
In some very formal situations, the speaker is obliged to stop at specific intervals to allow the interpreter to do his/her work.
This is to avoid a situation where the speaker or orator may be carried away and speak for too long.
He or she normally writes down salient or important points or aid memory.
In French, consecutive interpretation is known as l’interprétation consécutive or simply la consécutive.
3.2.3.
Whispered Interpretation In this case, the interpreter sits by someone who does not understand the language of the speaker.
He or she then whispers into the ear of the person who requires interpretation.
This is done without gadgets like headphone or microphone.
In French, we call this activity le chuchotage.
The interpreter may interpret for more than one person.
Le chuchotage is midway between simultaneous interpretation and consecutive interpretation.
3.3 Differences between Translation and Interpretation.
When you use the word “translation” to mean solely what is written, you can distinguish it from interpretation.
Some of the differences are as follows: 1.
The translator may not see the author.
2.
The work to be translated is in written form.
3.
In almost all cases, the original work and the translation are produced at different times.
On the other hand, the interpreter sees the speaker.
He is present while the speaker is delivering his message.
What is to be interpreted may not be written.
It may be spoken in the original form and it is also interpreted orally.
The translator has time to consult dictionaries and other documents in the course of his work.
The interpreters cannot consult while talking.
He can only do so after the work.
22 3.4 Linguistic Requirements in Interpretation It is still pertinent to talk a little more on the issue of the languages used in interpretation.
Usually the languages of conference interpretation are divided into three categories: A, B and C. This is the classification given by L’Association des interprètes de conférence – founded in Paris in 1953.
A is the mother tongue or any language the interpreter has mastered as much as his mother tongue.
The interpreter normally interpretes into the “A” language, i.e.
his mother tongue or a language he can use deftly and with ease.
Every interpreter must have at least one “A” language.
He may have many languages in the B or C category.
B - The B language is not the maternal language but the interpreter has a perfect or near perfect mastery.
This may not be as good as language A.
C - In language C, the interpreter has a very good passive knowledge of the language.
He understands the language very well, but may not be able to speak it fluently and confidently.
The interpreter’s knowledge here is not as active as the “A” or “B” language.
The knowledge to a large extent is passive.
The interpreter can translate from but NOT into this language.
The reason is clear.
He may make avoidable mistakes.
In Europe and other advanced parts of the world, interpreters translate mainly into their language A or B (i.e.
mother tongue and a mastered language).
This is to ensure spontaneity, lexical richness and stylistic ease.
But the African interpreter may not have the opportunity of translating into the modern tongue in big conferences.
He can however use his “B” language which may be English, French, Portuguese depending on whether he is Anglophone, Francophone or Lusophone.
People who speak Portuguese are Lusophone.
4.0 Conclusion You can now see how interesting translation can be.
It is very rich.
It has many parts.
You can speak or write in translation.
But 23 you do not carry out translation proper and interpretation the same way.
One is oral the other is written.
5.0 Summary The unit has equipped you to know the different types of translation.
You have also studied the three phases of interpretation.
You also realize that there are differences between written and oral translation (interpretation).
Good interpreters are in high demand.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.
Name the different types of translation.
2.
Write briefly on the different types of interpretation.
3.
What are the differences between oral translation and written translation?
4.
Write on the importance of the different phases of interpretation.
5.
What does le chuchotage mean?
6.
Name the languages you speak and group them into A, B, and C. 7.
Write out some challenges translators and interpreters are likely to face.
7.0 Reference Ladmiral, J. C. (1979) : Traduire: Théorèmes pour la traduction, Paris : Petite Bibliothèque Payot Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners (2007), United Kingdom, A&C Black Publishers Ltd. Seleskovitch, D. and Lederer, M. (1986), Interpréter pour traduire, Paris: Edition Erudition.
24 UNIT 4 TYPES OF TRANSLATION (II) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Types of Translation 3.1 Interlingual Translation 3.2 Intralingual Translation 3.3 Intersemiotic Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction In this unit, you will learn about some other types of translation.
In the last unit, you saw the differences in terms of whether a text to be translated is spoken or written, i.e.
the difference between interpretation and translation.
This time, the difference is not whether or not it is the spoken word.
The types treated here are: (i) translation involving two different languages.
(ii) translation within the same language.
(iii) translation of signs and symbols into human language.
The numerous examples on intralingual translation will greatly enrich your vocabulary.
They will challenge you to use the dictionary frequently.
Besides, they will sensitize you on different ways of saying the same thing.
2.0 Objectives As you successfully complete this unit, you will know the following types of translation: - interlingual translation or la traduction interlinguale - intralingual translation or la traduction intralinguale 25 - intersemiotic translation or la traduction intersémiotique These types of translation were first noted by Roman Jakobson.
3.0 Types of Translation Roman Jakobson groups translation into the following: interlingual translation, intralingual translation and intersemiotic translation.
3.1 Interlingual Translation In interlingual translation (la traduction interlinguale or la traduction interlinguistique), you translate from one language to another.
When you translate from English to French or any other language, it is interlingual translation.
All the texts we have been translating so far fall into the category of interlingual translation.
Let us see a few examples: I am a student - Je suis étudiant J’arrive - I am coming The two examples are interlingual translation.
They are “interlingual” because they are translated from one language to another.
This type of translation involves two different languages.
Some people say this is the real translation or translation proper, la traduction proprement dite.
3.2 Intralingual Translation In intralingual translation (la traduction intralinguale ou la traduction intralinguistique), you change the words in the same language.
The message is the same basically, but the words are different.
Let us see a few examples: Paul est plus grand que moi Je suis moins grand que Paul You realize that both sentences are in French.
The first sentence means literally “Paul is taller than me”.
The second one means “I am shorter than Paul”.
The two mean basically the same 26 even though they have different subjects.
Let us see another example.
1.
Le ragoût de ma mère est très fameux 2.
Le potage de ma mère est très excellent 3.
La soupe de ma mère est très délicieuse 4.
Le potage de ma mère est très appétissant These four sentences are saying almost the same thing in French.
“My mother’s soup is very delicious”.
The words used for “soup” and “delicious” are different.
In a way, they are synonyms.
Synonyms are different words meaning the same or almost the same thing.
We talk of intralingual translation here because the language of communication is entirely French.
Another word for la traduction intralinguale is la reformulation.
You can remind yourself of the meaning of “interlingual” and “intralingual” through the following: Intra-city bus services - buses that ply within the city or town Inter-city bus services - buses that ply from one city or town to another Intra- party - within the same party Inter-party - between two different parties Intra-campus - within the same campus Inter-campus - between two different campuses In a way, all definitions, summaries and paraphrases are intralingual translation.
In other words, when you are defining a word or expression in the same language, what you are doing is intralingual translation.
A speech reported in the same language also has elements of traduction intralinguale.
Let us take an interesting examples of interlingual and intralingual translation together.
The original version which is 27 taken from Adebowale’s Out of his mind (1987:95) in Ozidi Bariki (2001:22--23): As days rolled by, Alamu sank deeper and deeper into his private world.
So much so that Labake feared that her husband was soon going to go completely deaf and dumb – these in addition to the already heavy load of problems he was carrying on his shoulder.
The translation is given thus: Au fil des jours (au fur et à mesure que les jours s’écoulaient), Alamu s’ensevelit de plus en plus dans la solitude.
D’autant plus que Labake craignait que son mari ne devienne complètement sourd-muet.
Cela s’ajoutait au fardeau de problèmes qu’il portait déjà sur les épaules.
The translator can decide to replace “au fils des jours” with “au fur et à mesure que les jours s’écoulaient”.
They mean the same thing, but the two can’t be used at the same time, hence the brackets are used to show another possible option.
You will be given another version of the same text.
The difference is that different words and expressions are used: Comme les jours s’écoulaient, Alamu se recroquevillait plus profondément dans sa vie privée.
D’autant plus que Labake craignait que son mari ne devienne bientôt un sourd-muet – en plus du fardeau de problèmes qu’il trimbalait.
As earlier stated, the first translation is what is known as interlingual translation.
It is what is traditionally understood to be translation.
The second French is an intralingual translation.
28 Intralingual translation is very helpful in enriching one’s vocabulary and expressions.
You may wish to try it on your own.
Remember also that any time you define a word or you paraphrase or summarize a passage, you are involved in some kind of intralingual translation.
Very often, intralingual translation brings about nuances or slight differences in meaning.
This is because synonyms do not always mean exactly the same thing.
Note the following examples – all of which mean ‘I am eating’: Je me restaure Je mange Je bouffe Je boulotte ‘Je me restaure’ is rather high sounding.
‘Je mange’ is the normal day to day usage.
‘Je bouffe’ is colloquial while ‘Je boulotte’ is slang.
Colloquial and slang expressions and words should not be used in official gatherings, meetings or situations.
3.3 Intersemiotic Translation In intersemiotic translation, you translate a text into a sign or you translate a sign into a written or spoken text.
“Semiotics” is the study of signs.
Signs are common in science and mathematics.
We also see them in music.
The blind use braille and when what is in braille is written or spoken out in conventional language, we say it is intersemiotic translation.
Road signs are also intersemiotic translations.
Let us use some mathematical examples: 2 + 2 = 4 Deux plus deux égalent quatre 2 x 3 = 6 Deux fois trois égalent six You can also draw a picture to give a message.
When the drawing is written out, it becomes intersemiotic translation.
The 29 French equivalent of intersemiotic translation is la traduction intersémiotique.
Everyday, we encounter la traduction intersémiotique.
The watch tells you the time using signs.
As you translate the time, you are having recourse to la traduction intersémiotique.
As you go out today or tomorrow, write down the various opportunities of traduction intersémiotique.
Use the following to help you: 1. road signs 2. your watch 3. various drawings 4.0 Conclusion Your general knowledge of translation is getting transformed.
You can tell anyone about Roman Jakobson’s three-fold definition of translation.
5.0 Summary You have learnt la traduction interlinguale, la traduction intralinguale and la traduction intersémiotique.
Use them daily.
You will enjoy them.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.
What are the types of translation that Roman Jakobson wrote about?
2.
What type of translation is it when you translate from French into English?
3.
What do you understand by la traduction proprement dite?
4.
What is la traduction intersémiotique?
Give your own examples to illustrate the meaning?
5.
What is the difference between la traduction intralinguale?
6.
Use your dictionary and find out the slight differences in the meanings of the following words, all of which meaning basically ‘child’ progéniture, héritier, gamin, gosse and moutard.
30 7. Who uses braille to read?
7.0 References Bariki, Ozidi (2001): “Rénover la traduction pédagogique à travers la traduction intralinguale” in Translation Nouvelle série XX No 1-2 pp19-27 Jakobson, Roman (1963): Essai de linguistique générale, Paris: Edition de Minuit (traduit en français par Nicolas Ruwet (1974)).
31 UNIT 5 TEXT TYPOLOGY IN TRANSLATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Text Typology in Translation 3.1 Literary Texts 3.2 Medical Texts 3.3 Translation of a Medical Text 3.4 Model Translation 3.5 Vocabulary 3.6 More Practical Translations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 Reference 1.0 Introduction You have learnt of different types of translation.
The types of translation can be influenced by the type of text you have to translate.
This unit will introduce you to different texts you may encounter in translation.
It will let you realize that all texts are not translated the same way.
For instance, a literary text (e.g.
a novel) cannot be translated the same way as a medical or scientific text.
There is more flexibility and freedom in literacy translation than a technical or scientific text.
Medical, technical and scientific texts demand “high” faithfulness to avoid misunderstanding and catastrophe.
2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you will appreciate different texts involved in translation.
You will know that the different texts often have different approaches in translation.
The different texts also have different problems or challenges.
32 The main objective is to teach you translations involving the following types of texts.
- literary texts - technical and scientific texts - medical texts You will also learn the following words and their meanings: radiographie, somnifère, insomnie, comprimé, retraité, rechauffement climatique, pisciculture, séisme, etc.
3.0 Text Typology in Translation “Typology” simply means “a system for arranging things in groups…” (Macmillan English Dictionary for advanced Learners (2007)).
In this unit, the different texts to be translated are put in groups.
For our purpose, we are going to treat only two groups.
They are literary texts and technical and scientific texts.
Technical and scientific texts are grouped together as one.
For our slightly technical text, we opt for a medical one.
You will read and translate it later in this unit.
3.1 Literary texts Literary texts are texts relating to the kind of words you use in stories and poems.
In this group or category, we have in mind novels, short stories, poems and plays.
Literary texts are written in form of prose, poetry or plays.
There is a literary language which may not be common in normal writing or speech.
In poetry, you may talk of rhymes and metres.
Some literary writers like Soyinka may deliberately use flowery language.
According to Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners, “flowery language or writing uses many complicated words which are intended to make it more attractive”.
This leads us to style.
Every author has his own style.
Chinua Achebe’s style is different from that of Wole Soyinka or Amos Tutuola.
The style is not the message.
It is the way the message is passed across.
Most translators are of the opinion that the message is the most important thing in translation.
The style is translated 33 after the message has been translated.
In other words, the message takes precedence over the style.
This is amply demonstrated in the definition of translation given by Eugene Nida, a reknown linguist and translator.
La traduction consiste à produire dans la langue d’arrivée l’équivalent naturel le plus proche du message de la langue de départ, d’abord, quant à la signification, puis au style (quoted in the preface to Mounin 1963:ix).
What the quotation says is that translation consists of producing in the target language, the nearest natural equivalent of the message in the source language,first in meaning and then in style.
3.2 Medical Texts Medical texts are of utmost importance because they have to do with life.
Their translations require accuracy.
An unfaithful or incorrect translation can cause disaster, a situation which must be avoided.
In translating medical texts, make sure you have good dictionaries at hand.
Do not, however, be scared in translating medical texts.
They are generally simple.
The apparently difficult words have the same roots in English and French.
This makes it quite easy to get the equivalents.
Let us translate a text.
The terms are very simple.
3.3 Translation of a Medical Text Un couple souffre de l’insomnie « Docteur, nous avons fait cinquante kilomètres en voiture, ma femme et moi, pour venir vous consulter.
Ni l’un ni l’autre n’avions jamais été malade un seul jour jusqu’à ces derniers mois où nous avons commencé à souffrir d’insomnies.
Nous prenons des somnifères en comprimés quelquefois deux ou même davantage par nuit, mais nous ne pensons pas que ce soit là la vraie solution.
J’ai commencé à avoir des douleurs au creux de l’estomac.
On a 34 fait des radiographies, mais il n’y a rien d’anormal.
Ma femme s’est mise à souffrir dans la région du cœur, mais un spécialiste l’a examinée sans trouver quoi que soit de défectueux.
Nous sommes donc venus chez vous cet après-midi dans l’espoir que vous puissiez nous aider.
» C’était un couple sympathique, dans les soixante-dix ans, retraités de l’enseignement.
Je ne les avais jamais vus auparavant.
J’étais surchargé cet après-midi là et je sentais qu’il allait m’être difficile de les aider dans le peu de temps dont je pouvais disposer.
Après que j’eus posé quelques brèves questions à la femme et fait un examen superficiel, sans découvrir de trouble quelconque, elle sortit une lettre de sa poche : « Docteur, peut-être allez-vous penser que je suis stupide, mais nos ennuis paraissent avoir immédiatement suivi la réception de cette lettre.
La voilà, voulez- vous la lire ?
» 3.4 Model Translation : A couple suffers from insomnia “Doctor, we have driven fifty kilometers by car, my wife and I to come and consult you.
Neither of us had ever been sick for a single day until these few months when we started suffering from insomnia.
We take sleeping tablets sometimes two or even more every night, but we don’t think that is the real solution.
I started having pains in my stomach.
Xrays were taken, but there is nothing abnormal.
My wife started experiencing pain around her heart, but a specialist examined her without finding any defect.
We have therefore come to you this afternoon in the hope that you would be able to help us.
It was a nice couple in their seventies.
They retired from teaching.
I had never seen them before.
I was overloaded with work that afternoon and I was feeling that it would be difficult for me to help them within the time at my disposal.
After asking the woman a few brief questions followed by a superficial examination, without discovering any problem whatsoever, she brought out a letter from her pocket.
35 “Doctor, perhaps you will think that I am stupid, but our problems seemed to have followed the reception of this letter.
Here it is, you will like to read it ?” 3.5 Vocabulary Note the following vocabulary and expressions : insomnie – insomnia or sleeplessness un comprimé – tablet la radiographie – Xray anormal – abnormal un retraité – a retired person sympathique – nice auparavant – formerly un ennui – a problem Elle sortit une lettre de sa poche – She brought out a letter from her pocket Nous avons fait cinquante kilometers en voiture – We drove fifty kilometres by car.
surchargé – overloaded with work un somnifère – sleeping pill 3.6 More Practical Translations Many practical translations are not totally faithful to the original in a linguistic sense.
There are slight differences.
Let us examine a few examples taken from Things Fall Apart and its French equivalent Le monde s’effondre, written by Chinua Achebe.
He is always in a hurry p.49 – Il est toujours plus pressé que le vent p.87 This sentence refers to Okonkwo’s way of walking.
The French adds an image which does not exist in the English original.
Plus pressé que le vent means “more in a hurry than the wind”.
The idea of wind and the comparison is not expressed in the original.
36 Even looking at various titles of translations, you can make similar observations: L’Enfant noir – The African Child by Camara Laye from Guinea Noir is not “African”.
It means black.
Une vie de boy – House boy by Ferdinand Oyono who was a Camerounian.
The idea in une vie is not expressed in the English title.
There are even some where the reader may not be able to appreciate the original immediately through the translated version, unless he/she had known about it.
A typical example is L’âge d’or n’est pas pour demain.
This is the French version of Beautyful Ones Are Not Yet Born written by Ayikwei Armah, a Ghanaian.
Another example is Le demagogue whose original version is A Man of the People by Chinua Achebe.
The literal translation of L’âge d’or n’est pas pour demain is “Golden age is not for tomorrow”.
You must have observed that “beautyful” cannot be adequately translated.
In fact the word does not exist in English.
The correct English spelling is “beautiful” but the author chooses the wrong one for a specific purpose.
Similarly, The Palm Drinkard by Amos Tutuola does not have a perfect version in French.
The French version is L’ivrogne meaning The Drunkard.
The original one is Drinkard, a word that does not exist in English.
You can observe many of such problems in Une vie de boy and House Boy.
Une vie de boy was translated by John Reed: 1.
Qu’est-ce que c’est?
Who is it ?
(Instead of ‘What is it ?’) (in Ozidi Bariki 2000 p.46) 2.
C’est ma bouche qui est fatiguée (Une vie de boy) My mouth is tired (House Boy) (in Ozidi Bariki 2000 p.47) instead of “It is my mouth that is tired”.
You cannot afford these discrepancies in scientific or technological translations.
If you do not translate the exact meaning in a scientific, medical or technology-based translation, 37 you may cause serious problems.
For instance, translation involving the weather and a plane in the air at the airport or a medical operation has to be very faithful.
Or else, it may cause disaster and loss of life.
Try and learn the following examples of scientific translation: fish breeding – la pisciculture global warming – le réchauffement climatique sound proofing – l’isolation phonique earthquake – le tremblement de terre/le séisme/la secousse tellurique 4.0 Conclusion You have learnt a lot on literary translation.
Literary translation has peculiar problems that you cannot afford to have in technical, scientific or medical translation.
The latter requires precision.
Your vocabulary has been enriched greatly.
5.0 Summary You also have an idea of scientific and technological translation.
You cannot afford the type of liberty or freedom you have in literary translation.
You also know the meaning of the following words : tremblement de terre, isolation phonique, insomnie, radiographie, retraité.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.
What is a literary text?
2.
Cite a few cases of inconsistency in literary translation?
3.
Why do scientific, medical and technical translations require accuracy all the time?
4.
Give two synonyms of le séisme in French.
5.
What is the meaning of le pilule.
Look it up in your dictionary.
38 7.0 References Achebe, C. (1958) : Things Fall Apart, London, Heinemann Educational Books Ltd. Achebe, C. (1958): Le monde s’effondre, Dakar, Présence Africaine, translated by Michel Ligny.
Bariki, K.O (1999) : « La traduction appliquée et le français dans les universités nigérianes », Ph.d thesis, Department of Modern European Languages, University of Ilorin.
Bariki, O (2001) : « Rénover la traduction pédagogique à travers la traduction intralinguale » in Translatio No 1-2 Nouvelle Série xx pp19-27 Bariki, O.
(1999): “ La typologie textuelle en traduction” in M. Nnoruka (ed): Cours de langue et de littérature françaises, Ilorin pp 48- 59 Israel, F.
(ed.)
(1990) : La liberté en traduction, Paris : Didier Erudition.
39 UNIT 6 TENTATIVE DE VOL À MAIN ARMÉE Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Tentative de vol à main armée 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammar 3.3 Related Expressions 3.4 Model Translation 3.5 Félicitons la police !
3.6 Model Translation : Let us congratulate the police !
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction You are going from theory into practical translation.
A translation theory sets guidelines to help you in translating.
In practical translation, you translate a text from English to French or vice versa.
In this unit, you are going to deal with two passages on armed robbery in a bank (Vol à main armée dans une banque and Félicitons la police!).
In the first text, salaries had just been paid and there was a crowd in the bank.
Then, suddenly, armed robbers came in and went away with many things.
Fortunately, they were arrested with the active and quick response of the police.
The courage of the police men were appreciated.
You will learn new words relating to robbery as you translate the text.
Many of these words are useful to you daily: mobile telephone, the police, pistol, the cashier, etc.
40 In the second text to be translated, the story is similar.
The thieves are arrested.
The police is congratulated for doing a good job.
2.0 Objectives The main objectives of this unit are to help you - translate texts on armed robbery - increase your vocabulary – fonctionnaires, quartier, caissier, pistolet, bandit, malfaiteur, affolant, téléphone portable, policier, prévenir, le commissariat, empêcher de, chaleureusement, ordonner à, témoins, gérant, s’emparer de, ordinateur portable, l’entrée, masqué.
Read and try to translate the texts on your own.
You will get an explanation of some of the difficult words and expressions later.
Start by looking up the difficult words as you attempt to translate.
3.0 Vol à main armée On venait de payer les salaires des fonctionnaires.
Il y avait donc une foule dans la seule banque.
Mais juste une heure après l’ouverture de la banque, il est arrivé quelque chose d’inattendu.
Des hommes qui s’adressaient calmement à l’un des caissiers de la banque ont changé subitement de ton et pistolets braqués, ils ont ordonné à tous les employés et clients de lever les bras.
Comment ces hommes ont-ils sorti des pistolets de leur poche ?
Personne ne savait comment ils sont entrés dans la banque avec ces objets.
Mais une chose était évidente : c’étaient des bandits, des malfaiteurs.
C’était un moment affolant où les bandits obligeaient les gens de leur donner de l’argent.
Ils ont emporté des sacs de toutes les dames Heureusement, grâce à son téléphone portable, l’un des policiers en faction a prévenu ses collègues au commissariat.
Les policiers ont réagi immédiatement et ont empêché les voleurs de continuer leur méfait.
Les bandits ont été arrêtés (appréhendés).
Toute la ville a remercié très chaleureusement les agents pour leur courage.
41 3.1 Vocabulary A knowledge of the following vocabulary will help you to translate the passage.
You will learn the nouns first: le fonctionnaire – civil servant le caissier – cashier l’employé (masculine) – clerk, employee le pistolet – pistol le bandit – bandit le malfaiteur – evil person affolant – alarming le commissariat – police station sortir – to bring out quelque chose d’inattendu – unexpected thing subitement – suddenly pistolet braqué – pistle pointed at him 3.2 Grammar Observe the interesting use of « sorti » in the text.
This verb is used very often in the past with the auxiliary “être”.
e.g.
Il est sorti Elle est sortie It is, however, used here in a different sense.
You observe the use of “ont” and not “sont”.
In other words, the auxiliary is “avoir”.
Now look at the translation.
Ces hommes ont sorti les pistolets de leur poche.
These men brought out pistols form their pockets.
Empêcher de You observe also the use of “empêcher”: The verb is followed by “de”.
You will therefore say: Je l’ai empêché de venir I prevented him from coming It will be wrong to write: “Je l’ai empêché venir” 42 Ordonner à Unlike “empêcher”, ordonner takes the preposition “à”.
“Il ordonne à ses enfants de venir”.
You have seen various interesting points in the text.
You may now compare your translation with the model translation.
3.3 Related Expressions braquer une arme sur – to point a weapon at un braqueur de banque – a bank robber (male) une braqueuse de banque – a bank robber (female) menacer quelqu’un avec une arme – to pull one’s gun on 3.4 Model Translation Attempted armed robbery Salaries of civil servants had just been paid.
There was a crowd in the bank.
Barely one hour after opening, something unexpected happened.
Some men who were speaking calmly to one of the cashiers suddenly changed their tone and ordered the employees and customers to raise their hands.
How did the men bring out the pistols?
No one knew how they entered the bank with these objects.
One thing was, however, clear: they were robbers, evil people.
It was a terrible moment when the robbers forced people to give them money.
They went away with the bags of all the women.
Luckily, thanks to his mobile phone, one of the policemen called (informed) his colleagues at the police station.
The policemen reacted immediately and prevented the thieves from carrying out their evil deed.
The whole town thanked the policemen very much for their courage.
le téléphone mobile – mobile phone You may also use the following words to mean “le téléphone mobile”: le portable, le mobile, le cellulaire.
43 3.5 Félicitons la police !
Lundi matin, la Banque du Nigéria était la cible d’une attaque à main armée.
Dix hommes et trois femmes masqués ont forcé l’entrée de la banque.
Il ne restait que les grands gérants de la banque et certaines caissières.
Les braqueurs se sont emparés de beaucoup d’argent, d’ordinateurs potables et d’une voiture qu’ils abandonneront plus tard.
La police arrive deux heures après le vol, lance un avis de recherche et un appel à témoins.
La police trouve de nombreuses empreintes qui leur seraient utiles pour les enquêtes.
Deux jours après, les braqueurs sont arrêtés.
Les autorités de la banque étaient tellement contentes qu’ils ont organisé une grande fête pour dire merci aux employés et à la police.
s'emparer de – to grab un caissier – a male cashier une caissière – a female cashier 3.6 Model Translation : Let us congratulate the police !
On Monday morning, the Bank of Nigeria, was the target of an attack by armed robbers.
Two men and three women all of whom were masked forced their way through the entrance of the bank.
There were only the big bank managers and some female cashiers.
The robbers went away with a lot of money, laptops and a car which they were to abandon later.
The police arrived two hours after the raid, embarked on a search and an appeal for witnesses.
The police saw many footprints which were useful for the interrogations.
Two days later, the robbers were arrested.
The authorities of the bank were so happy that they organized a big feast to thank the clerks and police.
4.0 Conclusion 44 You have translated a text on armed robbery.
You have learnt another meaning and use of “sortir”.
Try and recall some of the expressions used in the text any time you hear or read of robbery.
5.0 Summary You have learnt many new words like téléphone mobile, affolant, commissariat, caissier, caissière, s’emparer de, braqueur de banque, braqueuse de banque.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into French.
1.
I took a pencil out of my pocket.
2.
They are armed robbers 3.
She prevented me from going.
4.
They ordered us to raise up our hands.
5.
Look at the mobile telephone.
6.
My salary has just been paid.
7.
They were evil people.
8.
The people thanked the police men.
9.
The armed robbers went away with all the handbags.
10.
The community organized a feast for the police 7.0 Reference Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners New Edition 2007, London: A & C Black Publishers.
Mounin, G (196): Les problèmes théoriques de la traduction, Paris : Gallimard.
Vinay, J. P. et Darbelnet, J.
(1977) : Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Didier Erudition.
45 UNIT 7 UN PETIT DRAME Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Un petit drame 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Expressions 3.3 Points of Grammar 3.4 Model Translation 3.5 Colloquialism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction In unit 6, it was the translation of a text on armed robbery.
But, here you are in a family setting.
The family is planning to travel and there is a little quarrel that follows.
It deals with the usual quarrels among children in the home.
As you translate it, your knowledge of French will improve.
2.0 Objectives It is hoped that you will be able to increase your vocabulary and expression through the translation of the text.
The following words should be of interest to you: • le pique-nique, casse-croûte, la télé, veuve, fainéant, se détendre, têtu, frotter.
There are expressions too : casser la tête à quelqu’un, Dites donc, en voilà assez, faire le ménage, tondre le gazon, brûler la chandelle, rater le train, je reviens à mon dire • Some grammatical points relating to the parts of the body among others will be highlighted.
46 Read the text and translate, using all available means of help at your disposal 3.0 Un petit drame C’était un vendredi.
Mme Lansani, une veuve travailleuse, et ses enfants ont décidé de pique-niquer à la campagne.
Il fallait acheter des casse-croûtes pour le pique-nique.
Mme Lansani est donc sortie très tôt le matin pour en acheter.
Elle se demandait si ses enfants pourraient vite faire le ménage avant le départ.
Mais, les enfants avaient tous dit : “Mama, ne vous en faites pas, nous aurons fait le ménage avant votre retour”.
Mme Lansani est donc partie.
A son retour, elle a découvert que les enfants n’ont pas tenu leur promesse.
Voici le petit drame qui a suivi.
Mme Lansani – Vous vous querellez, vous n’avez pas tenu votre promesse, vous voulez renoncer à ce pique-nique ?
Les enfants – Mais non !
Mme Lansani – Qu’est-ce que vous faites alors ?
Shade – C’est la faute de Tounde.
Tiens, il se repose au lieu de travailler.
Tounde – Maman, c’est pas vrai.
Moi, j’ai bien travaillé, j’ai fini de laver la voiture, j’ai nettoyé les fauteuils.
J’ai fait la vaisselle.
J’ai même tondu le gazon.
Je suis en train de me détendre un peu devant la télé.
Shade – Menteur !
Maman, tu vois combien il est paresseux.
C’est un fainéant.
Il se détend à 10 heures du matin !
Tounde – Mais pourquoi pas ?
J’ai fait mon travail.
J’ai travaillé toute la nuit.
En effet, j’ai brûlé la chandelle.
Et puis, je me suis déjà lavé, habillé et coiffé.
(En s’adressant à Shade, il dit) 47  Toi, tu n’es jamais prête.
Toujours paresseuse.
Et même têtue aussi !
Shade – Et alors ?
Tounde – J’ai même frotté le plancher avec une brosse dur.
Tu ne fais rien.
Je reviens à mon dire : tu es d’une paresse incurable.
Shade – Maman, tu vois, il m’insulte.
Je vais lui casser la tête.
Mme Lansani – Dites donc, ça suffit !
Courez tous les deux au magasin me chercher du lait.
On quitte ici dans une vingtaine de minutes.
Que tout le monde soit prêt.
Dépêchons-nous, sinon on risque de rater le train.
Ces dernières paroles de Mme Lansani ont marqué la fin de la querelle comme les deux enfants ne voulaient pas rater cette merveilleuse occasion de pique-niquer.
3.1 Vocabulary Below are some of the words that could be a source of problem to you le casse-croûte – snack la télé – TV, the ‘telly’ (Colloquial) “La télé” is a colloquial form of ‘la télévision’ i.e.
a television set.
“Television” also has a tinge of colloquialism when it is used to mean “television set”.
“Le téléviseur” is more appropriate when we want to talk of a television set.
une veuve – a widow un fainéant – idler, sluggard se détendre – to relax têtu – stubborn frotter le plancher avec une brosse dur – to scrub the floor 48  3.2 Expressions Know the following expressions faire le ménage – to do the house work tondre le gazon – cut the grass “Le gazon” refers mainly to “grass that is fore and short”.
It can also mean “lawn”.
casser la tête à quelqu’un – to crack someone’s skull brûler la chandelle par les deux bouts – to burn the candle at both ends rater le train – to miss the train Dites donc, ça suffit !
– Look here, I say that’s enough!
Je reviens à mon dire – I reaffirm what I have said 3.3 Points of Grammar Casser la tête à quelqu’un The expression means to “break someone’s skull” Je vais lui casser la tête means “I am going to break his/her skull”.
The pronoun is lui and not le or la because of the preposition à – casser la tête à quelqu’un.
Note also this important fact: You use the definite article to represent the possessive adjective when you are referring to parts of the body.
Hence you will say: J’ai mal au pied – My leg is hurting Elle se lave le visage – She is washing her face In a similar vein, you must have observed that you cannot say: “Je vais casser ta tête” to mean “I am going to break your head/skull”.
You will say “Je vais te casser la tête” to mean “I will break your head/skull”.
While English requires the use of a possessive adjective, French requires a personal pronoun or a reflexive pronoun and an article.
Hence the following sentences: Il s’est cassé la tête – He broke his head/skull Not: Il a cassé sa tête 49 Le coiffeur me coupe les cheveux – The barber is cutting/cuts my hair Not : Le coiffeur a coupé mes cheveux Un vendredi Remember the simple rule that the indefinite article indicates an unspecified “Friday”.
However, if the definite article le were used, it will mean “Fridays”, thereby implying repetition.
Examine the following sentences: On se verra lundi – We shall see on Monday On se voit le lundi – We see/meet on Mondays Tutoyer/vouvoyer In French, “tutoyer” means the use of “tu” when addressing someone.
“Tutoyer quelqu’un” means to use “tu” when speaking to someone.
You use it for familiar people.
In French, children use “tu” and not “vous” for their parents.
“Vouvoyer quelqu’un” is to address somebody as “vous”.
Read what Collins Robert French Dictionary Concise Edition (2005: 550) says: There are no hard-and-fast rules about when to use “tu” and “vous” to address people.
Small children can be addressed as “tu”, and will often reply using the “tu” form as well.
In formal contexts among young people of the same age, “tu” is often used even at first meeting.
Among the older generation, “vous” is standard until people know each other well.
As a general rule for non-native speakers, “vous” should always be used to address adults until the other person uses “tu” or asks permission to do so.
50 Tutoiement and vouvoiement are the noun forms of the verbs “tutoyer” and “vouvoyer”.
3.4 Model Translation A Little Drama It was a Friday.
Mrs. Lansani, the hardworking widow, and her children decided to go on a picnic in the countryside.
They needed to buy snacks for the picnic.
Thus, Mrs. Lansani went out very early in the morning to buy them.
She wondered if her children could quickly take care of the household chores before their departure.
But, all the children said: “Mum, don’t worry; we will have done the household chores before leaving”.
So Mrs. Lansani left.
On her return, she discovered that the children had not kept their promise.
Below is the little drama that followed.
Mrs. Lansani – You are quarrelling, you haven’t kept your word, do you want to forgo the picnic?
The children Of course not!
Mrs. Lansani – What are you doing then?
Shade – It is the fault of Tunde.
Look at him, he’s resting instead of working.
Tunde – Mum, it’s not true.
I have been working hard, I have finished washing the car, I cleaned the armchairs.
I washed the plates.
I even cut the grass.
I am relaxing a little in front of the television.
Shade – A liar!
Mum, you see how lazy he is.
He’s an idler!
He’s relaxing at 10am!
Tunde – Why not?
I have done my work.
I worked all night.
In fact, I burnt the midnight oil.
And here I am again, I have already taken my bath, I am dressed up.
I have combed my hair.
51  (Talking to Shade, he says) As for you, you’re never ready.
Always lazy.
And even stubborn!
Shade – And so what?
Tunde – I even scrubbed the floor.
You don’t do anything.
I’ll say it again: your laziness is incurable.
(You are incurably lazy).
Shade – Mum, you see?
He is insulting me.
I will break his head.
Mrs. Lansani – Look here, I say that’s enough.
Run, both of you, to the shop to look for milk.
We’re leaving here in twenty minutes.
Let everyone get ready.
Let’s hurry up, otherwise we stand the risk of missing the train.
The last words of Mrs. Lansani marked the end of the quarrel as both children did not want to miss the wonderful opportunity to picnic (to have a picnic).
3.5 Colloquialism Did you observe the use of colloquial language in the English translation?
Expressions like “we’re”, “don’t”, “let’s”, “that’s”, “he’s” are all colloquial expressions you use with people that are very familiar to you.
You can use these expressions among family members (as you can see in the translation) and among friends.
You cannot use them in formal circumstances like interviews for jobs and letters of application.
The French do not have many expressions of this type.
The only one you can see clearly in the text is “c’est pas vrai” instead of “ce n’est pas vrai”.
You use “c’est pas vrai” in informal speech.
4.0 Conclusion You have learnt very many expressions, words and grammatical points through the translation of the text.
You know more about the very crucial used of “tu” and “vous”.
52 5.0 Summary The numerous new words and grammar will assist you greatly.
Study them and use them constantly.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment A.
Translate the following into French 1.
He broke his arm.
2.
Shade sprained her ankles.
3.
My mother cut my nails.
4.
I washed my hair this afternoon.
5.
She broke her arm.
B.
1.
Write out situations where you think you will be free to use “tu” while addressing someone.
2.
Make a clear difference between tutoiement and vouvoiement.
7.0 References Collins French Dictionary (2006), Williams Collins Sons and Co. Ltd. and Dictionaires Le Robert 1981, 1990, Harper Collins Publishers and Dictionnaires Le Robert 1996, 2000 2003, 2006.
Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners (2007) Malaysia A&C Black Publishers Ltd, Macmillan Publishers Ltd 2007 and Martin Shovel 2007.
Vinay, J. P. et Darbelnet, J.
(1977) : Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Didier Erudition.
53 UNIT 8 UN COMPTE COURANT OU UN COMPTE D’ÉPARGNE?
Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Un compte courant ou un compte d’épargne ?
3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Venir de 3.3 Chercher à 3.4 Other Related Words or Expressions 3.5 Model Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction Unit 7 dealt with a little drama in the home.
In this unit, you are being introduced to some useful words and expressions relating to money and banking.
The title is “A current account or a savings account?” 2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this chapter, the student should be able to: • enrich his/her vocabulary: être embauché, société, toucher, compte bancaire, compte courant, compte d’épargne, grignoter • know more expressions such as : être dans le rouge, avoir de l’argent de côté, garder une poire pour la soif • identify some grammatical points in the passage 54 3.0 Read the text on “Un compte courant ou un compte d’épargne?” Je viens d’être embauchée par une société internationale.
C’est l’une des meilleures sociétés en Afrique de l’Ouest, même dans toute l’Afrique.
Dans quelques semaines, je toucherai mon premier salaire.
J’ai besoin d’ouvrir un compte.
J’ai un choix, soit d’ouvrir un compte courant ou un compte d’épargne.
Entretemps j’ouvrirai un compte d’épargne puisqu’on nous demande de faire des économies.
La plupart des mes compatriotes ne veulent pas ouvrir le compte d’épargne parce que l’épargne est souvent grignotée par l’inflation.
Mais, il y a une vérité incontestable qu’il ne faut pas oublier.
Il faut mettre de l’argent de côté.
Ce n’est pas sage d’être toujours au rouge.
Tout le monde doit organiser sa vie et garder une poire pour la soif.
3.1 Vocabulary Before you translate the text, get to know some of the words which may pose problem to you.
la société – a company (In this context, ‘la société’ does not mean ‘society’) In this text société and compagnie are synonyms; they have the same meaning.
être embauché – to be employed (The author of this text is female, so she uses ‘embauchée’).
un compte – a bank account un compte d’épargne – a savings account un compte courant – a current account grignoter – to erode gradually L’épargne est souvent grignotée par l’inflation means “Savings are often eroded by inflation”.
avoir de l’argent de côté – to save up money être au rouge – to be in the red When your account is in the red, it means you have spent more money than is available.
55 garder une poire pour la soif – to have something for a rainy day This is an example of equivalence.
Remember equivalence deals with stock expressions like idiomatic expressions and proverbs.
A few examples are given you.
You may commit them to memory and use them at the appropriate time.
There could still be some difficult words for you.
If that is so, look them up in your dictionary before you embark on the translation exercise.
3.2 venir de Venir de expresses the past recent (le passé récent).
It expresses an action that has just taken place.
Read the following examples as you appreciate its use: Je viens d’être embauché – I have just been employed Je viens d’être agressé – I have just been mugged La femme vient d’être promue – The woman has just been promoted You must have observed the use of the passive voice (le passif ou la voix passive) in all the examples.
Do not be misled to think that venir de must always be followed by ‘être’ and then the participe passé What is worth observing and retaining is that venir de is always followed by the infinitive as is evidenced in the use of être in the examples above.
Read the following examples: Mon ami vient de partir.
– My friend has just left.
Nous venons de commencer le travail.
– We have just started the work.
Je viens d’apprendre la nouvelle.
– I have just heard the news.
3.3 Chercher à Chercher à faire quelque chose – to try to do something.
A synonym of chercher à in this context is essayer de.
56 Just like venir de, chercher à is followed by the infinitive (l’infinitif).
A few sentences should be useful.
Il cherche à atteindre son objectif – He is trying to attain his objective Nous cherchons à finir le devoir – We are trying to finish the assignment 3.4 Other Related Words or Expressions You may further enrich your knowledge of banking terms and expressions.
Try and use them in your daily life.
Try and recall them any time you have reason to go to the bank.
banking – les opérations de banque, les affaires de banque banker – banquier faire des études bancaires – to study banking avoir un compte en banque – to have a bank account les guichets de la banque – the cashier’s desk relevé de compte – bank statement Depending on the context, to “save” could be gagner or économiser e.g.
He saved petrol – Il a économisé du carburant Going by plane will save you ten hours – Vous gagnerez dix heures en avion Talking about a computer file, sauvegarder is the appropriate word for “save”.
You have known most of the difficult words and expressions.
Now translate the text.
3.5 Model Translation A current account or a savings account?
I have just been employed by an international company.
It is one of the best companies in West Africa and even in the whole of Africa.
In a few weeks, I will earn my first salary.
I need to open a bank account.
I have a choice: either to open a current account or a 57 savings account.
In the meantime, I will open a savings account as the government is trying to encourage savings.
Most of my compatriots do not want to open savings account as savings are often eroded by inflation.
But there is an undeniable truth which must not be forgotten.
One must save some money.
It is not wise to be always in the red.
Everyone has to plan his life and keep something for the rainy day.
4.0 Conclusion You have learnt a lot of words and expressions on money.
Try to recall them each time you enter a bank.
You may write them in a piece of paper and glance through them in the bank.
5.0 Summary The text is very useful.
You can now translate some texts involving finance.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into French 1.
You save a thousand naira if you buy a dozen shirts 2.
We have just eaten.
3.
My bank account is in the red.
4.
He has money in the bank.
5.
The hospital has a blood bank.
6.
I drive very slowly in order to save fuel.
7.
My father is a banker.
8.
I am studying banking in the University.
9.
I want to open a savings account.
10.
I have a current account.
6.0 References Coffman, M. E. (1973): French Grammar, New York: McGraw- Hill Book Company.
58 Hervey, S. and Higgins, I.
(1992): Thinking Translation.
A course in Translation Method.
French to English, London and New York: Routledge.
Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. Vercollier, A. ; Vercollier, C. and Bourlier, K. (2006) : Difficultés expliquées du français, for English Speakers, Ibadan : Clé & Spectrum.
59 UNIT 9 UNE EXPÉRIENCE EXTRÊMEMENT PÉNIBLE Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Une expérience extrêmement pénible 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Model Translation 3.3 Other Related Vocabulary 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit has to do with the translation of a painful experience.
The text deals with an accident on the road.
The accident was very bad.
The accident victims were taken to a University Teaching Hospital by passers-by.
A lawyer who had just been called to the bar died, thus causing much sorrow to his village.
2.0 Objectives This chapter proposes to further expand your vocabulary and knowledge of grammar through translation.
As you carefully study it, you should be able to: • acquire the following vocabulary: insomnie, une dizaine, cadet, indemne, malédiction, rumeurs.
• acquire new expressions: inscrire au barreau, être brûlé vif, porter une barbe, succomber à • identify some grammatical elements in the passage • acquire other words and expressions related to the theme of the text 60 Read and translate the text.
Make use of your dictionaries and grammar books.
Consult your friends who are students of French or your French teacher if the need arises.
3.0 Une expérience extrêmement pénible Gagou souffre d’insomnie depuis une quinzaine de jours.
C’est la suite d’une expérience extrêmement pénible qui s’est produite tout récemment.
Il s’agit d’un accident de la route dont elle a été témoin lors d’un voyage.
C’était un lundi.
L’avion de Gagou venait d’atterrir dans la capitale nigérienne et elle allait en ville dans une voiture quand un accident mortel a eu lieu.
Deux mercedes étaient entrées en collision.
D’après les témoins oculaires, l’incident a été provoqué par la route fort accidentée.
L’un des chauffeurs voulait éviter un nid-de-poule.
Et les victimes ?
Il y en avait trois, mais un jeune homme a succombé à ses blessures.
Les deux autres étaient pratiquement indemnes sauf une écorchure au bras pour Lata.
C’était vraiment un moment pénible.
Les passants ont tout fait pour aider les victimes.
On a emmené les victimes au Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, plus précisément au service d’urgence où elles étaient hospitalisées.
Mais les efforts désespérés n’ont rien changé.
Le jeune homme décédé était bien bâti, beau et portant une barbe.
Sa mort fut une mauvaise nouvelle pour son village où il était le seul avocat.
Il s’est inscrit au barreau il y avait à peine trois mois.
Les villageois disaient même que son sort était pareil à celui de son cadet – un médecin qui avait péri, brûlé vif dans un accident d’avion !
Quel malheur !
Le bruit court que cette famille était bel et bien victime d’une malédiction dont la source reste inconnue.
3.1 Vocabulary Une expérience extrêmement pénible – harrowing experience Le bruit court que – Rumour has it that la suite – sequel, follow-up être témoin de – to witness 61 les victimes de l’accident – the accident victims indemne – unhurt cadet – younger brother le sort – the fate (Note that ‘le sort’ is a noun and differs from the third person singular of the verb ‘sortir’) la malédiction – curse, spell les efforts désepérés (m) – frantic efforts la route accidentée – the unevenness of the ground accident mortel – fatal accident “Fatal accident” means death was recorded.
It does not means “ghastly accident”.
La capitale nigérienne – The Nigerien capital.
Note that the adjective here refers to the country called Niger and NOT Nigeria.
If it referred to Nigeria, the author would have said La capitale nigériane.
Note also nigérienne (féminine) has two n, but nigériane has just one.
In the masculine form, both have just one ‘n’: L’homme nigérien L’homme nigérian Une mercedes – car are feminine because the generic term “la voiture” is feminine.
Thus one would say ‘une peugeot’, ‘une toyota’, etc.
Quinzaine Quinzaine means fifteen or about fifteen.
Quinzaine de jours means “a fortnight” or “about two weeks”.
In French two weeks is fifteen days, hence quinze jours.
Similarly, a week is NOT seven days as in English but eight days – huit jours: On se verra dans huit jours – We shall see in a week’s time Les victimes – The word is feminine, hence “ells étaient hospitalisées”.
The accord of gender and number must be respected.
Expressions brûlé vif – burnt to death 62  porter une barbe – to have a beard s’inscrire au barreau – to be called to the bar succomber à – to die from We have characteristically avoided explaining some of the difficult words, expressions and grammatical points.
The idea here is to encourage you to master the use of your dictionaries and grammar books on your own.
Dictionaries are invaluable assets in translation in particular and in your studies as a whole.
Make them your good companions.
Note: You need dictionaries and not just a dictionary.
Do your best to procure a minimum of three dictionaries: a bilingual French/English dictionary (un dictionnaire bilingue), an entirely French dictionary (un dictionnaire unilingue français) and an entirely English dictionary (un dictionnaire unilingue anglais).
Do not underestimate the importance of your English dictionary.
If you do not understand an English word, the French equivalent may mean nothing to you.
Taking our text as an example, look at “insomnia” in the English dictionary, if you do not know its meaning.
Now attempt the translations and then compare your translation with the model translation.
Do not be discouraged if you make many mistakes.
Remember the French proverb which says Petit à petit l’oiseau fait son nid.
This means literarily “little by little a bird makes its nest”.
In actual fact, it means “slow and steady wins the race”.
Another useful expression is En forgeant, on devient forgeron – Practice makes perfect.
Yet another very important thing you must always bear in mind is this: there are many different possible translations of a particular text.
Two good translators are likely to use different words to convey the same meaning of a text.
Where you are absolutely in doubt or at crossroads, seek help from a colleague or teacher of French 63 3.2 Model Translation A harrowing experience Gagou has been suffering from insomnia for about two weeks.
It is as a result of a harrowing experience which took place very recently.
She saw a road accident in one of her numerous journeys.
It was a Monday.
Gagou’s plane had just landed in the Nigerien capital, and she was on her way to town in a car when a fatal accident occurred.
It involved two Mercedes Benz that collided.
The accident victims?
There were three of them, but a young man died from serious wounds.
The others two were virtually unhurt except for Lata who had graze in her arm.
It was a very painful moment.
Passers-by did all they could to help the accident victims.
They took the casualties to the University Teaching Hospital, the Emergency Unit to be precise.
But the frantic efforts did nothing.
The young dead man was solidly built, handsome and wore a beard.
His death was bad news for his village where he was the only lawyer.
He was called to bar barely three months ago.
The villagers were even saying that his fate was like that of his younger brother – a medical doctor who was burnt to death in a plane crash.
What a misfortune!
Rumor had it that the family was a victim of a spell whose source was unknown.
3.3 Other Related Vocabulary Il est mort accidentellement – He died in an accident This an example of transposition.
Refer to FRE 301.
It is a transposition because ‘accidentellement’ is an adverb and ‘accident’ is a noun.
Transposition means that a word changes its grammatical category or part of speech in the course of translation.
avoir un accident – to have an accident assurance (f) accidents – accident insurance 64  accident de la circulation – road accident accident de la route accidents domestiques – domestic accidents i.e.
accidents in the home sa cadette – his/her younger sister L’homme portait une barbe – L’homme était barbu – The man had a beard.
The man was bearded.
The following words should be of interest to you: Écorcher = égratigner = to graze.
Elle s’est écorchée les genoux = She grazed her knees 4.0 Conclusion You have learnt a lot of expressions and words.
Study them very hard and use them regularly.
5.0 Summary The numerous words and expressions will help you immensely.
Recall some of them: succomber à, écorcher, expérience pénible.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate 1.
We met about ten days ago 2.
I had just arrived at school 3.
He died of hunger 4.
The potbellied man eats too much 5.
Accident insurance is a necessity 6.
The rumours of a coup are rife 7.
There were many casualties during the accidents 8.
I took her to the Casualty Department 9.
Tyndale, a well-known translator, was burnt to death.
10.
She grazed her elbows.
65 7.0 References Coffman, M. E. (1973): French Grammar, New York: McGraw- Hill Book Company.
Hatim, B. and Mason, I.
(1990): Discourse and the Translator, New York: Longman.
Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. Vercollier, A. ; Vercollier, C. and Bourlier, K. (2006) : Difficultés expliquées du français, for English Speakers, Ibadan : Clé & Spectrum.
66 UNIT 10 COUPÉE DE LA RÉALITÉ?
(I) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Coupée de la réalité (I) 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammar 3.3 Conseiller à, renoncer à, 3.4 Tenir de 3.5 Celui-ci 3.6 Model Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to the translation of a very interesting short story.
It deals with a young girl, Okuboere, whose dogged ambition paid off.
She was inspired by the laudable work her father did as a doctor.
She was not without her moments of confusion and discouragement.
But this is just part I.
2.0 Objectives This unit is particularly rich with new words and expressions.
On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to know: • a variety of new words e.g géniteur, défi, optique, retentissant, pédiatre, épargner, celui-ci.
• more new expressions such as tenir de, tantôt … tantôt, courbé par l’âge.
• the use of conseiller à, renoncer à.
67 Read the text entitled “Coupée de la réalité ?
(I)”.
This is the first part of the story.
Make sure your dictionaries are very close by.
3.0 Coupée de la réalité?
(I) Okuboere avait son rêve comme toute autre jeune fille – celui de devenir pédiatre un jour.
Elle voulait tenir de son géniteur.
Son père est un homme intelligent.
Il est très vieux maintenant, courbé par l’âge.
Mais Okuboere s’est inspirée des efforts louables de celui-ci qui traitait les malades.
Mais il existait d’innombrables défis à relever.
Ce désir pourrait-il se transformer en réalité ?
La question s’imposait, car les échecs des années passées avaient déjà retardé de cinq ans la réalisation de son ambition.
Inquiets, les parents ont conseillé à Okuboere de changer d’optique.
On lui a proposé d’être infirmière.
Mais c’était un refus total, un non retentissant de sa part.
Elle était bien décidée à poursuivre son unique rêve.
Néanmoins, des moments de confusion ne l’ont pas épargnée.
Elle se laissait tantôt décourager tantôt encourager par son environnement.
3.1 Vocabulary Some of the difficult words will be explained here.
Learn and keep them at your finger tips.
Make use of them at the slightest opportunity.
Some of them are particularly useful when you are in a hospital.
le géniteur – father le défi – challenge l’optique (f) – perspective le pédiatre – paediatrician.
The American spelling is “pediatrician”.
Similarly, “paediatrics” is British spelling, while “pediatrics” American.
retentissant – resounding distraire – to distract tantôt ….. tantôt – sometimes ….. sometimes 68 3.2 Grammar 3.3 Conseiller à, renoncer à Conseiller à means ‘to advise’ or ‘to recommend to’.
Note the use of the preposition ‘à’.
Thus, I advise Tunde to come will be translated as Je conseille à Tunde de venir.
As a result of the preposition à, I advise him to come will be Je lui conseille de venir.
It will be very wrong to say Je le conseille de venir.
In the same vein, to renounce or to give up is renoncer à J’ai renoncé au mariage – I have given up the idea of marriage J’ai renoncé au tabac – I have given up smoking The use of ‘au’ is necessitated by the masculine article ‘le’ that should precede mariage and tabac.
Remember: à + le = au You should recall the following verbs too: obéir à – to obey I obey my father – J’obéis à mon père I obey him – Je lui obéis pardoner à – to pardon I forgive my mother – Je pardonne à ma mère I pardon her – Je lui pardonne 3.4 tenir de Tenir de means to ‘take after’ referring to a parent.
Il tient de son père – He takes after his father.
A synonym will be ressembler à If there are still words and expressions you do not understand, look them up in your dictionary.
3.5 Celui-ci Celui-ci means the latter.
Celui-là means the former.
In the sense used in this context, they – i.e.
celui-ci and celui-là – refer to the persons mentioned earlier.
They follow an order.
In that order, celui-ci is the person just mentioned or mentioned second while 69 celui-là had been mentioned earlier.
They are both compound forms of demonstrative pronouns.
They are said to be compound because two different words are joined together.
The feminine forms are celle-ci and celle-là Observe the following sentences : Lequel des romans aimez-vous ?
Which of the novels do you like?
J’ai mieux celui-ci, mais celui-là est intéressant aussi.
I prefer this one, but that one there is also interesting.
Alice et Aishat sont des sœurs.
Celle-là (Alice) est chrétienne ; celle-ci(Aishat) est musulmane.
Alice and Aishat are sisters.
The former (Alice) is a Christian; the latter (Aishat) is a Muslim.
Note: Elle est chrétienne – She is a Christian Elle est musulmane – She is a Muslim It is wrong to write: Elle est une chrétienne Elle est une musulmane.
However, you can write: Elle est une bonne chrétienne.
Elle est une bonne musulmane.
The indefinite article ‘une’ is necessary because of the adjective ‘bonne’.
Now translate the text.
3.6 Model translation Cut off from reality?
(I) Okuboere had her dream just like any other girl.
She wanted to be a paeditrician one day.
She wanted to take after her father.
Her father is an intelligent man.
He is very old now, bowed with age.
But Okuboere was inspired by the laudable efforts of the latter who treated sick people.
But there were uncountable challenges to overcome.
Could this desire be transformed into reality?
The 70 question was necessary, for the failures of the previous years had slowed down the realization of this ambition by five years.
Worried, the parents have advised Okuboere to change her perspective.
She was advised to be a nurse.
But she refused totally with a resounding no.
She had firmly made up her mind to pursue the only dream she had.
However, she was not spared some moments of confusion.
Sometimes she would be discouraged by the environment, but some other times she would be encouraged by it.
4.0 Conclusion You have learnt many expressions and words like retentissant, tantôt … tantôt, le pédiatre, épargner, tenir de, défi.
You have also learnt the meanings of celui-ci, celui-là, celle-ci, celle-là.
You know how to use them also.
5.0 Summary You certainly can make correct sentences with obéir à, pardoner à, tenir de, renoncer à.
You must go through this passage.
Hold tenaciously to those great ideas you have.
Work very hard on them to attain success.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences 1.
My mother has always advised her children to work hard.
2.
Sometimes, I feel like dancing, and sometimes I simply feel like listening to music.
3.
I have decided not to travel.
4.
She was advised to be a teacher.
5.
Write a short story involving two people.
Use celui-ci and celui-là as the occasional demands.
71 7.0 References Coffman, M. E. (1973): French Grammar, New York: McGraw- Hill Book Company.
Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. Van Hoof, H. (1989) : Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris : Editions Duculot.
Vercollier, A. ; Vercollier, C. and Bourlier, K. (2006) : Difficultés expliquées du français for English Speakers, Ibadan : Clé & Spectrum.
72 UNIT 11 COUPÉE DE LA RÉALITÉ?
(II) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Coupée de la réalité (II) 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Medical Terms 3.3.
Expressions 3.4 Related Words/Expressions 3.5 Model Translation 3.6 Translation Procedures 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This is the concluding part of “Coupée de la réalité ?” which you translated in Unit 10.
The text is rich in ideas and language.
The unit also recalls Translations procedures generally.
Equivalence is singled out for further explanations.
2.0 Objectives This unit has very useful words and expressions.
As you successfully translate the text and study the notes, you should know: • a variety of new words : distraire, sobriquet, affubler, aiguillonner, imminence, paupières, surnom, ce dernier, celui-ci, épineux • more new expressions such as brûler la chandelle par les deux bouts, en son for intérieur, décrocher une mention, affubler quelqu’un d’un sobriquet 73 • a few medical terms e.g.
ausculter, palper 3.0 Coupée de la réalité?
(II) Pour réaliser son désir, elle a choisi le chemin de l’honneur.
Le chemin d’honneur n’est pas toujours facile.
C’est souvent un chemin épineux.
Okuboere a travaillé avec plus d’ardeur que jamais, brûlant la chandelle par les deux bouts dès le début de l’année scolaire jusqu’à la fin.
Cette fois-ci, elle s’est laissée entièrement dévorer pas les flammes de son rêve.
C’était la médecine ou rien.
Elle a donc renoncé à tout plaisir qui pourrait la distraire de son ambition.
Cette attitude a été condamnée par ses amis.
On l’a donc affublée du sobriquet “coupée de la réalité”.
Mais Okuboere connaissait une joie certaine en son for intérieur.
Elle assimilait mieux le cours.
Et l’approche des examens, l’espoir d’entamer le voyage vers la médecine la galvanisait.
Quand les résultats sont sortis, elle a décroché une mention très bien.
Enfin, la fortune lui souriait, et on commençait à chanter ses louanges.
Quant à Okuboere, elle vivait déjà dans l’avenir.
Elle s’imaginait dans un hôpital pour examiner les malades, pour ausculter et retourner les paupières des malades tout en prenant les pouls.
Le surnom – “ coupée de la réalité” – est resté, mais Okuboere est adulée.
3.1 Vocabulary le sobriquet – nickname le surnom – nickname Le ‘surnom' and ‘surname’ are typical examples of faux amis.
Don’t be misled by the physical appearance!
“Faux amis” means ‘false friends’.
In English, you may talk of ‘cognate’.
l’imminence (f) – imminence galvaniser – to spur on épineux – thorny 74 3.2 Medical Terms ausculter – to feel the breathing (of a patient).
This is a medical term.
Le médecin m’a ausculté – The doctor listened to my heart beat.
examiner – to feel.
‘Palpate’ is another medical term meaning “to examine part of the body by touching”.
3.3 Expressions: affubler quelqu’un d’un sobriquet – to attach a nickname to someone en son for intérieur – in his heart of hearts en mon for intérieur – in my heart of hearts décrocher une mention – to get a distinction 3.4 Related Words/Expressions Mention in the university or secondary school means ‘grade’.
mention très honorable – with distinction (used for Ph.D. candidates) mention très bien – A or A+; First Class Honours mention bien – B+ or A (in the secondary school) second class upper (in the university) mention assez bien – second class lower mention passable – pass Mon enfant a très bien fait à l’examen, il est reçu avec mention – My son did very well at the examination, he passed with distinction.
Mon enfant est reçu sans mention – My son got a pass 3.5 Model Translation Cut off from reality?
(II) To accomplish her desire, she opted for a honourable way.
The hounourable way is not always easy.
It is often a thorny way.
Thus Okoboere worked harder than ever, burning the midnight oil 75 from the beginning of the academic year till the end.
This time she was completely consumed by the flames of her dream.
It was medicine or nothing!
She therefore gave up all pleasures which could distract her from her ambition.
This attitude was condemned by her friends.
She was then nicknamed ‘Cut off from reality’.
But Okuboere experienced some joy in her heart of hearts.
She understood the lectures better.
As the examinations approached, the hope of embarking in her journey towards medicine spurred her on.
When the results were released, she obtained “A”.
At last, luck smiled on her.
People started then to sing her praises.
As for Okuboere, she lived in the future.
She imagined herself in a hospital palpating the sick, listening to their chests, turning their eyelids and feeling their pulse.
The nickname – ‘Cut off from reality’ – stuck, but the praises of Okuboere are sung.
3.6 Translation Procedures Let us recall the seven procedures for translated as formulated by J. P. Vinay and J. Darbelnet in their famous book La stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais written in 1958.
The procedures are literal translation, calque, borrowing, transposition, modulation, equivalence and adaptation.
There are at least two examples of equivalence in the translation.
They first one is: … brûlant la chandelle par les deux bouts … burning the midnight oil.
or … burning the candle at both ends.
The second option – burning the candle at both ends – is a literal translation.
When we opt for the first translation – burning the midnight oil – the translation becomes equivalence.
Both are correct.
The other example is : en son for intérieur in her heart of hearts 76 Equivalence, in translation, involves idiomatic expressions, proverbs and other stock expressions which are generally not translated word for word.
Let us learn two new expressions which are examples of equivalence.
C’est toujours la même chanson.
It is the same old story.
Courir sur l’haricot à quelqu’un.
To get on someone’s nerves There are a few other interesting observations : La médicine la galvanisait Medicine spurred her on ‘Galvaniser’ means ‘to give new life to’.
But the option ‘spurred her on’gives the message in a beautiful way.
Okuboere est adulée The praises of Okuboere are sung Okuboere est adulée can be translated simply as ‘Okuboere is praised’.
That will be a literal or word for word translated.
However, the option chosen in the text brings out a kind of beauty in the language.
4.0 Conclusion You have learnt numerous new words and expressions.
Use them as often as possible.
Some of the words are épineux, le surnom and le chemin.
You can also recall briefly the seven translation procedures: traduction littérale, emprunt, calque, transposition, modulation, équivalence and adaptation.
5.0 Summary You have learnt the following expressions and many others: galvaniser, ausculter, examiner, affubler quelqu’un d’un sobriquet.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences 1.
I have given up drinking for two years running 2.
Good parents always forgive their children 3.
I am listening to the teacher.
77 4.
Efua’s surname is Mensah.
5.
The brilliant student passed out with a first class.
6.
To pass my examinations, I had to burn the midnight oil.
7.
The way of success can be very thorny.
8.
She worked hard in order to accomplish her ambitions.
9.
She was nicknamed ‘intelligent’.
10.
Imagine your future ambition.
Write a short essay of six lines to describe it.
7.0 References Coffman, M. E. (1973): French Grammar, New York: McGraw- Hill Book Company.
Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. Vercollier, A. ; Vercollier, C. and Bourlier, K. (2006) : Difficultés expliquées du français for English Speakers, Ibadan : Clé & Spectrum.
Vinay, J. P. et Darbelnet, J.
(1977) : Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Didier Erudition.
78 UNIT 12 MORT D’UNE CRISE CARDIAQUE Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Mort d’une crise cardiaque 3.1 Model Translation 3.2 Vocabulary 3.3 Grammar 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction In unit 11, you translated the story of Okuboere whose dogged determination to be a doctor was fulfilled.
This unit introduces you to a text on heart attack (crise cardiaque).
The words, expressions and constructions will be very useful to you.
Know the new words and use them as often as you can.
2.0 Objectives The primary objective is to guide you to translate the text on heart attack (crise cardiaque) from French into English.
In the process, you will fulfil the following objectives too: Increasing your vocabulary: crise cardiaque, puissant, anesthésiant, médicament, hospitalier, insomnie, homicide involontaire, à plusieurs reprises, répréhensible, entre-temps, perquisitionner, deuil, héritiers.
Read, enjoy and translate the text.
Let your bilingual and monolingual dictionaries be handy.
You will need them.
79 3.0 Translate the text into English using your dictionaries where necessary.
Mort d’une crise cardiaque Le “roi du pop” est mort d’une crise cardiaque, sa mort annoncée il y a quelques jours.
Le grand chanteur n’est plus !
Son médecin lui a administré un puissant anesthésiant, un médicament habituellement réservé à l’usage hospitalier.
L’anesthésiant, procuré dans une pharmacie, s’employait pour combattre l’insomnie.
Malheureusement le chanteur est mort et son docteur est accusé d’avoir commis l’homicide involontaire.
L’homicide involontaire se différencie de l’homicide volontaire.
Interrogé par les médias, l’avocat du médecin a réaffirmé à plusieurs reprises que son client n’avait rien fait de répréhensible.
Entre-temps, le domicile du chanteur et la pharmacie dans laquelle le médicament a été procuré ont été perquisitionnés les dernières semaines.
Le monde pleure sa mort.
Sa mort fut un deuil.
Ce riche chanteur n’avait que deux héritiers.
Enfants heureux ou malheureux ?
A vous de juger.
er (Texte adapté de lepoint.fr, mardi 1 septembre 2009) 3.1 Model translation Died of heart attack The “king of pop” died of heart attack.
His death was announced a few days ago.
The great singer is no more!
His doctor gave him a powerful anesthetic, a drug normally reserved for hospital use.
The anesthetic bought from a chemist’s shop was used to combat insomnia.
Unfortunately, the singer died and his doctor is accused of manslaughter.
Manslaugher is different from murder.
Interrogated by the media, the doctor’s lawyer has reaffirmed many times that his client did nothing reprehensible.
Meanwhile, in the last few weeks, a search has been carried out in the singer’s home and the pharmacy shop where the drug was bought.
The world is mourning his death.
His death was universally mourned.
This rich singer had only two heirs.
Fortunate or unfortunate children?
The judgment is yours.
80 You have attempted to translate.
You can now improve on your knowledge of the text.
Study the vocabulary and grammar.
You will understand and enjoy the text better.
3.2 Vocabulary puissant - powerful un anesthésiant - anaesthetic (British spelling), anesthetic (American spelling) l’insomnie (feminine) - insomnia (inability to sleep) usage hospitalier - hospital use homicide involontaire - manslaughter répréhensible - reprehensible un médicament - drug perquisitionner - to carry out a search (This is a legal language) entretemps - meanwhile You can also spell entretemps in the flowing way: entre-temps Il n’est plus – He is dead.
Literally, he is no more.
L’homicide involontaire manslaughter (through L’homicide par l’imprudence negligence) Le deuil – mourning 3.3 Grammar The use of the Passive voice.
You observe again the use of Passive voice (la voix passive or le passif).
There are three examples in the text: Son docteur est accusé d’homicide involontaire.
His doctor is accused of manslaughter.
Interrogé par les médias - interrogated by the media Le domicile du chanteur et la pharmacie ont été perquisitionnés The home of the singer and the pharmacy shop were searched.
(A search 81 was carried out on the singer’s home and pharmacy shop).
Always, remember the use of “être” as the auxiliary for expressing the passive voice (la voix passive) in a complete sentence.
Notice also the different uses of être” – “est” and “ont été” – according to the tense required in the text.
“Le docteur est accusé” is in the present tense.
The use of “ont été” is passé composé of “être”.
When you use la voix passive ou le passif, you should remember to ensure agreement of person and number: 1.
La femme est accusée par son mari.
2.
Les femmes sont accusées par leurs maris.
3.
Le domicile du chanteur et la pharmacie ont été perquisitionnés Note that the subject is plural.
We have “le domicile du chanteur” and “la pharmacie” as subject.
That is why “perquisitionnés” is in the plural.
4.0 Conclusion The text is short but very rich in vocabulary.
You have learnt the following new words among many others: anesthésiant, usage hospitalier, homicide involontaire, perquisitionner.
5.0 Summary Your vocabulary and grammar have further expanded.
You have been reminded of le passif also.
L’homicide involontaire and l’homicide par l’imprundence are synonyms.
They mean the same thing.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into French.
1.
The woman is accused of stealing 2.
The man is combating insomnia 3.
He is interrogated by the media 4.
The doctor committed manslaughter 82 5.
The man died of malaria 6.
The media interrogated the lawyer 7.
The man’s house was searched by the police 8.
The king of music has just died 9.
The judgment is ours 10.
The rich man had just a child 7.0 References lepoint.fr , mardi 1er septembre 2009 Van Hoof, H. (1989) : Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris : Editions Duculot.
Vinay, J. P. et Darbelnet, J.
(1977) : Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Didier Erudition.
Seleskovitch, D. and Lederer, M. (1986), Interpréter pour traduire, Paris: Edition Erudition.
83 UNIT 13 LE MONDE VOTE OBAMA (I) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Le monde vote Obama (I) 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Points of Grammar 3.3 Model Translation 3.4 A few more points or comments 3.5 Day and Months in French 3.6 The media 3.7 Le Net 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction The text should sound very familiar to you.
It tells the story of Obama’s victory at the Democratic Party’s primaries and later at the Presidential election.
It ends by showing Obama’s world wide popularity.
This text introduces you to a lot of useful words such as the French equivalents of “the rising star”, charisma, opinion poll, the pet or favourite, etc.
The text also widens your general knowledge and political horizon.
2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this text, you will have learnt the following words and expressions: le suffrage, les suffrages exprimés, l’étoile montante, électrifier, assistance, charisme, don d’éloquence, concurrent, victoire éclatante, le chouchou.
84 3.0 Le monde vote Obama (I) Read the text Ayant conquis le Sénateur Hilary Clinton, ancienne première dame de l’Amérique et la favorite initiale de divers sondages par rapport à la course vers la Maison Blanche, Barack Husein Obama de l’Illinois dont le père était kenyan et la mère américaine blanche, a reçu l’investiture du parti démocrate.
Au niveau de son parti, ce n’était qu’une étoile montante.
Son discours prononcé en 2004 a électrifié l’assistance.
A part son charisme et son don d’éloquence rare, il a vite convaincu les Américains du besoin de rassemblement et du changement dans la politique américaine.
Lisons ses propres mots : “il n’y a pas une Amérique rouge des Républicains et une Amérique bleue des Démocrates.
On prie aussi dans les Etats bleus et on a aussi des amis homesexuels dans les Etats rouges”.
Et face à son concurrent républicain John McCain, il a eu une victoire éclatante, remportant avec 56% des suffrages exprimés le 4 novembre 2008.
Est-ce un miracle ?
Pour bien des Africains, la réponse est “oui”.
Barack veut dire ‘béni des dieux’ en swahili, langue communément parlée en Afrique de l’Est.
C’est presque incroyable : en six ans, il est devenu une star exceptionnelle et le chouchou des médias et du Net.
Les médias non américains eux aussi, se rallient au clan Obama !
“Un vent d’engouement s’est levé autour du jeune sénateur et les médias l’ont nommé : l’Obamania”.
Our text in this unit has very many words that should be of great interest to you.
Some of them are as follows: le sondage, la course, le charisme, le suffrage, le chouchou.
There are other words and expressions : a reçu l’investiture, étoile montante, victoire éclatante.
Get acquainted with some of the difficult words before you start translating.
85  3.1 Vocabulary Le sondage – poll Le sondage d’opinion – opinion poll We could also say l’enquête d’opinion La course – race (i.e.
competition) Le charisme – charisma Le suffrage – vote (used in politics) Les suffrages exprimés – valid votes Le chouchou – the pet, favourite Recevoir l’investiture – to be endorsed by one’s party Investiture de candidat means “nomination”.
Example: En 2007, Yar’adua a reçu l’investiture de son parti politique.
L’étoile montante (f) – rising star Sometimes the word ‘star’ is used in French.
It is feminine because the original French equivalent ‘étoile’ is also feminine.
Obama est une star de la politique Obama is a big star in politics Okocha était une star de l’équipe Green Eagles Okocha was a top football player of Green Eagles Note that l’équipe means team.
But it certainly refers to a footballer in this context.
A footballer or football player can be translated literally as un un footballeur.
The translation given in the above sentence is therefore an example of modulation, that is translation where words or elements are viewed form different points of view in two languages.
L’équipe is the whole team, but a football player is just a member of the team.
Victoire éclatante – resounding victory Attempt to translate the text now.
Continue to encourage yourself even if you make many mistakes.
Know that you are improving on your knowledge as you continue to translate.
3.2 Points Grammar dont - is a complement of a noun indicating possession or quality.
It means ‘whose’.
86 Note: ce sénateur dont le père était kenyan Not : ce sénateur dont son père était kenyan Similarly you should write : “la femme dont les enfants travaillent bien …” “les enfants dont la mère est très travailleuse …”.
Note : Les points de suspension (…) are used here to show that the sentences are incomplete.
Bleus Note the plural form of bleu.
It ends with an ‘s’, NOT ‘x’.
Compare other words and their plural forms: le cheveu – les cheveux le cheval – les chevaux le caillou (stone) – les cailloux It will also interest you to know the following: le bal (dance) – les bals le chandail (candle) – les chandails le travail (work) – les travaux 3.3.
Model Translation Now compare your translation with the model provided.
The world votes for Obama I Having defeated Senator Hilary Clinton, former first lady of America and the initial favourite of various opinion polls regarding the race to the While House, Barrack Hussein Obama, the Senator from Illinois whose father was Kenyan and mother white American, was endorsed by his Democratic party.
At the party level, he was only a rising star.
His speech delivered in 2004 electrified the audience.
Apart from his charisma and his rare gift of eloquence, he convinced Americans of the need for unity and change in American politics.
Hear him: “There is no red America of the Republicans and no blue America belonging to the Democrats.
The blue states also pray just as there are homosexuals in the red states”.
87 He won a resounding victory over John McCain, winning th 56% of the valid votes on 4 November, 2008.
Is it a miracle?
For many Africans, the answer is “yes”.
Barrack means ‘blessed by the gods’ in Swahili, a language commonly spoken in East Africa.
It is almost unbelievable that he has become an exceptional star of the media and the internet within six years.
The non- American media also rally round Obama.
“A new fad has risen around the young Senator and the media call it Obamania”.
3.4 A few more points or comments East Africa East Africa is either L’Afrique de l’Est or L’Afrique Orientale.
Similarly, West Africa is L’Afrique Occidentale or L’Afrique de l’Ouest.
Obamania is neither a French word nor an English word.
It is simply formed out of Obama.
Obamania is used to express the enthusiasm Obama’s name and personality create in people, that is the people’s love for him.
3.5 Days and Months in French Remember that in French, the initial letters of the days of the week and the months of the year are written in small letters.
The days of the week are lundi, mardi, mercredi, jeudi, vendredi, samedi, dimanche.
In English, we have: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
The months are janvier, février, mars, avril, mai, juin, juillet, août, septembre, octobre, novembre, décembre.
On the other hand, they are all written in capital in English : January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December.
3.6 The media ‘The media stands for ‘radio, television, newspapers, the Internet and magazines’, considered as a group: can be followed by 88 a plural or singular verb’ Macmillan English Dictionary (2007:935).
3.7 Le Net is a shortened form of L’Internet.
The word – L’internet – is the same in English.
4.0 Conclusion The text is full of words and expressions designed to improve your knowledge.
Recall some of these words and expressions: le sondage, l’étoile montante, le chouchou.
The expressions and words are very useful.
Use them to talk about your favorite political model or any person you admire very much.
5.0 Summary Your knowledge of French has greatly improved.
Recall these words any time you face similar situations.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into English 1.
La Maison Blanche est le siège du président américain.
2.
Voici mon ami dont les parents sont nigériens.
3.
Le discours du président a électrifié le pays.
4.
La victoire éclatante a été facilitée par son don d’éloquence.
5.
Gani Fawehinmi était le chouchou des médias nigérians.
6.
Write the ordinals from first to tenth st 7.
Write the equivalents of the following in French: 1 November, 2nd November, and 3rd November.
8.
Today is 5th June.
9.
He is the pet of his parents 10.
I love Obama, I like him.
89 7.0 Référence http://www.afrik.com/article11052.html consulted on 20th November, 2008.
Lederer, M. (1994) : La traduction aujourd’hui : le modèle interprétatif, Lille : Presse Universitaire de Lille.
Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners (2007): Second Edition, London: A&C Black Publishers Ltd. 90 UNIT 14 LE MONDE VOTE OBAMA (II) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Le monde vote Obama (II) 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Points of Grammar (se vouloir, Noir, les Kennedy) 3.3 General Knowledge 3.4 Model Translation 3.5 A Few More Points 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit is a continuation of the last unit topic on Obama.
As you study it, you will enrich your vocabulary and general knowledge tremendously.
That will in turn make you adequately prepared for the task of translating.
2.0 Objectives This unit will help you in: • enriching your vocabulary • improving your grammar • broadening your horizon 3.0 Read the text “Le monde vote Obama (II)” Partout, on dit que Obama est noir.
Est-ce vrai ?
Etant métis, il est plutôt bronzé !
Grâce à ses efforts infatigables, Obama a transcendé non seulement les stéréotypes socioculturels mais aussi les clivages partisans anciens favorisés également par les indépendants.
Les 91 banlieues blanches l’ont voté.
Il en était de même dans les quartiers noirs.
Le vent Obamania a touché de nombreuses personnalités américaines, notamment l’animatrice Oparah Winfrey, Colin Powell et les Kennedy.
Obama a même été surnommé “le John Kennedy noir”.
De même, Michelle, la femme d’Obama est comparée à Mme Kennedy d’où l’interrogation : Michelle Obama : la “Black Jacky Kennedy” ?
Mais est-ce que cette star fait l’unanimité partout ?
Mais non.
Personne n’est aimé de tous !
Des menaces d’assassinat ont obligé Washington à renforcer le dispositif de sécurité autour de lui.
Au moins ce que dit le FBI se veut très rassurant.
* Adapté de Barrack Obama : l’homme qui pourrait être le premier président noir des Etats-Unis, http://www.afrik.com/article11052.html consulté le 11/20/2008 7.36 du soir Our text in this unit has very many words that should be of great interest to you.
Some of them are as follows: l’engouement (m), bronzé, l’animatrice (f), métis, surnommé.
There are other words and expressions : menaces d’assassinat, le dispositif de sécurité.
3.1 Vocabulary You will find here most of the difficult words.
The explanations serve as a guide to make the work easier.
l’engouement (masculine) – fad bronzé – tanned animateur (m) – presenter (of cultural show) animatrice (f) – presenter (of cultural show) animateur de radio (masc.)
– radio presenter animatrice de radio (fem.)
– radio presenter métis – a person of mixed race (Note that the ‘s’ is pronounced.
We say /metis/ and not /meti/!)
You could also use “mulato” or “half cast”.
92 surnommé – nicknamed This is an example of a ‘faux ami’ or false friend.
Faux amis are deceptive words that resemble each other in appearance.
Having understood the words explained above, you should also know the following words so that the task of translating will be easier.
menaces (f) d’assassinat – threats of assassination le dispositif de sécurité – security presence renforcer le dispositif de sécurité – reinforce or increase the presence of security agents and operations le Net – abridged form of l’Internet (m) One more explanation before you translate.
The word ‘voter’ means of course ‘to vote’.
You could say le monde vote Obama or le monde vote pour Obama.
They mean the same thing.
How was your translation?
As usual do not get discouraged if you did translate some things wrongly.
The important thing is: be determined, translate as many texts as you can.
The more you translate, the more interested you become in the art and the better you are.
The following issues of grammar and general knowledge will be useful to you: November (Note the comma also!
), Independent voters, the Kennedys, FBI.
3.2 Points of Grammar Se vouloir Ce que dit le FBI se veut très rassurant.
What the FBI says is meant to be very reassuring Le journal se veut objectif – The journal claims to be unbiased, objective 93 The use of ‘On’ You have met the word ‘on’ many times.
It is an important word.
You learnt in FRE 301 that ‘on’ means one of the following: someone, you, on, we, they.
The context determines its meaning.
In this passage, ‘on’ is used in translating the passive construction ‘it is said’: On dit que Obama est noir – It is said that Obama is black (They say Obama is black) (People say Obama is black) Note that the que in French meaning ‘that’ may or may not be translated in English.
It is optional in English, but compulsory in French.
Remember its use when you translate a sentence like: He says he is coming – Il dit qu’il vient The absence of que makes your French very faulty and therefore unacceptable.
It will also betray your Anglophone background.
November The days of the month are written with an initial capital letter in English, but the reverse is the case in French.
It is also worth knowing that there is no comma after the French novembre.
The English version needs it.
The Kennedys In French, it is les Kennedy, les Ajiboye, les Clark.
3.3.
General Knowledge Jacqueline (Jackie) Kennedy was the wife of John Kennedy.
The Kennedys are a very popular and well-established American family.
FBI = Federal Bureau of Investigation.
It is a US government department which deals with criminal cases that cut across states in America.
It is not translated because it is a well known department just like the CIA – Central Intelligence Agency.
Independent voters in America are those who are neither pro Democrat nor pro-Republican.
The Democratic Party and the 94 Republican party are the two major parties in America.
The colour ‘red’ refers to Republicans and ‘blue’ to Democrats.
3.4 Model Translation The world votes for Obama II Everywhere it is said that Obama is black.
Is it true?
Being a mulato, he is rather tanned!
Due to his indefatigable efforts, Obama broke and transcended not only sociocultural stereotypes but also partisan division in America favoured equally by independent voters.
The white suburbs voted for him.
So did the black areas.
The wind of Obamania has touched many American personalities, notably the presenter Oprah Winfrey, the black Republican Colin Powell and the Kennedys.
Obama was even nicknamed “The black John Kennedy”.
In the same way, Michelle, Obama’s better half was compared to Mrs Kennedy, hence the question: Michelle Obama: “The black Jackie Kennedy”?
But does this star enjoy unanimity everywhere?
Of course not.
No one is loved by all.
Threats of assassination have forced the FBI to increase its security presence around him.
The original version was adapted form the Internet entitled ‘Barack Obama: l’homme qui pourrait être le premier président noir des Etats-Unis’, http://www.afrik.com/article11052.html (Consulted on November 20, 2008 at 7 :36pm).
3.5 A few more comments Independent voters are people who do not vote according to party affiliation.
For instance, in America there are two major parties – The Republican Party and the Democratic Party.
An independent voter is one who does not belong to any party.
4.0 Conclusion 95 You have learnt a lot in this extremely rich passage.
You should be able to recall the following words with ease: métis, bronzé, banlieu and dispositif de sécurité.
5.0 Summary With your improved vocabulary and grammar, you can readily translate similar texts.
Remember the use of se vouloir and other points of grammar.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into French 1.
He says you are right 2.
She told me that she saw you 3.
Obama is a halfcast 4.
The assassins are there 5.
The Jonathans are here with us 7.0 References Coffman, M. E. (1973): French Grammar, New York: McGraw- Hill Book Company.
Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. Van Hoof, H. (1989) : Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris : Editions Duculot.
Vercollier, A. ; Vercollier, C. and Bourlier, K. (2006) : Difficultés expliquées du français for English Speakers, Ibadan : Clé & Spectrum.
Sitographie http://www.afrik.com/article11052.html consulted on 20th November 2008.
Sitographie here stands for references taken from the internet.
96 UNIT 15 TWO SIAMESE TWINS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Two Siamese twins 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Related Vocabulary 3.3 Points of Grammar 3.4 Model Translation 3.5 The successful separation of two Siamese babies 3.6 La séparation réussie de deux bébés siamois 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit treats a topic titled “two Siamese twins”.
It is a short passage that introduces you to new vocabulary.
2.0 Objectives The translation text will help expand your knowledge of French vocabulary.
You will know the French equivalent of the following words: Siamese twins, figurative meaning, faithfulness, beefy, Don Juan, lanky.
3.0 Read the following short text.
Translate it.
Use your three dictionaries – dictionnaire unilingue anglais, dictionnaire unilingue français, dictionnaire bilingue (anglais/français) to help you.
Try to translate the text on your own before referring to the Model Translation.
Two Siamese twins 97 Laide and Mohammed are two Siamese twins.
Siamese twins are twin brothers or sisters who are joined together on the same parts of their bodies.
But Laide and Mohammed are not Siamese twins in the literal sense.
In fact, they are not from the same country.
Laide is a Ghanaian mulato while Mohammed is an African American.
Both are tanned.
The term ‘Siamese’ is used in this case in a figurative sense to mean that they are two inseparable friends.
They are friends whose faithfulness is absolute.
What is interesting is their physical differences.
Laide is short and beefy, while Mohammed is tall and lanky.
Perhaps what unites them most is that they are both Don Juan.
Laide is preparing for career in the diplomatic service.
Like his Siamese brother, he works very hard, having completed his studies in History, he boasts of having acquired an admirable and profound knowledge of human sociology.
As for Mohammed, he has just finished his studies in law.
He will be called to bar in two weeks time.
He is intelligent, a bit talkative and very likeable.
His friends accuse him of just one thing; he is a chain smoker: yes an addicted smoker.
They dress always or almost the same way.
During the week, they wear checked shirt and jeans.
But the weekend, especially Saturday is reserved for a striped T-Shirt or trainers.
One understands therefore why they are nicknamed “Siamese twins” Try to translate the text.
3.1 Vocabulary twins (male) – les jumeaux Siamese twins (male) – frères siamois figurative meaning – le sens figuratif figuratively – au sens figuré beefy – costaud faithfulness – la fidélité lanky – maigre Don Juan – Don Juan, a seducer of women 98  th ‘Don Juan’ has its origin in the 19 century from the name of a legendary Spanish noble man with an immoral character.
3.2 Related vocabulary female Siamese twins – sœurs siamoises Siamese sisters – sœurs siamoises jumelles – twin sisters au figuré – figuratively, in a figurative sens 3.3.
Point of Grammar Dont Dont in French is a relative pronoun.
It means whose.
Ce sont des amies dont la fidélité est absolue – They are friends whose faithfulness is absolute (complete).
Read the following sentences.
See how dont is used.
Make sentences on your own using dont.
Voilà le monsieur dont je connais la fille That is the gentleman whose daughter I know.
Tu connais l’homme dont l’enfant est malade?
Do you know the man whose child is sick?
C’est le professeur dont les examens sont toujours difficiles.
It is the teacher whose examinations are always difficult.
3.4 Model Translation Deux frères siamois Laide et Mohammed sont des frères siamois.
Les frères siamois sont des jumeaux unis l’un à l’autre par deux parties homologues de leur corps.
Mais Laide et Mohammed ne sont pas des frères siamois dans ce sens littéral.
En effet, ils n’ont pas la même nationalité.
Le terme ‘siamois’ s’emploie ici dans un sens figuré pour signifier que ce sont des amis dont la fidélité est absolue.
Ce qui est intéressant est leurs différences physiques.
99 Laide est petit et costaud, tandis que Mohammed est grand et maigre.
Peut-être que ce qui les unit, c’est qu’ils sont tous deux des Don Juan.
Laide s’oriente vers une carrière du service diplomatique.
Comme son frère siamois, il travaille tres dur.
Ayant fini ses études en histoire, il se vante d’avoir acquis une connaissance admirable et approfondie de la sociologie humaine.
Quant à Mohammed, il vient de terminer ses études en droit, il s’inscrira au barreau dans quinze jours.
Il est très intelligent, un peu bavard et très aimable.
Ses amis lui reprochent d’une seule chose : il est un fumeur de cigarette à la file, c’est un fumeur invétéré.
Ils s’habillent toujours ou presque toujours de la même façon.
Au cours de la semaine, ils portent des chemises à carreaux et des jeans.
Mais le weekend en particulier le samedi, est réservé pour un tee-shirt à rayures (striped T-shirt), un jean ou un short (shorts) ou des tennis (trainers Uk, sneakers US).
On comprend alors pourquoi on les affable « les frères siamois » Ils n’ont pas la même nationalité They are not from the same country.
Another way of translating this sentence is “Ils sont des pays différents” “They are form different countries”.
This last translation will be a kind of modulation.
3.5 The successful separation of two Siamese babies Let us translate another text – a case of Siamese twins The successful separation of two Siamese twins from Madagascar made headline in the newspapers.
The children were joined in the thorax and abdomen with a common liver.
About twenty professionals were mobilized for the operation which lasted almost six years.
The word “Siamese babies” originated form the birth of two brothers in Siam in 1811.
100 In fact, Siamese children are twins who are joined together in one part of their bodies.
This malformation is due to an embryonic anomaly or other complications during pregnancy.
In general, it would have to do with the incomplete division of the egg, but in some other more rare cases, it could also be due to a partial fusion of two eggs that were distinct (different) from the beginning.
This happens in one pregnancy out of a 100, 000.
This type of birth is getting reduced more and more in developed countries due to the increase in ultrasound scan leading to the suggestion of possible abortion.
Another fact: in 90% of the cases, girls are involved.
Among the extraordinary cases recently registered, one can cite the cases of Abigeal and Britanny Hansel, two American th Siamese sisters from Minnesota.
They were born on 7 March, 1990, have two heads, two vertebral columns joined to the pelvis, have two stomachs, four lungs, two hands, a ribcage, a bladder, one reproductory organ and two legs.
The two sisters aged 18 years still live joined together; they take part in sports, piano, computer, etc.
They do not have the same interests and have been the source of many documentaries.
Vocabulary échographie = ultrasound; ultrasound scan, sonogram (US) passer une échographie = to have an ultrasound échographie is a technical term.
In day to day language, one may use ‘ultrasons’ (masc.
plural).
la cage thoracique = ribcage la vessie = bladder les colonnes vertébrales = spine 3.6 La séparation réussie de deux bébés siamois La séparation réussie de deux bébés siamois originaires de Madagascar a fait la une des journaux.
Les enfants étaient reliés par le thorax et l’abdomen avec un foie en commun.
L’opération qui a duré près de six ans a mobilisé une vingtaine de professionnels.
101 Les mots “bébés siamois” viennent de la naissance de deux frères nés au Siam en 1811.
Ils étaient accolés et faisaient la belle part des spectacles de cirque.
En fait, des enfants siamois sont des jumeaux qui sont soudés l’un à l’autre par une partie du corps.
Cette malformation est, soit due à une anomalie embryonnaire, soit à une complication dans le cas de grossesse gémellaires.
En général, il s’agirait d’une division incomplète de l’œuf unique mais dans d’autres cas plus rares, il pourrait aussi s’agir d’une fusion partielle de deux ébauches d’embryons qui étaient bien distinctes au départ.
Une grossesse sur 100 000 serait concernée.
Ce type de naissance dans les pays développés est de plus en plus rare grâce à la multiplication des échographies et dans ce cas, des interruptions de grossesse sont proposées.
Autre indication : cette malformation touche les filles dans 90% des cas.
Parmi les cas extraordinaires recensés, l’on peut citer celui d’Abigeal et de Britanny Hensel, deux sœurs siamoises américaines bicéphales vivant dans le Minnesota.
Elles sont nées le 7 mars 1990, ont deux têtes, deux colonnes vertébrales jointes au pelvis, ont deux estomacs, quatre poumons, deux bras, une cage thoracique, une vessie, un appareil reproducteur et deux jambes.
Les deux sœurs âgées de 18ans, vivent toujours collées, pratiquent des sports, le piano, l’ordinateur, etc.
elles n’ont pas les mêmes goûts et ont fait l’objet de plusieurs documentaires.
(tiré de http://www.web-libre-org/breves/bebes-siamois.4151.html téléchargé le 24 juillet 2010, article posté le 9 février 2009).
4.0 Conclusion This short and challenging translation has further expanded your knowledge of French.
You now know more words: maigre, Don Juan, siamois, fidélité and so on.
5.0 Summary Your knowledge of vocabulary and grammar has increased.
102 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences 1.
Sade and Bilikis are Siamese sisters 2.
They come from the same country 3.
They are friends whose love is sincere 4.
My friend is a football addict.
7.0 References The Concise Oxford Dictionary, Oxford New York: Oxford University Press.
Newmark, P. (1980): About Translation, Clevdon: Multilingual Matters International Sitographie http://www.web-libre-org/breves/bebes-siamois.4151.html downlaoded on 24th July, 2010.
The article was posted online on 9th February, 2009.
103 UNIT 16 INTERSEMIOTIC TRANSLATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Intersemiotic translation 3.1 Addition 3.2 Division 3.3 Multiplication 3.4 Subtraction 3.5 Les numéros impairs/Les numéros pairs 3.6 Aimes-tu les mathématiques ?
3.7 Model Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to intersemiotic translation with particular reference to elementary mathematical signs.
You will recall that in unit 4, we studied intersemiotic translation as one of the types of translation.
Intersemiotic translation involves the use of signs.
Transmutation is another word for intersemiotic translation.
There is also a very short passage for translation.
Your vocabulary will be further enriched.
2.0 Objectives The objectives are to teach you the: • addition or plus sign + • division sign ÷ • substraction or minus sign – • multiplication sign x 104 • You will acquire the following vocabulary: le calcul, les numéros impairs, les numéros pairs, les mathématiques, le scientifique, Ah bon!, les machines à calculer, la calculatrice, impeccable.
3.0 Intersemiotic Translation You will recall that we treated intersemiotic translation or traduction intersémiotique in Unit 4.
Another word for intersemiotic translation is transmutation.
Intersemiotic translation involves the use of signs.
Intersemiotic translation or transmutation can be defined as the interpretation of verbal signs (i.e.
words) by means of nonverbal signs and vice versa.
In this unit, you will learn to translate the mathematical signs into French.
3.1 Addition 100 + 100 = 200 Cent plus cent égalent deux cents.
40 + 41 = 81 Quarante plus quarante et un égalent quatre vingt un Note that 81 is quatre-vingt un NOT quatre-vingt et un.
3.2 Division 15 ÷ 3 = 5 Quinze divisé par trois égale cinq 410 ÷ 2 = 205 Quatre cent dix divisés par deux égale deux cent cinq The ‘cent’ in quatre cent dix and deux cent cinq are without ‘s’because of the dix and cinq that follow them.
Thus, you will write quatre cents, deux cents, etc.
105 3.3 Multiplication The word for multiplication in French is also multiplication.
Of course, the two languages pronounce them differently.
See how multiplication is expressed in French.
Observe the alternatives and the use of different verbs depending on the figure involved.
2 x 6 = deux fois six 3 x 10 = trois fois dix 4 x 9 = quatre fois neuf 5 x 3 = cinq fois trois 4 x 6 = quatre fois six 3 x 10 = trois fois dix 5 x 100 = cinq fois cent You can say or write the examples above differently : 2 x 6 = doublez six 3 x 10 = triplez dix 4 x 9 = quadruplez neuf 5 x 3 = quintuplez trois 4 x 6 = sextuplez quatre 3 x 10 = décuplez trois 5 x 100 = centuplez cinq 3.4 Subtraction Subtraction is “la soustraction”.
14 – 12 = 2 Quatorze moins douze reste deux.
or Quatorze moins douze fait deux.
3.5 Les numéros impairs/Les numéros pairs Les numéros impairs – odd numbers Odd numbers cannot be divided by 2 without having a remainder, eg.
3, 5, 7, 9.
Les numéros pairs – even numbers 106 Even numbers are divided by two e.g.
2, 4, 10, 50 3.6 Aimes-tu les mathématiques Paul : Aimes-tu les mathématiques ?
Moustapha : Oui, je les aime très bien.
Paul : Ah bon!
Comme tu as de la chance !
Moustapha : Comment ?
J’aime les mathématiques.
Je suis fort en mathématiques.
Pour être scientifique, il faut aimer le calcul.
Paul : Moi, je suis très faible en mathématiques.
Moustapha : C’est pas un problème.
Tu veux être un grand écrivain.
Tu écris bien.
Ton français est impeccable.
Paul : Merci, chacun a son goût.
Je n’ai jamais aimé le calcul.
Heureusement pour moi, il y a des machines à calculer et des calculatrices !
3.7 Model Translation Do you like Mathematics ?
Paul : Do you like Mathematics ?
Mustapha : Yes, I love it.
Paul : How lucky you are !
Mustapha : How ?
I love Mathematics.
I am good at Mathematics.
To be a scientist, you have to like calculation.
Paul : As for me, I am weak in Mathematics.
Mustapha : That’s not a problem.
You want to be a great writer.
You write very well.
Your French is impeccable.
Paul : I don’t like calculation (Arithmetic).
Luckily for me, there are calculating machines and calculators!
Note: The French and English spellings of Moustapha/Mustapha.
Other similar examples are Youssuf/Yusuf, Moussa/Musa, Tiamiyou/Tiamiyu.
107 A scientist – un scientifique Ah bon!
– It is an expression of surprise.
4.0 Conclusion You have recourse to intersemiotic translation everyday.
It is thus only proper that you remember the relevant words and expressions.
Some of the useful words are scientifique, calcul, calculatrice, numéros impairs, numéros pairs.
5.0 Summary Your knowledge of la traduction intersémiotique or la transmutation and the appropriate words will be very useful to you.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following mathematical signs into French 1.
8 x 202 2.
4 x 4 x 4 = 64 3.
10 ÷ 2 = 5 4.
6 – 5 = 1 5.
5 + 6 = 11 Translate the following sentences to mathematical signs 1.
Triplez trois 2.
Dix divisé par deux fait cinq 3.
Dix divisé par deux reste cinq 4.
Multipliez deux par dix 5.
Trois et trois font six 7.0 Reference Grellet, F. (1991): Apprendre à traduire.
Typologie d’exercices de traduction.
Nancy, Presses Universitaires de Nancy.
Jakobson, Roman (1963) : Essai de linguistique générale, Paris, Edition de minuit.
Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. 108  UNIT 17 IN A SHOP Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 In a shop 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Model Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction From intersemiotic translation, you are back to interlingual translation.
You will recall that in interlingual translation, you translate from one language to another, e.g.
English into French.
In this unit, you will translate a short and simple dialogue in a shop.
2.0 Objectives As you successfully translate the text, you will acquire the following words and expressions: tailleur-pantalon, s’acheter quelque chose, vous désirez, payer par chèque.
3.0 Read and Translate this text into French In a shop One day, Tounji bought a wrist-watch for himself.
He also bought a trouser suit for his wife.
Here is the discussion that ensued between him and the shop assistant.
Shop assistant: What can I do for you?
Tounji: A trouser suit for my wife.
I would also buy a watch of very good quality for myself if you have one.
If not, I go elsewhere.
I am in a hurry.
Shop assistant: A trouser suit?
I have many of them.
Please make 109 your choice.
There are very beautiful watches over there.
There are also beautiful belts Tounji: That’s what I want (pointing to it with his finger).
Belts?
No, I have a lot of them.
I have too many of them.
Shop assistant: That will be 15 thousand naira only for the trouser suit and 12 for the watch.
Tounji: But, that’s too expensive.
What’s the lowest you’ll go?
Shop assistant: 25 thousand for the two.
Tounji: It’s too expensive.
Shop assistant: Don’t forget that you want something of good quality.
Tounji: I don’t, but … Shop assistant: Ok, I understand.
I’ll let you have it cheap.
Pay 23 thousand.
Tounji: 23 thousand!
And you say you’ll let me have it cheap?
Shop assistant: Of course, Ok., tell me, what’s your final offer?
Tounji: 20 thousand.
Shop assistant: Ok, pay.
Tounji: But I am going to pay by cheque.
Shop assistant: No problem 3.1 Vocabulary Note the following words, expressions and their meanings in French.
s'acheter quelque chose – to buy something for oneself s’acheter une montre – to buy a watch for oneself trouser suit – un pantalon-tailleur What can I do for you?
– Vous désirez?
or Que désirez-vous?
What’s your final offer?
– Quel est votre dernier prix?
What’s the lowest you’ll go?
– Quel est votre dernier prix ?
110 I’ll let you have it cheap – Je vous fais un prix or Je vous fais un prix d’ami.
You will observe that “Quel est votre prix ?” has two different translations depending on who is speaking.
In “I’ll let you have it cheap?”, you may or may not add d’ami.
The meaning is the same.
3.2 Model Translation Dans un magasin Un jour Tounji s’est acheté une montre.
Il a acheté également des tailleurs-pantalons à un vendeur pour sa femme.
Voilà l’entretien qui a eu lieu entre lui et le vendeur.
Vendeur : Vous désirez ?
Tounji : Un tailleur pantalon pour ma femme.
J’aimerais m’acheter aussi une montre de très bonne qualité si vous en avez.
Sinon, je vais ailleurs.
Je suis pressé.
Vendeur : Un tailleur pantalon ?
J’en ai beaucoup ici.
Faites votre choix!
Il y a de belles montres là-bas.
Il y a aussi de belles ceintures.
Tounji : Voilà ce que je veux (le démontrant du doigt).
Des ceintures ?
Non, je n’en ai pas besoin.
J’en ai trop !
Vendeur : Vous payez 15 mille naira seulement pour le tailleur pantalon et 12 mille la montre.
Tounji : Mais, ça coûte trop cher !
Quel est votre dernier prix ?
Vendeur : 25 mille pour les deux.
Tounji : C’est trop cher !
Vendeur : N’oubliez pas que vous voulez quelque chose de bon.
Tounji : Je n’oublie pas, mais ….
Vendeur : Ok, je comprends.
Je vous fais un prix d’ami.
Payez 23 mille.
Tounji : 23 mille !
Et vous me faites un prix d’ami ?
Vendeur : Mais oui !
Ok, dites-moi, quel est votre dernier prix ?
Tounji : 20 mille.
Vendeur : D’accord, payez.
Tounji : Mais je vais payer par chèque.
Vendeur : Pas de problème.
111 NOTE: Do you observe that the French too say OK?
You may say d’accord instead of OK. OK is a kind of emprunt (borrowing).
4.0 Conclusion Do your best to retain the words whenever you enter a shop.
Know the following expressions and words to the extent that you can readily recall them for use when necessary : vous désirez?, un tailleur pantaloon, je vous fais un prix, quel est votre dernier prix?
5.0 Summary This translation has helped to widen your vocabulary and ability to translate.
You have learnt the following words and expressions: l’entretien, magasin, je vous fais un prix d’ami, etc.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate into English 1.
De nos jours, les voitures coûtent très cher.
2.
Je vais m’acheter un bon tailleur-pantalon.
3.
Il vend des montres modernes.
4.
Il s’achète une belle voiture.
Translate into French 5.
I will pay in cash 6.
My cheque booklet is not here 7.
My wife loves trouser suit.
8.
It is rather cheap 9.
There are beautiful flowers over there 10.
Don’t forget that quality means more money!
7.0 Reference Collins Robert French Dictionary Concise Edition (2006), Great Britain: Le Robert.
Grellet, Françoise (1991): Apprendre à traduire.
Typologie d’exercices de traduction.
Nancy, Presses Universitaires de Nancy.
112 UNIT 18 A NEW ERA BEGINS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 A new era begins 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Points of Grammar 3.3 Model Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction The last unit dealt with the short dialogue in a shop.
This unit is devoted to the translation of a text on modern science and technology.
Specifically, you are to translate a text on mobile phones and related ideas.
2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you should: • acquire more vocabulary: le mobile, le cellulaire, novatrice, ci-après, les indicatifs, virement bancaire, en un clin d’œil.
• be able to translate the text 3.0 A new era begins Science and technology have done a lot for man.
They continue to do so.
Through a mobile phone, one can send and receive written and oral messages.
Certainly, an innovative and modern touch has found itself in the use of mobile telephone.
113 You will find below the dialing codes of some Francophone countries.
Benin – 229 Guinea – 224 Burkina Faso – 226 Togo – 228 Côte d’Ivoire – 225 You do not have to subscribe to telephone lines anymore.
You simply go to a supermarket or elsewhere and buy a mobile phone and a recharge card.
Telephone directories have disappeared.
You can also embark on bank transfer form one country to another.
The transfer is done in a twinkling of an eye.
3.1 Vocabulary mobile telephone – le mobile (téléphone mobile), le cellulaire, le portable.
innovative – novateur (masc.)
novatrice (fem) dialing code – l’indicatif (indicatif téléphonique) (masc.)
subscribe to – s’abonner à recharge card – la carte de recharge bank transfer – virement bancaire a twinkling of an eye – un clin d’œil 3.2 Point of Grammar s’ouvrir – to open La porte s’ouvre – The door opens In a more literal way, it may be translated as “the door opens itself”.
That is the way the French language expresses the idea.
Such ideas are expressed also in the following: Il se lave – He is taking his bath (Literally, he is washing himself) Il s’habille – He is getting dressed up (Literally, he is dressing himself up).
114 The verbs used in this kind of construction are known as pronominal verbs – les verbes pronominaux.
Let us see a few other examples: se battre, se quereller, s’évader, s’évanouir, se suicider.
3.3 Model Translation Une nouvelle ère s’ouvre.
La science et la technologie ont tant fait pour l’homme.
Elles en font toujours.
Avec le mobile, on peut envoyer et recevoir des messages écrits et oraux.
Certes, une touche novatrice et moderne a été apportée au téléphone par l’usage du mobile.
Vous trouverez ci-après la liste des indicatifs téléphoniques de certains pays francophones.
Le Bénin – 229 La Guinée – 224 Le Burkina Faso – 226 Le Togo – 228 La Côte d’Ivoire – 225 Il n’est plus question d’abonnement à une ligne téléphonique.
Il suffit d’aller au supermarché ou ailleurs pour acheter un portable et une carte de recharge.
On peut également entreprendre le virement bancaire d’un pays à un autre.
Le virement (transfert) d’argent est fait en un clin d’œil.
How was your translation?
Many mistakes?
If not, congratulations!
If yes, you have no cause to worry.
Simply learn the words and expressions fast.
Try to recall and use them in your daily encounter with mobile telephone!
4.0 Conclusion This text is very practical.
You see or use mobile phones everyday.
Use the expressions.
If there is no one to speak to in French, try and recall them just on your own.
115 5.0 Summary This is a very practical passage.
Write down the new words.
Use them.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into English 1.
La technologie a contribué énormément au développement de l’homme 2.
Le portable est aujourd’hui indispensable.
3.
A travers les cellulaires, on peut envoyer des textes oraux et écrits.
7.0 References Collins Robert French Dictionary Concise Edition (2006), Great Britain: Le Robert.
Vercollier, A. ; Vercollier, C. and Bourlier, K. (2006) : Difficultés expliquées du français for English Speakers, Ibadan : Clé & Spectrum.
116 UNIT 19 ST A BRITISH COUPLE CELEBRATES ITS 81 YEAR OF MARRIAGE: A RECORD Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives st 3.0 A British Couple Celebrates its 81 Year of Marriage: A Record 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Points of Grammar 3.3 Model Translation 3.4 Mixed Race 3.5 Un couple de noirs fait un enfant... blanc !
Regardez 3.6 Model Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction From mobile phones and bank transfer, the topic switches over to marriage – a British couple and a Nigerian couple.
This unit will introduce you to a story on two old lovebirds – a text that st is a challenge to mankind.
The British couple celebrates its 81 marriage.
The second text made “good” news in the press.
Two Nigerians – both black – gave birth to a white baby in Britain.
There had been a similar one where parents of mixed races gave birth to a set of twins of different colour : one white and the other one black.
2.0 Objectives When you successfully complete this unit, you should be able to: • translate the passage 117 • expand your vocabulary: les tourtereaux, pour le meilleur et pour le pire, une maison de retraite, génétique, albinos, etc.
• identify some grammatical issues 3.0 Read and understand the text.
Study the vocabulary and translate.
st A British Couple Celebrates its 81 Year of Mariage: A record Two Britons, Anita and Frank Milford respectively aged 100 st and 101 years, have celebrated their 81 wedding anniversary.
The husband died in 2009.
The two lovebirds got married in 1928 in England for better and for worse.
According to the wife, the secret of the marriage is “to give, receive and laugh a lot”.
The two married in all simplicity – without much money – and lived in a small house until March 2005.
Th.
They lived in an old people’s home till the death of the husband.
The two records on longevity in marriage are in India and the United States.
Each lasted for 86 yearey have two children, five grandchildren and seven great grandchildrens.
(Translated from French into English http://www.senioractu.com/un-couple-de-Britanniques-vient-de- fêter-ses-78-ans-de-mariage-un-record!-a5734.html).
3.1 Vocabulary to feast, celebrate – fêter lovebirds – les tourtereaux (masc.)
for better for worse – pour le meilleur et pour le pire grand children – les petits-enfants great grand children – les arrière-petits-enfants The term “ les petits-enfants” is not ‘small children’ in English but ‘grand children’.
Similarly, ‘les arrières-petits-enfants’ is ‘great grand children’ old people’s home – une maison de retraite 118 the wife – l’épouse the husband – l’époux longevity – la longévité ‘Lovebirds’ are two people who love each other, especially young ones who show their love in public.
3.2 Points of Grammar Se marier should remind you of les verbes pronominaux.
They married in 1928 – Ils se sont mariés en 1928 You cannot say “Ils ont marié en 1928” !
If you do, you are wrong.
You will have betrayed your Anglophone background.
Observe the beautiful uses of marier and se marier in the following sentences.
1.
Demain, je marie ma fille – I’m giving out my daughter (in marriage) tomorrow 2.
Le rose se marie très bien avec le noir – Red goes very well with black A pronominal verb is a verb preceded by another pronom which is not the subject personal pronoun.
The accompanying pronoun is called a reflexive pronoun : me, te, se, nous, vous, se.
The pronouns refer to the same person as the subject is also the object of the verb.
It means therefore that the subject acts upon itself.
(Ade Ojo 2005: 331) Elle se regarde devant le miroir Elle se souvient de ses études en Pologne.
She is looking at herself in the mirror/before the glass.
She always remembers her studies in Poland.
3.3.
Model Translation Un couple Britannique célèbre ses 81 ans de mariage: un record Deux Britanniques, Anita et Frank Milford, respectivement âgés de ème 100 et 101 ans, ont fêté leur 81 anniversaire de mariage.
Le mari est mort en 2009.
Les deux tourtereaux se sont mariés en 1928 en 119 Angleterre pour le meilleur et pour le pire.
Selon l’épouse, le secret de ce mariage c’est “d’offrir, de recevoir, et de rire beaucoup”.
Les deux se sont mariés en toute simplicité, sans beaucoup d’argent – et ont vécu dans une petite maison jusqu’en mars 2005.
Ils sont deux enfants, cinq petits-enfants et sept arrière-petits-enfants.
Ils vivaient dans une maison de retraite jusqu’à la mort du mari.
Les deux records de longévité en matière de mariage se situent en Inde et aux Etats-Unis pour une durée de 86 ans.
3.4 Mixed Race Other words for someone of a mixed race are halfcaste and mulatto, but the two terms are offensive in English.
A more polite expression is a person of mixed race (Macmillan English Dictionary, 2007:678) There is a second text for you to translate.
3.5 Un couple de noirs fait un enfant... blanc !
Regardez "The Sun" rapporte la naissance à Londres d'une petite fille blanche aux yeux bleus, mais dont les parents sont noirs... Des experts en génétique ont toutefois précisé que l'enfant n'est pas albinos.
Ben et Angela, d'origine nigériane, sont déjà les heureux parents de deux enfants, tous les deux noirs.
Quelle fut donc leur surprise en découvrant leur petite fille, qu'ils ont appelée Nmachi, qui signifie "beauté de Dieu".
"Elle est belle et je l'aime.
Sa couleur n'a pas d'importance.
Elle est un miracle", a confié Angela.
De son côté, Ben déclare: "Ma femme est fidèle.
Même si elle m'avait trompé, le bébé ne ressemblerait pas à ça.
Elle ne ressemble pas à un enfant albinos, pas à ceux que j'ai vu au Nigéria ou dans les livres.
Elle ressemble juste à un petit bébé blanc, en pleine santé.
(...) Tout ce qui compte c'est qu'elle soit en bonne santé et que nous l'aimons".
120 Rappelons qu'il y a cinq ans, un cas similaire s'était produit.
Kylie Hodgson et Remi Horder, avaient ainsi donné naissance à des jumelles de couleur différente, une noire et une blanche.
ressembler à – to ressemble, to look like tromper – to deceive toutefois – however 3.6 Model Translation A Black Couple Gives Birth to a White Child!
Look at it!
“The Sun” reports the birth in London of a little white girl with blue eyes, but the parents are black.
Experts in genetics have confirmed that the child is not an albino.
Ben and Angela of Nigerian origin are already the happy parents of two children, both of whom are black.
How surprising it was for them to cover their little girl whom the named Nmachi meaning “the beauty of God”.
“She is beautiful, I love her.
Her colour isn’t important.
She is a miracle!”, said Angela.
On his part, Ben declares : “My wife is faithful.
Even if she cheated on me, the baby would still not look like that.
She does not look like an albino, not like those I saw in Nigeria or in the books.
She just looks like a little white baby full of life (in good health).
All that matters now is that she is healthy and we love her”.
Let us recall that there was a similar case some years ago.
Kylie Hodgson and Remi Horder, also gave birth to a set of twins of different colours – one black and the other one white.
4.0 Conclusion You must have enjoyed this translation with quite a good number of new words.
Recall the equivalents of the following words in English: les tourtereaux, le meilleur et le pire, la longévité, une maison de retraite.
121 5.0 Summary You have learnt many words and expressions like tourtereaux, épouse, maison de retraite, couple, génétique, similaire, etc.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment A.
Translate the following sentences into English 1.
Les Etats-Unis et l’Inde détiennent les records de longévité dans le domaine du mariage 2.
Ils ont célébré leur 81ème anniversaire de mariage/ Ils ont fêté le 81e anniversaire de leur mariage.
3.
Pour qu’un mariage réussisse, il faut donner, recevoir et beaucoup rire.
B.
Correct the following sentences 4.
L’homme a marié la femme.
5.
C’est un bon marriage.
6.
Les Etats-Unis d’Amérique détient le records.
7.
Il faut fais le travail.
8.
Voilà ma épouse.
7.0 References http://www.senioractu.com/un-couple-de-Britanniques-vient-de- fêter-ses-78-ans-de-mariage-un-record!-a5734.html Collins Robert French Dictionary Concise Edition ( 2006), Great Britain: Le Robert Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners (2007), London, Macmillan.
Vercollier, A. ; Vercollier, C. and Bourlier, K. (2006) : Difficultés expliquées du français for English Speakers, Ibadan : Clé & Spectrum.
122 UNIT 20 MY FAVOURITE NEWSPAPER Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 My favourite newspaper 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Related Vocabulary 3.3 General Knowledge 3.4 Translation Issues 3.5 Model Translation 3.6 French Newspaper 3.7 La Coupe du monde 3.8 Vocabulary 3.9 Model Translation: The World Cup 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to a practical translation.
You will learn certain practical aspects of translation.
2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you are expected to have learnt: • the following words: journal préféré, défense légitime, radicaux, aisé • related words : le journal télévisé, la revue.
• Some facts on newspapers in France.
• Some practical issues on translation.
123 3.0 Read the passage.
Study the vocabulary and some practical issues on translation.
Finally, translate the dialogue into French.
My favourite newspaper Pumor: What is this newspaper?
(Which newspaper is this?)
Ebikabowei : Which one?
This one?
The Guardian?
The Sun or The Nation?
Pumor: No, the other one ….
yes, that one.
Opened in front of you.
Ebikabowei : Ah!
That’s my favourite newspaper for now.
It’s The Tribune.
The newspaper for radicals.
Pumor : You want to be a radical?
Ebikabowei : Of course yes!
However, you know, I am not from a rich family.
So, I have to be quiet and suffer without complaint.
Pumor: But money isn’t the criterion for self defense!
3.1 Vocabulary newspaper – le journal radical – le radical radicals – les radicaux criterion – le critère self defense – la défense légitime In English, ‘criterion’ is singular, while ‘criteria’ is plural.
Note this as it is a common error.
When you hear someone say “The criteria is that … ”, you know there is an error.
It should be “The criteria are that …..”.
Note also that “journal” in English is translated as “la revue” in French.
3.2 Related vocabulary le journal de 21h – the 9 o’clock news 21h shows that it is 9pm and NOT 9am.
9am will be 9h.
le journal télévisé – television news – news bulletin 124  3.3 General Knowledge In French, the major national newspapers are Le Monde, Libération and Le Figaro and Le Canard Enchaîné which is a satirical weekly.
There are regional newspapers too such as Ouest- France (Collins Robert 2006: 287).
3.4 Translation Issues You do not translate these newspapers.
In a nutshell leave the papers – The Guardian, the Sun and the Nation – in their English versions.
In the same vein, you may not, in a practical context, translate names and addresses.
e.g.
John James Department of French University of Georgetown Freetown.
If you translate the names and address as Jean Jacques Le département de français L’Université de Georgesville Libreville You will mutilate the real meaning.
By this translation, virtually everything has been distorted.
The letter can never get to its destination.
Libreville is a town.
In fact, it is the capital of Gabon while Freetown is the capital of Sierra Leone!
3.5 Model Translation Mon journal préféré Pumor: Ebikabowei !
Qu’est-ce que ce journal?
Ebikabowei: Lequel ?
Celui-ci ?
The Guardian ?
The Sun ou The Nation ?
Pumor: Non, l’autre ….
oui, celui-là, ouvert devant toi.
Ebikabowei: Ah, ça, c’est mon journal préféré en ce moment.
C’est Tribune.
Le journal pour les radicaux.
Pumor: Tu veux être un radical ?
125 Ebikabowei: Mais oui !
Cependant, tu sais bien, je ne suis pas d’une famille aisée.
Donc, je dois me taire et souffrir sans plaintes.
Pumor: Mais l’argent n’est pas le critère pour la défense légitime.
3.6 French Newspapers You need to know something about newspapers in France.
There are many newspapers in France.
Below are some of the daily national papers (les quotidiens nationaux).
Libération Le Monde Le Parisien La Tribune Les Echos Le Figaro L’Humanité La Croix France Soir For sports dailes, we have L’équipe and Midi-Olympique.
The following ones are magazines (les périodiques) Courier International Les Clefs de l’actualité Junior Elle L’Européen L’Express Marianne Le Monde Diplomatique Le Nouvel Observateur Le Point Le Monde d’Education Sciences et Avenir L’Etudiant Phosphore Télérama 126 You can read all these papers in the Internet.
Form the habit of reading them regularly if you have the means.
You will expand your horizon, improve your French and be more in tune with French culture.
When you read a paper like Midi-Olympique, you will get words like entraîneur (coach), la Coupe du monde (World cup), etc.
Another text is hereby provided for reading and translation.
3.7 La coupe du monde 2010 : L’Espagne sur le toit du monde L’Espagne s’est offert sa première étoile de champion du monde, avec en prime un fabuleux doublé Euro – 2008/Mondial – 2010 dans la douleur avec un but d’Iniesta en prolongation contre les Pays-Bas réduits à dix en finale de la Coupe du monde dimanche à Johannesburg.
Ce match était fait pour les livres d’Histoire.
Avant l’arrivée des joueurs sur le terrain, Nelson Mandela, fit même une apparition, en voiturette sur le terrain, pour saluer les fans du Soccer City.
Au moment du but d’Iniesta, Casillas éclata en pleurs.
Ce fut l’autre image de cette finale.
La Furia Roja, qui jouait sa première finale de coupe du monde, rejoint l’Allemagne, seule à avoir jusqu’ici réalisé un doublé Euro-Mondial dans ce sens (1972-1974).
L’Espagne devient aussi le premier pays européen consacré en Coupe du monde en dehors du Vieux Continent.
Au total, l’arbitre anglais, M. Weff sorti 14 cartons jaunes et a exclu Heitinga en prolongation.
Les Néerlandais étaient généreux en fautes – plus d’une vingtaine dans le temps réglementaire.
Mais c’est le but marqué par Iniesta qui change le sort des deux équipes.
Pour les Pays-Bas, c’est la troisième finale d’un Mondial raté après les échecs de 1974 contre la RFA et de 1978 contre l’Argentine.
Le jeu était évidemment dominé par les Espagnols, toutefois moins fringants que prévu.
127 Les meilleures occasions néerlandaises vinrent de Robben.
Parti dans le dos de la défense, son tir fut détourné du bout du pied e droit par ‘San Iker’ (62 ).
Robben vit son effort encore annihilé par le gardien espagnol.
(Texte adapté de http://www.lepoint.fr/coupe-de-monde/coupe-du- monde-lespagne-sur-le-toit-du-monde) 3.8 Vocabulary doublé – double victory fabbuleux – fabulous un but – a goal Les Pays-Bas – Netherlands consacré – consecrated i.e.
blessed exclu en prolongation – excluded from the extra time cartons jaunes – yellow cards la prolongation – extra time voiturette – a small car les fans – fans Casillas éclata en pleurs – Casillas burst to tears L’arbitre – referee L’Espagne (f) – Spain Espagnol – Spanish les Néerlandais – The Dutch un Néerlandais – a Dutchman une Néerlandaise – a Dutchwoman le Néerlendais – Dutch (language) moins fringants que prévu – less dashing than expected son tir fut détourné du bout du pied droit par “San Iker” – his short was deflected by the tip of the “San Ikler’s” right foot.
faire cavalier seul – to go it alone RFA = République Fédérale de l’Allemagne = Federal Republic of Germany Recognize the names of some of the players : Robben, “San Iker”, Iniesta, Heitinga.
128 3.9 Model Translation 2010 World Cup: Spain on top of the world Spain gave herself her first world cup star with a double European 2008 and 2010 world champion with a goal scored by Iniesta during the extra time against Netherlands whose team was reduced to ten at the Sunday World Cup final in Johannesburg.
The match was made (destined) for the History books.
Before the players arrived on the field, Nelson Mandela made his appearance in a small car in the field to salute the fans of Soccer City.
When Iniesta scored his goal, Casillas burst into tears.
That was another image of this final.
La furia Jola who was playing his first world cup final joined Germany, the only country to have had a double European and world champion (1972-1974).
Spain also becomes the first blessed European country to win world cup outside of the Old Continent.
On the whole, the English referee, M. Weff brought out 14 yellow cards and barred Heitinga from the extra time.
The Dutch were generous in mistakes – more than twenty at the regular time.
But it is the goal scored by Iniesta that changes the fate of the two teams.
For Netherlands, this is the third failed world cup final following the failures of 1974 against the Federal Republic of Germany and that of 1978 against Argentina.
The game was obviously dominated by the Spaniards who however less dashing than expected.
The best opportunities for Netherlands came from Robben.
Going into the back, his short was deflected by the tip of San Iker’s right leg.
Robben saw his effort again destroyed by the Spanish goalkeeper.
4.0 Conclusion These texts have led you to a broader horizon in French, English and translation issues.
Note the words on football: arbitre, tir, but, gardien, la coupe du monde, cartes jaunes, cartes rouges, prolongation.
5.0 Summary 129 The texts have enriched your knowledge of translation.
Keep the new words at your fingertips.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into French 1.
I want to buy today’s Punch newspaper.
2.
The 9pm news is read by Joke Agbaje.
3.
Musa is a radical.
4.
James comes from a rich family.
5.
The Spaniards played better than the Dutch.
6.
The Dutch players were given many yellow cards.
7.
The Spannish goalkeeper was very good.
8.
When Iniesta scored his goal, Casillas wept.
9.
The word cup in South Africa was exciting.
10.
This was Netherlands third failed attempt at the world cup.
7.0 References Berchiche, Y.
(2000): Cours de la Sorbonne, Paris Collins Robert French Dictionary Concise Edition ( 2006), Great Britain: Le Robert 130 UNIT 21 FUEL SCARCITY Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Fuel Scarcity 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Related Vocabulary 3.3 Model Translation 3.4 Translation Issues 3.5 Le prix du carburant réduit au Nigéria 3.6 Model Translation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit deals with a common Nigerian phenomenon – fuel scarcity.
You should have no problem understanding the original text since it is written in English.
Take pains to master the translated version as they contain very useful words and expressions.
You should learn to use the relevant vocabulary at the earliest opportunity.
2.0 Objectives The primary objective is the translation of the passage on “Fuel Scarcity”.
In the process of translating, you should be able to acquire the French equivalents of fuel, engine, mechanic, threaten, keg, panel beater, to refuel, damaged, the previous day.
3.0 Read the text.
Get acquainted with the explanations below and translate the text.
Fuel Scarcity 131 It was a beautiful day (or at least so I thought) when I woke up very early in the morning.
My main objective that day was to repair my damaged vehicle.
I had an accident, but fortunately there was no casualty.
The engine worked perfectly, but I still needed to see a mechanic.
But the most urgent work was for my panel beater.
I wanted to solve all the problems quickly as I was getting ready for an important journey.
But alas!
My hopes were dashed.
Why?
Fuel scarcity was again threatening our state.
The problem had started the previous day.
But it was getting worse.
I needed immediate solutions.
I had to go to the black market to refuel, to buy two kegs of fuel at an exorbitant price.
3.1 Vocabulary fuel – le carburant, l’essence (fem.)
engine – le moteur mechanic – le garagiste (garage mechaninic) le mécanicien to threaten – menacer keg – le bidon panel beater – le tolier to refuel a car or an aeroplane – se ravitailler a damaged car – une voiture accidentée the previous day – la veille to get worse – empirer to pay a fortune for something – acheter quelque chose à prix d’or Note that in the cases of fuel and mechanic, you are given synonyms.
Fuel is le carburant and l’essence is petrol.
Le garagiste is the garage mechanic, while mécanicien is simply a mechanic.
3.2 Related Vocabulary It will interest you also to know the following: l'ingénieur mécanicien (masc.)
– mechanical engineer 132 When talking about aircraft and ship, un mécanicien is an engineer.
On the other hand un mécanicien is also “an engine driver” i.e.
someone who drives a train (British English).
3.3 Model Translation Le manque de carburant C’était un beau jour (au moins c’est ce que je croyais) quand je me suis réveillée et levée très tôt le matin.
Ce jour-là, j’avais comme but principal la réparation de ma voiture accidentée.
J’avais eu un accident, mais heureusement il n’y avait ni morts ni blessés.
Le moteur marchait parfaitement, mais il fallait voir quand même un garagiste.
Le travail le plus urgent était chez le tôlier.
Je voulais vite tout régler, comme je m’apprêtais pour un voyage important.
Hélas!
Mes espoirs étaient frustrés.
Et la cause ?
Le manque de carburant menaçait de nouveau notre Etat.
Le problème avait commencé avant-hier, mais cela empire encore.
Il fallait des solutions immédiates.
J’ai dû aller au marché noir pour me ravitailler, pour acheter deux bidons d’essence à prix d’or.
Mais le problème de carburant ne se pose plus au Nigéria.
Il y a du carburant partout.
C’est le réveil d’un géant du continent africain.
Mais pourquoi dit-on que notre pays est le géant de l’Afrique ?
C’est parce qu’il est béni de ressources énormes humaines et matérielles.
Le Nigéria est le pays le plus peuplé d’Afrique.
3.4 Translation issues You observe that there were a few cases where we avoided a literal translation.
In other words, the translations were not word for word.
They, however, gave the desired meaning.
Let us examine a couple of examples: Et la cause?
– why?
Literally, it is “And the reason?” 133 “Acheter quelque chose à prix d’or” means to “pay a fortune for something”.
That is the expression I opted to use to translate “to buy at an exorbitant price”.
3.5 Le prix du carburant réduit au Nigéria Action Congress a réclamé une réduction des prix de l’essence.
L’essence a des coûts plusieurs fois élevés que les coûts officiels fixés à 22 naira le litre.
La pénurie de carburant est un problème récurrent au Nigéria.
Le problème est lié aux produits pétroliers souvent illégalement exportés du Nigéria vers l’extérieur au marché parallèle où il est vendu à environ 1,20 dollar le litre – près du double du prix officiel.
3.6 Model Translation 4.0 Conclusion This text is a very practical one.
Recall the words and expressions any time you experience fuel crisis or you have to go to a mechanic.
5.0 Summary You have learnt many new words and expressions like le garagiste, se ravitailler, la veille and une voiture accidentée.
Remind yourself of the words whenever you see an accident.
Recall also the different relevant words when there is fuel scarcity: le manque de carburant, le manque d’essence, le bidon.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into English, 1.
Le moteur marche bien.
2.
Je vais chez le garagiste.
3.
Il y a manque d’essence en ville.
4.
Voilà la voiture accidentée.
5.
J’ai acheté trois bidons de carburant.
134  3.0 References Collins Robert French Dictionary Concise Edition ( 2006), Great Britain: Le Robert Grellet, Françoise (1991): Apprendre à traduire.
Typologie d’exercices de traduction.
Nancy, Presses Universitaires de Nancy.
135  UNIT 22 THINGS FALL APART Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 An Extract 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Model Translation 3.3 A Few Observations 3.4 Transposition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit deals with the translation of an extract from Things Fall Apart by Chinua Acheba.
The story is the beginning of the success story and fame of Okonkwo.
The French title of Things Fall Apart is Le monde s’effondre.
As you know, the novel is very interesting.
Take pains to understand the vocabulary and enjoy the story.
It will be nice for you to buy the French version and read all of it.
2.0 Objectives The chapter proposes to introduce you to literary translation in a more practical way.
Through the reading of this short extract, you will be sensitized to reading French texts as your vocabulary and ideas will also ‘grow’ very rapidly.
3.0 Things Fall Apart 136 Okonkwo was well known throughout the nine villages and even beyond.
His fame rested on solid personal achievements.
As a young man of eighteen he had brought honour to his village by throwing Amalinze the Cat.
Amalinze was the great wrestler who for seven years was unbeaten, from Umuofia to Mbaino.
He was called the Cat because his back would never touch the earth.
It was this man that Okonkwo threw in a fight which the old man agreed was one of the fiercest since the founder of their town engaged a spirit of the wild for seven days and seven nights.
The drums beat and the flutes sang and the spectators held their breath.
Amalinze was a wily craftsman, but Okonkwo was as slippery as a fish in water.
Every nerve and every muscle stood out on their arms, on their backs and their thighs, and one almost heard them stretching to breaking point.
In the end Okonkwo threw the Cat.
That was many years ago, twenty years or more, and during this time Okonkwo’s fame had grown like a bush-fire in the harmattan.
He was tall and huge, and his bushy eyebrows and wide nose gave him a very severe look.
He breathed heavily, and it was said that, when he slept, his wives and children in their out-houses could hear him breathe.
When he walked, his heels hardly touched the ground and he seemed to walk on springs, as if he was going to pounce on somebody.
And he did pounce on people quite often.
He had a slight stammer and whenever he was angry and could not get his words out quickly enough, he would use his fists.
He had no patience with unsuccessful men.
He had had no patience with his father.
Unoka, for that was his father’s name, had died ten years ago.
In his day he was lazy and improvident and was quite incapable of thinking about tomorrow.
If any money came his way, and it seldom did, he immediately bought gourds of palm-wine, called round his neighbours and made merry.
He always said that whenever he saw a dead man’s mouth he saw the folly of not eating what one had in one’s lifetime.
Unoka was, of course, a 137 debtor, and he owned every neighbour some money, from a few cowries to quite substantial amounts.
3.1 Vocabulary wrestler – un lutteur to bring down an adversary – terrasser un adversaire a debtor – endetté les vieux s’accordèrent à dire que … – the old men agreed that … thigh – la cuisse reputation, fame – la réputation his bushy eyebrows – ses soupirs broussailleux bush-fire – un feu de brousse to stammer – bégayer fists – les poings (masc) huge – massif out-house – une case cowry – la caurie improvident – imprévoyant Amalinze was a wily craftsman – Amalinze était un professionnel retors.
as slippery as a fish in water – aussi souple et fuyant qu’un poisson dans l’eau.
3.2 Model Translation Okonkwo était bien connu a travers les neuf villages et même au-delà.
Sa réputation reposait sur de solides réussites personnelles.
Jeune homme de dix-huit ans, il avait apporté honneur et gloire à son village en terrassant Amalinze le chat.
Malinze était ce grand lutteur qui, pendant sept ans, était resté invaincu, d’Umuofia à Mbaino.
On l’appelait le Chat parce que son dos se refusait à toucher la terre.
Ce fut cet homme qu’Okonkwo terrassa dans une lutte dans dont les vieux s’accordèrent à dire que c’était une des plus acharnées depuis que le fondateur de leur ville s’était attaqué à un esprit de la brousse et l’avait affronté pendant sept jours et sept nuits.
138 Les tambours battaient et les flutes chantaient et les spectateurs retenaient leur respiration.
Amalinze était un professionnel retors, mais Okonkwo était aussi souple et fuyant qu’un poisson dans l’eau.
Tous leurs nerfs et tous leurs muscles se dessinaient en relief sur leurs bras, sur leur dos et sur leurs cuisses, et on les aurait presque entendus se tendre à se briser.
A la fin, Okonkwo terrassa le Chat.
Cela se passait il y a de nombreuses années, vingt ans ou plus, et au cours de cette période la réputation d’Okonkwo avait grandi comme un feu de brousse sous l’harmattan.
Il était grand et massif, et ses sourcils broussailleux et son large nez lui donnaient un aspect très sévère.
Sa respiration était forte, et on disait que lorsqu’il dormait ses femmes et ses enfants pouvaient l’entendre respirer de leurs cases.
Quand il marchait, ses talons touchaient à peine le sol et il semblait marcher sur des ressorts, comme un qui s’apprête à boxer quelqu’un.
Et il boxait effectivement les gens, très souvent.
Il bégayait légèrement et, chaque fois qu’il était en colère et ne parvenait pas à sortir ses mots assez vite, il se servait de ses poings.
Il n’avait aucune patience avec les hommes qui ne réussissaient pas.
Il n’avait eu aucune patience avec son père.
Unoka, car tel était le nom de son père, était mort dix ans auparavant.
En son temps, il était paresseux et imprévoyant et tout à fait incapable de penser au lendemain.
Si quelque argent lui tombait entre les mains, et cela était rare, il achetait immédiatement des calebasses de vin de palme, appelait ses voisins à la ronde et faisait fête.
Il disait toujours que chaque fois qu’il voyait la bouche d’un mort, il voyait la folie de ne pas manger ce qu’on possédait pendant qu’on était en vie.
Unoka était, bien sûr, un homme endetté, et il devait de l’argent à chacun de ses voisins depuis quelques cauris jusqu’à des sommes tout à fait substantielles.
3.3 A Few Observations There are many things that need to be treated in this passage, but you have to do some work on your own.
You have learnt a lot.
139 Now, use your dictionary and study the passage and the translation very carefully.
A few observations are these: “to pounce” is “se lancer sur”, “bondir sur”, but the translator has used ‘boxer’ which means to ‘box’.
The meaning is slightly different.
You will also observe that the word order of the sentences are not strictly followed.
Let us read an example.
He breathed heavily, and it was said that, when he slept, his wives and children in their out-houses could hear him breathe.
Sa respiration était forte, et on disait que lorsqu’il dormait ses femmes et enfants pouvaient l’entendre respirer de leurs cases.
Notice where “their out-houses” and “leurs cases” are placed in the original and the translation.
One very good way of intuitively and unconsciously acquiring good language possession in through the reading of good novels like the one you are treating.
As you read vey many novels, you will have no difficulty in your syntax and grammar.
Buy and read as many simple novels you can afford.
3.4 Transposition You are not likely to have forgotten what transposition is.
You cannot afford to forget it.
There are some examples in the text.
But first what is transposition?
It is the grammatical change of a part of speech that occurs during translation.
Some examples in the text are: He breathed heavily – Sa respiration était forte “Breathed” is a verb (past participle), but it is translated as a noun (respiration - breath) “He”, a personal pronoun is replaced with “sa”, possessive pronoun in French.
“The old men” is translated as “les vieux”.
140 Ordinarily, “vieux” is an adjective but the use of the plural article or determinant “les” makes it to mean “old men”.
Debtor (noun) – endetté (participe passé) He had no patience with unsuccessful men – Il n’avait aucune patience avec les homes qui ne réussissaient pas.
“Unsuccessful” is an adjective.
It is translated as “ne réussissaient pas” which is a verb.
4.0 Conclusion You have read at least a few paragraphs of Le monde s'effondre which is the French version of Things Fall Apart.
Your vocabulary has improved tremendously.
Recall some of them like : terrasser, lutteur, la cuisse, sourcils broussailleux, massif, bégayer.
5.0 Summary You have seen in a more practical sense what literary translation entails.
You have been reminded also of transposition.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Get the English version for the following words, expressions and sentences in the passage : nerfs, se dessinaient en relief sur leurs bras, était resté invaincu, il se servait de ses poings.
7.0 References Achebe, C. (1958) : Things Fall Apart, London, Heinemann Achebe, C. (1972): Le monde s’effondre, Dakar, Présence Africaine, translated into French by Michel Ligny.
141
