Course Guide Course Code CTH316 Course Title Hebrew Syntax Course Developer/Writer Dr. David Moomo Bible Society of Nigeria Apapa, Lagos Dr. Olubiyi Adeniyi Adewale National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor Dr. Afolorunso Olalekan Dairo Olabisi Onabanjo University Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State Course Coordinator Dr. Jacob A. Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Programme Leader Dr. Godwin I. Akper National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA CTH316 Hebrew Syntax National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2011 Printed 2011 ISBN: ------------------------------------- All Rights Reserved Printed by --------------------------------- For National Open University of Nigeria ii CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Content Page Introduction 4 What you will learn in this Course 4 Course Aims 4-5 Course Objectives 5 Working through this Course 6 Course Materials 6 Study Units 6 Set Textbooks 6-7 Assignment File 7 Presentation Schedule 7 Assessment 7 Tutor-Marked Assignments 8 Final Examination and Grading 8 Course Marking Scheme 8 Course Overview 8-9 How to get the Best from this Course 9-10 Tutors and Tutorials 10 Summary 11 iiiCTH316 Hebrew Syntax Introduction CTH316: Hebrew Syntax is a one-semester 3-credit unit course.
The course is available toward the award of first degree in Christian Theology.
The course material can also be useful for students in other levels of Christian Theology.
Besides, those who wish to broaden their knowledge on religious ideas, especially the role of biblical languages in the understanding of the Old Testament can find this course material beneficial.
This course is made up of 22 units.
It will begin with a review of CTH313-Biblical Grammar, which is a prerequisite to this course.
After this preview, meant to strengthen previous studies, we will start off from principles of syntax of Hebrew Grammar where we will explore all the nuances of the various moods of the Hebrew verb.
The Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what you are expected to know in each unit, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through the materials.
It also emphasizes the need for Tutor (cid:8211) Marked Assignments (TMAs).
Detailed information on TMAs is found in a separate file, which will be sent to you later.
There are periodic tutorial classes that are linked to this course.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of CTH316 is to help you develop a systematic growth in the use of biblical Hebrew so that you can get to the level where you can access the original language and do your translation/interpretation without recourse to any existing translation of the Old Testament.
This will help you in your personal Bible study, sermon preparation and the development of study guide for use in the Church.
Course Aims • The aim of this course is to help you discover the importance of language in the understanding of the Old Testament literature since the Old Testament was originally written in the Hebrew.
This will be achieved by: • Reviewing the major components of grammar studied in CTH313 • Giving you the distinctive traits of Hebrew verbs in terms of tense, mood, number, person and the voice (active or passive) iv CTH316 Hebrew Syntax • Giving you the distinctive traits of Hebrew nouns in terms of number, person and gender.
• Giving you tips of translation process so that you can begin to translate from small units of sentences.
• Giving you various Hebrew vocabularies that occur commonly in the Bible and the various shades of meaning they possess.
• Introducing you to biblical exegesis through translation and interpretation of actual Bible texts Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, there are set overall objectives.
Besides, each unit has its specific objectives.
The unit objectives would be included in the beginning of each unit.
You should read them before you start working through the unit.
It is advisable that you refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
At the end of every unit, you should also revise the unit objectives.
In this way you can be sure that you have done all you are expected to do in the unit.
Listed below are the broader objectives of this course.
It is expected that by meeting these objectives, the overall aims of the course must have been achieved.
At the end of this course, you should be able to: • Discuss the formation of the various moods of the Hebrew verbs.
• Discuss the functions of the various moods of the Hebrew verbs.
• Write any numeral in Hebrew.
• Explain syntactical functions of participles.
• Explain syntactical functions of infinitives.
• Translate any given passage in the Hebrew Bible.
• Undertake brief exegesis of any given passage in the Hebrew Bible.
vCTH316 Hebrew Syntax Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read the recommended books and the other materials provided by the National Open University (NOUN).
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at points during the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of this course there is a final examination.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course and what you have to do.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments file 5.
Presentation schedule You must obtain these materials.
You may contact your tutor if you have problems in obtaining the text materials.
Study Units There are twenty-one study units in this course.
They are listed as follows: Each unit contains a number of self-tests.
In general, these self-tests question you on the material you have just covered or require you to apply the material in some ways, and thereby, help you to gauge your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the material.
Together with your tutor marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Set Textbooks These textbooks are recommended for your study in this course: Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
vi CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Books are however very scarce in the area of languages however some websites can give you assistance in seeing what the original manuscripts look like and not a full study.
For these sites see the following: www.bible.org www.religion-online.org www.biblestudies.org Assignment file In this file you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count toward the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignment will be found in the assignment file itself and later in this Course Guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The (cid:8220)presentation schedule(cid:8221) included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of your tutor marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignment as and when due.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
First are the tutor marked assignments; second, there is a written examination.
While working on your assignments, you are expected to apply information and knowledge acquired during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final three-hour examination.
This will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
viiCTH316 Hebrew Syntax Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are fifteen tutor assignments in this course.
You need to submit all the assignments.
The best three (that is, the three with the highest grades of fifteen assignments) will be counted.
The total mark of the best three will be 30% of your total course mark.
Assignments for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You should be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set textbooks, reading and study units.
However, you are advised to use other references to broaden your viewpoint and provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
Final Examination and Grading The examination will consist of questions you will come across in tutor marked assignments.
You are therefore advised to revise the entire course after studying the last unit before you sit for the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The table below gives a breakdown of the course mark: Assessment Marks Assignments 1-21 Three assignments, best three marks of the assignments counts for 30% of course marks.
Final examination The final examination counts for 70% of overall marks.
Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of works you should take to complete.
Unit Title of Work Week(cid:8217)s Assessment Activity (end of unit) Course Guide 1 The Article Assignment 1 2 The Prepositions Assignment 2 3 The Conjunction and the Assignment 4 Adjectives 4 Introduction to the Noun in Assignment 4 Hebrew viii CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 5 The Pronouns Assignments 5 6 Basic Principles of Syntax Assignment 6 7 The Perfect Verb in Hebrew Assignment 7 8 The Imperfect Verb in Hebrew Assignment 8 9 The Imperative, Infinitive and Assignment 9 Participles in Hebrew Verbs 10 The Stems of the Hebrew Verb Assignment 10 11 The Perfect of other Verb Stems Assignment 11 12 The Imperfect of other Verb Assignment 12 Stems 13 The Imperative, Infinitive and Assignment 13 Participles in other Verb Stems 14 The Irregular Verbs Assignment 14 15 The Waw Consecutive Assignment 15 16 The Numerals Assignment 16 17 Hebrew Verbs and the Principles Assignment 17 of Syntax 18 The Verb in the Indicative Mood Assignment 18 19 The Verb in the Subjunctive and Assignment 19 Voluntative Moods 20 The Imperative and the Assignment 20 Infinitive 21 The Participles Assignment 21 22 Practical Examples of Syntactic Assignment 22 Relation 23 24 25 Table 2: Course Overview How to Get the Best from this Course In distance learning the study units replace the university Lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of the distance learning system.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Following this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives enable you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
The objectives should guide your study.
After studying the units must cross check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you adhere strictly to ixCTH316 Hebrew Syntax this art of checking whether the objective is achieved or not, you will definitely improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a (cid:8220)Reading(cid:8221) section.
Whenever you need help, don(cid:8217)t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read through this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Plan your study schedule.
You should refer to the (cid:8216)course overview(cid:8217) for more details.
Find out the time you are expected to spend on each unit and when and how to turn in your assignments.
3.
Stick to your study schedule.
Don(cid:8217)t allow anything to get you distracted from your study schedule.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and objectives for the unit.
5.
Gather the study material you need.
All you need or a unit is given in the (cid:8216)Overview(cid:8217) at the beginning of each unit.
The study unit you are working on and one of your set books should be on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit has been arranged in a sequential order.
Instructions would be given on where to read from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
7. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm you have achieved them.
8.
Don(cid:8217)t proceed to the next unit, until you are sure you have achieved the objectives of the unit you are working on.
9.
Don(cid:8217)t wait until your assignment is returned before working on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
10.
When you complete the last unit, you can be preparing for exams.
Be sure that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
x CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Tutors and Tutorials There are 8 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
The dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor will be communicated to you.
This will be done as you are allocated to a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact our tutor by telephone, e-mail or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be the circumstances in which you will find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
• You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises, and • You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor(cid:8217)s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to interact with your tutor by asking questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To maximize the benefits of the course tutorials, it is advisable that you prepare a question list before attending them.
When you participate in the discussions your intellectually life will be deeply enriched.
Summary CTH316 exposes you to the background history and development of Old Testament Text as well as the biblical Hebrew.
It will also lead you to a working knowledge of the language and the ability to consult the original language of the Bible thereby enriching your knowledge of the Bible.
On successful completion of this course, you will be able to answer questions such as: 1.
What are the functions of the indicative mood?
2.
How is the imperative mood formed?
xiCTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.
What are the various uses of the infinitive?
4.
What is the difference between the participle and the infinitive?
5.
What is the difference between the perfect and the imperfect state?
6.
What does the cohortative function of the voluntative mood stand for?
7.
How would you translate a relative perfect?
8.
How would you translate a perfect of experience?
9.
How many forms of imperfect exist in Hebrew language?
10.
Hiow does the imperative mood functions in the Hebrew language?
xii CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Course Code CTH316 Course Title Hebrew Syntax Course Developer/Writer Dr. David Moomo Bible Society of Nigeria Apapa, Lagos Dr. Olubiyi Adeniyi Adewale National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos Course Editor Dr. Afolorunso Olalekan Dairo Olabisi Onabanjo University Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State Course Coordinator Dr. Jacob A. Owolabi National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Programme Leader Dr. Godwin I. Akper National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xiiiCTH316 Hebrew Syntax National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2011 Printed 2011 ISBN: ------------------------------------- All Rights Reserved Printed by --------------------------------- For National Open University of Nigeria xiv CTH316 Hebrew Syntax CONTENTS PAGES Module 1 4 Unit 1 The Articles Unit 2 The Prepositions Unit 3 The Conjunction and the Adjective Unit 4 Introduction to the Noun in Hebrew Unit 5 The Pronouns Unit 6 Basic Principles of Syntax Unit 7 The Perfect Verb in Hebrew Unit 8 The Imperfect Verb in Hebrew Module 2 Unit 1 The Imperative, Infinitive and Participles in Hebrew Verb Unit 2 The Stems of the Hebrew Verbs Unit 3 The Perfect of other Verb Stems Unit 4 The Imperfect of other Verb Stems Unit 5 The Imperative, Infinitive and Participles of Other Verb Stems Unit 6 The Irregular Verbs Unit 7 The Waw Consecutive Unit 8 The Numerals Module 3 Unit 1 Hebrew Verbs and the Principles of Syntax Unit 2 The Verb in the Indicative Mood Unit 3 The Verb in the Subjuncttive and the Voluntative Moods Unit 4 The Imperative and the Infinitive Unit 5 The Participles Unit 6 Practical Examples of Syntactic Relations xvCTH316 Hebrew Syntax MODULE 1 UNIT 1: THE ARTICLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Introducing the Article in Hebrew 3.3 Table for Writing Articles in Hebrew 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcomes to the first unit of this module.
We will begin with a review of the articles.
In the first part of this course, that is, CTH313- Hebrew Grammar, you have been taught the formation of the articles in the Hebrew language as well as their functions.
You might need to revise this and also revise the formation and the functions of the article in the English language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Write the definite article in Hebrew • State the main rule governing the writing of articles in Hebrew • List the exceptions to the rule of writing articles in Hebrew • State the difference between the definite and the indefinite article 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English earth (f) way covenant (f) Cre)e K7red%e tyrib%; 16 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax sword word priest brexe rbfd%f Nh''k%o king peace year (f) K7leme MwOl#f hnf#f NB: The nouns marked (f) are feminine nouns in the Hebrew language.
3.2 Introducing the Article in Hebrew Unlike the English language where we have the definite and indefinite article, but like the Greek language, there is no indefinite article in the Hebrew language.
The indefinite article is always indicated by the absence of the definite article.
Under normal conditions, the definite article is a prefix that is joined to the word so that it becomes one word along with its noun both in writing and pronunciation.
However, it is important to note that unlike the Greek language, the definite article in the Hebrew language is not gender or number sensitive, that is, it does not change form due to gender or number.
The rule of writing the definite article in Hebrew is this: the consonant he (h) and would be joined to the noun with the vowel pathah and would add a dagesh forte in the following consonant, if the consonant accepts a dagesh forte.
Using the Hebrew word for voice as an example, lwOq would be translated (cid:8216)a voice(cid:8217) and lwOq%ha would be translated (cid:8216)the voice(cid:8217).
After treating the main rule, let us now turn our attention to the exceptions to the main rule.
• For the consonants that do not take dagesh forte, the vowel before the consonants would be heightened.
This implies that the pathah under the h would become a kamets.
For example, for the word #)oro, instead of #)oroha, we would have #)orohf.
You must also remember at this point that h and x are said to be doubled by implication and so the vowel pointing of the article would remain the same as in brexeha.
• Even for this exception above, there are further exceptions.
These few exceptions are better learnt as part of the vocabulary along with its main principle so that when you come across it in other words, you would remember it.
The first of the words is Cre)e (earth).
With the definite article, Cre)e would now be written as Cre)fhf (the earth).
The second word is M(a (people), which would now be written as M(fhf (the people) with the definite article.
The third word is rhf 17CTH316 Hebrew Syntax (mountain) and with the definite article it would be written as rhfhf (the mountain).
• Finally, the normal article, when it comes before xf, unaccented hf and unaccented (f would be written as he.
A good example of this is gxf (festival) which would be written as gxfhe (the festival).
3.3 Table for Writing Articles in Hebrew Having gone through all these, the principles can be summarized in this table as follows: Definite Circumstance of Use Example Article Form %ha The normal article form lwOq%ha (the voice) hf Article before ), r and ( b)fhf (the father) ha Article before h and x brexeha (the sword) he Article before xf, unaccented hf gxfhe (the festival) and (f 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied the use of articles in the Hebrew language.
You have been taught that there is no indefinite article in the Hebrew language and the absence of the definite article implies the indefinite article.
You have learnt that the normal way of writing the definite article is to attach h which is pointed with a pathah along with a dahgesh forte in the next consonant to the word that would carry the definite article.
The use of a dagesh forte in the first letter of the substantive thus would create exceptions especially when the first consonant of the substantive happens to be a guttural.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • There is no indefinite article in the Hebrew language and the absence of the definite article implies the indefinite article.
• The normal way of writing the definite article is to attach h which is pointed with a pathah along with a dahgesh forte in the next consonant to the word that would carry the definite article.
18 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax • The use of a dagesh forte in the first letter of the substantive thus would create exceptions especially when the first consonant of the substantive happens to be a guttural.
• For the consonants that do not take dagesh forte, the vowel before the consonants would be heightened from pathah to a kamets.
For example, for the word #)oro, instead of #)oroha, we would have #)orohf.
• Because h and x are said to be doubled by implication the vowel pointing of the article would remain the same as in brexeha.
• When the normal article comes before xf, unaccented hf and unaccented (f it would be written as he.
A good example of this is gxf (festival) which would be written as gxfhe (the festival).
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Add the proper article to the following words: Myf, bhfzf, rwO), dleye, M)', K7#exo, l)', MwOl#f, sw%s, dsexe Translate the following to Hebrew The man, the father, the day, the sword, the heart, the son, the priest, the brother, the year, the waters 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER STUDIES Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and the Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
19CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 2: THE PREPOSITIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Introducing the Hebrew Prepositions 3.3 Inseparable Prepositions 3.4 Preposition Nmi 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we have gone through a study of the definite article in the Hebrew language.
You have been taught that there is no indefinite article in Hebrew and that the absence of the definite article implies the presence of the indefinite article.
In this unit, we are going to go through another impotant group of words in language: the prepositions.
In this unit you would learn about the different types of preposition and how they are written.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you would be able to: • Identify the prepositions of the Hebrew language • Differentiate between the separable and the inseparable prepositions • Write a preposition to any given Hebrew word 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English light house daughter (f) rwO) tyib%a tb%a blood darkness sea Md%f K7#exo Myf 20 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax place prophet Saul MwOqmf )ybinf lwO)#fO 3.2 Introducing the Hebrew Prepositions As in other languages, the prepositions are used to denote the relationship between two substantives.
In the Hebrew language however, there are two types of prepositions: the inseparable and the separable prepositions.
3.3 Inseparable Prepositions The inseparable prepositions in the Hebrew language are three and they are written as prefixes to the word they are to work with.
The three inseparable prepositions are: b%; in, by, with k%; as, like, according to l; to, for, at As you would have noticed, each of the prepositions above carries about three different meanings.
In this case, the context would eventually decide which of the three meanings you are going to use.
Having seen the prepositions, the next thing is to go on and examine the usage of these prepositions.
If you are very observant, you would have noticed that all the three prepositions above carry a shewa, and this would have implications for its usage.
In the normal usage, the preposition would be prefixed to the substantive.
The following are examples: M#''b%; in a name or by a name or with a name rbfdfk%; according to a word, like a word lwOql; to a voice, for a voice The following are the exceptions to this normal rule: Exception 1 Before a simple shewa, the shewa of the preposition would become a hirek as in the following examples: tyrib:b%i by a covenant; the Hebrew word tyrib: means covenant 21CTH316 Hebrew Syntax hmfh''b;k%i like cattle; the Hebrew word hmfh''b; means cattle Exception 2 If the preposition is to be prefixed to a compound shewa, the simple shewa of the preposition would take the short vowel of the class of the compound shewa.
Examine the following example closely: r#eO)jk%a like who; the Hebrew word r#eO)j has hatheph pathah as its compound shewa and thus the preposition k takes pathah as its vowel.
Exception 3 If the preposition is to be prefixed to the word that has a definite article, the h of the definite article would be substituted with the consonant of the preposition.
Examine the following examples closely: MwOy%b%a in the day; this is the combination of MwOy%ha (the day) and the preposition b; (in).
You would note that instead of having MwOy%hab; we have MwOy%b%a because the consonant of the preposition (in this case, b) has taken the place of the consonant of the definite article (h).
#O)rok%f like a head; this is the combination of #O)rohf (the head) and the preposition k; (like).
You would note that instead of having #O)rohfk%; we have #O)rok%f because the consonant of the preposition (in this case, k) has taken the place of the consonant of the definite article (h).
The following are the summary of all that has been explained above: • The inseparable preposition is pointed with a shewa except if the word to which it is prefixed beings with a consonant that is also pointed with a shewa or a word that already have the definite article.
• When two vocal shewas follow one another, the shewa of the preposition becomes a hirek.
• If the second shewa is a compound shewa, the shewa of the preposition would become the short full vowel of the same class of the compound shewa.
22 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax • If the preposition is prefixed to the word that already has a definite article, the consonant of the definite article is substituted with the definite article of the preposition.
3.4 Preposition Nmi Preposition Nmi is a unique preposition of the Hebrew language.
It is unique because it could be written in two different ways.
As an inseparable preposition, it is written as m, pointed with hirek and with a dagesh forte in the following consonant.
A good example is lwOq%mi (from a voice).
It could also be written as a separate word but joined with a makkeph to the word it should be prefixed to.
This is used mostly when it is to be used along with a word that already carries the definite article.
A good example is lwOq%ha-Nmi (from the voice).
Exception 1 If Nmi is to be prefixed to a word beginning with h and x, since they are doubled by implication and do not take the dagesh forte, it would be written as it should have been written but without the dagesh forte.
For example, with Cw%x, it would be written as Cw%xmi.
Exception 2 If Nmi is to be prefixed to a word beginning with ) ( and r, it would be written as m''.
This is because the gutturals would reject being doubled; hence the hirek would be heightened to a tsere.
A good example is rwO)m'' (from light).
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt about the two categories of Hebrew preposition, namely the separable prepositions and the preposition Nmi that can be written both as a separable and inseparable preposition.
You have learnt that the inseparable prepositions are written as a prefix joined to the substantive and they carry shewa as their vowel.
Nmi in its case would be joined with a makkeph to the substantive especially when the substantive carry the definite article.
As an inseparable preposition, Nmi would loose the 23CTH316 Hebrew Syntax final nun and then be prefixed to the substantive which would now carry a dagesh forte in its first consonant.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • There are three main inseparable prepositions in the Hebrew language which are written as prefixes to the substantive.
The three are: b%; (in, by, with); k%; (as, like, according to) and l; (to, for, at).
• In the normal usage, the preposition would be prefixed to the substantive.
The following are examples: M#''b%; (in a name or by a name or with a name); rbfdfk%; (according to a word, like a word) and lwOql; (to a voice, for a voice).
• Note however that before a simple shewa, the shewa of the preposition would become a hirek as in tyrib:b%i (by a covenant).
• If the preposition is to be prefixed to a consonant carrying a compound shewa, the simple shewa of the preposition would take the short vowel of the class of the compound shewa as in r#eO)jk%a (like who).
• If the preposition is prefixed to the word that has a definite article, the h of the definite article would be substituted with the consonant of the preposition as in MwOy%b%a (in the day).
• Preposition Nmi could be written as an inseparable preposition as in lwOq%mi (from a voice) and as a separable preposition as in lwOq%ha-Nmi (from the voice).
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Pronounce and translate the following words: #O)rom'', ry(ib%f, Nb%'la, MwOqm%fb%a, rbfdfk%;, )ybinf%mi, ry(ihf-Nmi, Md%fb%a, K7#eO, dyfl; Translate the following to Hebrew: To the day, in a name, for the man, from head to heart, by the covenant, from darkness to the light, for a man, according to the word of God, the daughter, the son 24 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and the Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
25CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 3: THE CONJUNCTION AND THE ADJECTIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Introducing the Conjunction 3.3 Introducing the Adjective 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we have dealt with the prepositions.
You have known that the prepositions are written as prefixes to the substantive in Hebrew.
You should have also know that there are four prepositions in Hebrew with preposition Nmi being the fourth one and could be written separately but joined with a makkeph to the substantive or written as a prefix like the others.
In this unit however, we are going to focus our attention on the conjunction and the adjectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Explain how the conjunction is written in Hebrew • List the exceptions to the general rule of writing the conjunctions • Identify the type of adjective used in any piece of writing • Identify the normal word order in Hebrew language • Write the preposition in Hebrew • Use any adjective attributively or predicatively 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English NwOd)f lord lwOdg%f great #Odfxf new 26 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax bread child tree Mxele dleye C(' t(' time (f) #OwOdqf holy Mymit%f perfect 3.2 Introducing the Conjunction Under normal conditions, the conjunction (that is, the word that is used to join words and thoughts together) is written as a waw with a shewa.
In Hebrew, it would be w;.
An example is dleyew; (and a child).
Exception 1 Like all other rules that have been treated before, the writing of conjunctions also has exceptions.
The first exception to the rule is when the conjunction is to come before b, m, and p. In this case, it would be written as a shurek.
Examples are: MwOqmfw% and Nb''w%.
Exception 2 Also, before the consonants that are pointed with simple shewas, the preposition would also be written like shurek as in exception 1 above.
A good example is tw%md;w% (and likeness).
Exception 3 When the preposition is to follow consonants that are pointed with compound shewas and not simple shewas as in exception 2 above, the waw of the conjunction would drop its shewa and take the short vowel of the same class with the compound shewa.
A good example is the Hebrew word yni)Jwa (and I).
If you examine this word very well, you will notice that, the consonant waw is pointed with pathah, the short vowel of the (cid:8216)a(cid:8217) class vowel, to which the compound shewa belongs.
Exception 4 You need to observe this exception very well because it is a little bit complicated and it concerns only one Hebrew word.
Before the word yhiy:, the conjunction would be written as wI.
Thus with the conjunction, you would have yhiywI (instead of yhiy:w:).
This is so because two vocal shewas cannot follow one another, thus, the first shewa is pressed to a hirek.
Remember also that when a yodh follows a hirek immediately, it becomes a 27CTH316 Hebrew Syntax vowel called hirek-yodh; and because two vowels cannot follow one another without any intervening consonant, the shewa cannot be retained.
3.3 Introducing the Adjective Like in the Greek language, the adjective in the Hebrew language can be used both attributively and predicatively.
The Attributive Use The adjective is said to be used attributively if it modifies or qualifies a substantive.
In this case, the adjective would come after the substantive noun and it would agree with the noun in gender, number and definiteness.
In other words, if the noun is feminine and singular and also an indefinite noun, the adjective would also be feminine, singular and indefinite.
Examples are: bwO+ M#O' (a good name); bwO+%ha M#'O%ha (the good name); lwOdg%haw: bwO+%ha lwOq%ha (literally: the voice, the good and the great; in polished English: the good and the great voice).
I would advice that when you translate that you first do a literal translation before polishing the translation to smooth English.
Doing this would show you how close in thought most African culture are to the first century Palestinian thought.
The Predicative Use The adjective is said to be used predicatively when it adds the verb to be to the substantive.
In this case, the adjective would agree with the substantive in gender and number but would not take the definite article and would also stand before the substantive.
For example, lwOq%ha bwO+ (the voice is good); lwOdg%haw: lwOq%ha bwO+ (the voice is good and great).
It is very important at this point to let you know a very important grammatical and syntactical issue.
The normal order in which the adjectives and the substantives are written is as discussed above.
However, for the purpose of emphasis, this order can be inverted.
When this is done, the word that is placed in the first position is the emphasized word.
For example, though the phrase bwO+%ha M#O%'ha would rightly be translated (cid:8220)the good name,(cid:8221) the emphasis would be on the adjective (cid:8216)good(cid:8217).
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have studied how the conjunction is written in the Hebrew language, which is the use of the consonant waw pointed with a shewa.
28 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax You have also been told that the presence of a shewa under the waw would lead to some changes especially with another consonant pointed with a simple or a compound shewa.
You have also been taught that the adjective can be used attributively and predicatively and you should be able to identify the way in which the adjective has been used.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have been taught in this unit: • The conjunction is written as a waw with a shewa, that is, w; • Before b, m, and p it would be written as a shurek that is, w% • Before the consonants pointed with simple shewas, the preposition is written like shurek • Before consonants pointed with compound shewas the waw of the conjunction would drop its shewa and take the short vowel of the same class with the compound shewa.
• The adjective is used attributively if it modifies or qualifies a substantive.
In attributive use, the adjective would come after the substantive noun and it would agree with the noun in gender, number and definiteness.
• The adjective is used predicatively when it adds the verb to be to the substantive.
In predicative use, the adjective would agree with the substantive in • gender and number but would not take the definite article and would also stand before the substantive.
When word order is reversed, the first word carries the emphasis.
• 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following words to English lwOdg%F, lwOdg%F C('h,f C('hf Mymitf%, bwO+%ha dleyeh,a dleye bwO+, Mdf)fh,f NwOd)fh,f #wdqf dley%eha, bwO+%ha, bwO+%ha Nb%'ha, K7#eOxha, brexeha lwOdgf%ha, K7#eOxh,a #OwOdq%fha K7lem%eh,a NwOd)f. Translate the following words to Hebrew A great day, the good brother, in the great day, the great man is good, the lord and the son, father and daughter, light and darkness, the tree is perfect, the bread is holy.
29CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and the Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
30 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 4: INTRODUCTION TO THE NOUN IN HEBREW CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Cases in Hebrew Noun 3.3 Marking the Direct Object 3.4 Showing Direction and Motion 3.5 Construct Relation 3.6 Gender and Number 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, we have examined various grammatical and syntactical issues that are supposed to be the ground rules for the language.
In this unit, we would be looking at the nouns and the various salient issues affecting the nouns.
I would implore you to go back to the course material on Greek Grammar and study the introduction to the nouns.
This would serve as a reminder to you on the general issues relating to the nouns, especially the cases and the functions of the cases.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Show how case function is determined in Hebrew language • Identify the marking of a direct object • Explain how motion or direction is written in Hebrew • Define construct relation • Explain the use of construct relation • Discuss how plural forms are written in Hebrew • Discuss the formation of the genders in Hebrew 31CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English one faces woman dxf)e Mynip% h#%Of)i servant all, every evening dbe(e lk%o bre(e mouth law, tent hp%e hrfwOt% lhe)o instruction 3.2 Cases in Hebrew Noun Nominative Case Unlike the Greek language, the nominative case in the Hebrew language does not have identical case endings.
The best way to locate the nominative case noun in the Hebrew language is the position of the noun within the sentence.
Under normal conditions in the Hebrew language, the nominative case noun, which performs the functions of the subject of the sentence, comes after the finite verb.
Genitive Case The genitive case is the case that indicates the possessive noun.
This is done in Hebrew by a special construction called the construct relations.
As the content would have shown you, this would be treated shortly.
Ablative Case The ablative case is the case of separation.
This function in the Hebrew language is fulfilled by the use of the preposition -Nmi.
Dative Case This is the case of interest and in the Hebrew, this function is fulfilled by the use of the preposition l;.
Locative Case The locative case is the case that shows the spatial position of nouns.
This function is fulfilled by the preposition b; in conjunction with the context.
32 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Other words that can also be used for this are: l(,a txat%,a-l)e,lce)' and yn'p;li among others.
Instrumental Case The instrumental case is the case that gives us an idea of the instrumentality through which certain things are done.
This function is fulfilled by the preposition b; and M(i in conjunction with the context.
Please note that it is the context that would help decide the difference between the locative and the instrumental cases.
Accusative Case The accusative case is the case that designates the direct object.
However, in the Hebrew language, this is not marked by identical word endings but by the position of the object in the sentence.
In the Hebrew language, the direct object, under normal conditions, follows the subject of the sentence.
3.3 Marking the Direct Object When a direct object carries the definite article, it is usually marked in the Hebrew language by the word t)'.
Please note that this word cannot be translated as it is only marking the direct object carrying the definite article.
It is also present only in prose and not in poetry.
3.4 Showing Direction and Motion Direction and motion towards a place in the Hebrew is indicated by the use of kamets that is followed by he, that is, h f. In this case, the kamets, which is a vowel would become the vowel pointing for the last letter of the word (which under normal conditions would be a consonant).
For example while rhfhf would be translated (cid:8220)the mountain(cid:8221), hrfhfhf would be translated (cid:8220)towards the mountain(cid:8221).
3.5 Construct Relation In the Hebrew language, when two nouns are placed immediately after one another without any punctuation mark or any other word, they are said to be in construct relations.
The governing substantive of the two nouns would be said to be in construct state and the other would be in the absolute state.
For example, in the phrase #Oy)ihf sw%s (this phrase would be translated (cid:8220)the horse of the man(cid:8221) or (cid:8220)the man(cid:8217)s horse(cid:8221) in polished English) the governing 33CTH316 Hebrew Syntax substantive is sw%s and would be in the construct state while #Oy)ihf would be in the absolute state.
In this construction, the first noun (substantive) would be the governing substantive and it would never take the definite article even if the other does.
Whenever this construction takes place, the two words would form a compound word.
The following are examples of some nouns in construct relation: #Oy)i rbad%; a word of a man a man(cid:8217)s word Nb%'ha dya the hand of the son the son(cid:8217)s hand Cre)fhf lk%f (the) all of the earth the whole earth hwhy trawOt% law of Yahweh Yahweh(cid:8217)s law 3.6 Gender and Number Unlike the Greek and the English language, Hebrew has only two genders: masculine and feminine.
In terms of numbers however, while the other two languages has only two forms, that is, singular and plural, Hebrew language has three forms, namely: singular, plural and dual.
The dual number is used specifically for objects that go in pairs like ears, eyes and feet.
Below are the various endings for the gender and the number: Gender State Singular Plural Dual Masculine Absolute sw%s Mysiw%s Myisaw%s Construct sw%s ys'w%s ys'w%s Feminine Absolute hsfw%s twOsw%s Myitasfw%s Construct hsaw%s twOsw%s yt's;w%s Please take note of the following: a.
The masculine singular noun of the Hebrew language has no identical ending.
The position of the word in the sentence indicates its function.
b.
To form the plural form of the masculine noun, the suffix Myi is usually added to the masculine singular form.
c. The normal feminine singular ending is h which is identical with the sign of direction or motion.
In this case, the context would tell you whether it is a feminine noun or the sign of direction.
But note please that most words ending in h fare feminine nouns.
Examples are hrf#of (princess), hsfw%s (mare) and hbfwO+ (good).
34 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax d. To form the plural of the feminine noun, all you need to do is to add the suffix twO as in the following examples: twOrwOd% (generations) and twObwO+ (good ones-a substantive use of an adjective).
e. In the dual form of numbers, the ending for the masculine and the feminine nouns are similar and it is Myi as in Myidyf (a pair of hands) and Myinaz:)f (a pair of ears) Please note that there are some irregular plurals that need to be studied on their own.
They are treated briefly below: a.
There are some masculine nouns that their plural form is identical with the feminine plural noun ending as in twOb)f (fathers), twOmwOqm; (places), twOlwOq (voices) and twOm#O' (names).
b.
There are some feminine nouns that their plural form is identical with the masculine plural noun ending as in MyniwOy (doves), and Myl%imi (words; this is from another Hebrew word for word, hl%fmi).
c. There are some nouns that have two plural forms; one in the masculine and the other in the feminine.
Examples are rwOd% (generation), ry#iO (song) and hnf#O (year).
d. Finally, there are some nouns that are found only in the plural and never in the singular form.
These include Myima#f (heavens), Myima (waters) and Mynip%f (faces).
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been taught the various cases and how they are formed in the Hebrew language.
Most especially is the use of construct relation in expressing the possessive case.
Finally, the use of gender and number is also explained.
You are also taught that there are only masculine and feminine genders in Hebrew (that is, there is no neuter noun) and there are also three numbers (singular, plural and dual).
You have also been shown some nouns that are regarded as irregular nouns.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • When a direct object carries the definite article, it is usually marked in the Hebrew language by the word t)'.
35CTH316 Hebrew Syntax • Direction and motion towards a place in the Hebrew is indicated by the use h f. • When two nouns are placed immediately after one another they are said to be in construct relations.
• The governing substantive of the two nouns would be said to be in construct state and the other would be in the absolute state.
• Unlike the Greek and the English language, Hebrew has only two genders: masculine and feminine.
• In terms of numbers however, while the other two languages has only two forms, that is, singular and plural, Hebrew language has three forms, namely: singular, plural and dual.
• The dual number is used specifically for objects that go in pairs like ears, eyes and feet 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following to English Myin ,#Oy)i rbad%; ,Nb%'ha dya ,Cre)fhf lk%f , hwhy trawOt% Translate the following to Hebrew: The law of the covenant, the man toward the mountain, the word of God is perfect, the instruction for the king, the son of the prophet, the good woman.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
36 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 5: THE PRONOUNS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 A Brief Introduction to the Pronouns 3.3 Personal Pronouns 3.4 Demonstrative Pronouns 3.5 Relative Pronouns 3.6 Interrogative Pronouns 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have been introduced to the Hebrew nouns and their various cases in the Hebrew language.
In this unit, you would be examining the pronouns which should literally follow after the study of the nouns because they pretty run along the same rules since the pronouns are used instead of the nouns.
The various aspects of the pronoun would be examined in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Differentiate between subject and object pronouns • Write the demonstrative pronouns in Hebrew • Differentiate between the singular and the plural pronouns • Identify the relative pronoun in Hebrew • Write out all the interrogative pronouns 37CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English this (m) that (m) who hze )w%h ymi this (f) that (f) what t)Oz )yhi hmf that (m) where who, which, what )w%h y)' r#eO)J 3.2 A Brief Introduction to the Pronouns As the name suggests, pronouns are the words used in place of nouns.
Their use basically helps to reduce monotony that would have arisen as a result of continuous use of a particular noun.
There are various classes of the pronoun, namely: personal, demonstrative, relative and interrogative pronouns.
3.3 Personal Pronouns There are two classes of personal pronouns: the subject personal pronoun and the object personal pronoun.
In the Hebrew language, the subject personal pronouns are written as distinct words and are called separate forms.
The object pronouns are also of two types.
The first type is usually attached to a noun thus indicating a genitive relationship.
They are the fragments of personal pronouns that are attached to the substantive.
The other pronouns are usually attached to a verb and thus indicate an accusative relationship.
Below are the separate forms of subject personal pronouns: Singular Plural Pronoun Meaning Pronoun Meaning I we yni)J wOnx;na ykinO)f wOnx;na)J you (masculine) you (masculine) ht%f)a Mt%e)a you (feminine) you (feminine) t%;)a hnft%')a )w%h he Mh', hm%fh' they (masculine) )yhi she Nh', hn%fh' they (feminine) It is important for you to note that these pronouns are not used under normal conditions to express the subject of the verb because the Hebrew 38 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax verb always contains the pronominal subject.
In this case, the subject pronoun is used more in the Hebrew to express an emphasis of the subject- nominative.
This is called the casus pendens.
For example, the Hebrew word l#amf means (he ruled).
If I now say l#amf )w%h would then be translated (cid:8220)as for him, he ruled(cid:8221) (the emphasis is on he).
3.4 Demonstrative Pronouns Demonstrative pronouns are pronouns that are used to point out (that is, demonstrate) what is being talked about.
They can be in the singular or in the plural and can also point to what is far and what is near.
Below are the demonstrative pronouns of the Hebrew language: Singular Plural Gender Hebrew English Gender Hebrew English Masculine this Common these hze hl%e)' Feminine t)Oz Masculine )w%h that Masculine Mh' or those hm%fh' Feminine )yhi Feminine Nh' or hn%fh' Please note that the pronouns should conform to the rules that are applicable to the adjectives, especially with regard to the use of the article.
This is to say that when they are used attributively, they take the article but when they are used predicatively, they would not take the article.
The following examples illustrate the use of the demonstrative article: bwO+ #Oy)i hze this (is) a good man bwO+%ha #Oy)ihf hze this (is) the good man hze%ha #Oy)ihf this man t)z%ha h#%Of)ihf this woman hz%ha bwO+%ha #Oy)ihf this good man If you examine the above sentences carefully, you would discover that the first two sentences are predicative use of the pronoun.
As we have said earlier, when use predicatively, the demonstrative pronouns did not take the definite article but when used attributively, they take the definite article.
39CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.5 Relative Pronouns There is only one relative pronoun in the Hebrew language.
It is written as r#Oe)J.
This same word is translated as (cid:8216)who(cid:8217), (cid:8216)which(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)that(cid:8217).
Thus, it is the context that would help you to determine the actual meaning.
It has to be noted however that in the later development of Hebrew, a shortened form of the relative pronoun developed and it is in two forms: #Oe or #Oa.
These occurrences are however rare.
3.6 Interrogative Pronouns The interrogative pronouns, as their name goes, are pronouns that are used to ask questions.
There are two interrogative pronouns: ymi (meaning (cid:8216)who(cid:8217) and is used to refer to human beings) and hmf (meaning (cid:8216)what(cid:8217) and is used to refer to inanimate things).
Study the following examples very well: ht%f)a ymi who are you?
)yhi-hma what is that?
You need to note however that the vowel pointing of the interrogative pronoun (hmf) would vary depending on the consonant which follows the pronoun.
This is due to the fact that most of the time; hma is joined to the word that follows it by a makkeph.
a.
If the word that follows hmf carries a dagesh forte, it would be pointed with pathah as written above, for example, K7l%f-hma meaning (cid:8216)what to you?
(cid:8217) b.
If the word that follows hmf starts with either h or x, it would be pointed with pathah as written above because h and x are said to be doubled by implication, for example, )yhi-hma meaning (cid:8216)what is that?
(cid:8217) c. If the word that follows hmf starts with either ), ( or r, it would be pointed with kamets as written above because ), ( and r do not receive the dagesh forte, for example, hl%e)'-hmf meaning (cid:8216)what are these?
(cid:8217) d. If the word that follows hmf starts with a guttural that is pointed with a kamets, it would be pointed with a seghol as written above, for example, ytiy#oi(f-hme meaning (cid:8216)what have I done?
(cid:8217) 40 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Before concluding the discussion on interrogative pronouns, it is important for you to know that there is a Hebrew word y)' meaning (cid:8216)where(cid:8217) which is usually used with the demonstrative pronoun (hze) to form an interrogative pronoun.
A good example is K7red%eha hze-y)' which would be translated (cid:8216)which way?
(cid:8217) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied the major pronouns of the Hebrew language.
These include the personal, the demonstrative, the relative and the interrogative pronouns.
By now, you should be able to distinguish between the various pointing of the interrogative pronoun (hmf) which is dictated by the consonant that follows.
You have also seen the two forms of the personal pronoun, that is, the separate forms and the others that are written as suffixes to the noun.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • There are two classes of personal pronouns: the subject personal pronoun and the object personal pronoun.
• In the Hebrew language, the subject personal pronouns are written as distinct words and are called separate forms.
• The object pronouns are also of two types.
The first type is usually attached to a noun thus indicating a genitive relationship.
• The other pronouns are usually attached to a verb and thus indicate an accusative relationship.
• The subject pronoun is used more in the Hebrew to express an emphasis of the subject-nominative.
This is called the casus pendens.
• Demonstrative pronouns are pronouns that are used to point out (that is, demonstrate) what is being talked about.
• The demonstrative pronouns conform to the rules that are applicable to the adjectives, especially with regard to the use of the article.
• There is only one relative pronoun in the Hebrew language.
• The interrogative pronouns, as their name goes, are pronouns that are used to ask questions.
41CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following to English: )w%h )w%hha rhfhf b)fhf r#Oe)J #Oy)ihf hz%eha rbfd%fha rbfd%ha hze tb%aha )ybin%fha ymi bwO+%ha K7lem%eha Translate the following to Hebrew: This great house, who (is) the priest?, this (is) the new covenant, he (is) the perfect light, I (am) the good prophet, this (is) the way to the holy mountain, lord and God to the man 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
42 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 6: BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SYNTAX CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Word Order in Hebrew Sentence 3.3 The Comparative Degree 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units, that is, from unit one to the last unit, we have discussed various aspects of the Greek grammar.
We have touched on the noun, the pronouns, the conjunction, the adjectives and the prepositions among others.
Having gone this far, it is time for us to begin considering the sentence in Hebrew.
Thus, in this unit, we would examine the basic principles of syntax, that is, the word order in the Hebrew language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • State the part of the sentence that takes the first place in the Hebrew sentence.
• Explain the style of placing emphasis in the Hebrew sentence.
• Discuss the formation of the comparative degree in the Hebrew sentence.
• List all the word order in the regular manner 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English tent burnt generation lhe)o hlfwO( rwOd% offering 43CTH316 Hebrew Syntax age, silver many MlfwO( Psek%e bra eternity judgement spirit, +p%f#;Omi xaw%r sentence breath 3.2 Word Order in Hebrew Sentence In the Hebrew sentence, the verb usually takes the first position.
You need to remember however that since the Hebrew verb carries its subject, the verb can be a complete sentence in the English translation.
For example, the Hebrew verb rkamf means (cid:8216)he sold(cid:8217).
The major exception to this rule is the negative particle and the interrogative pronoun.
Examine the following sentences as examples: sw%s #Oy)ihf rkamf The man sold a horse sw%s #Oy)ihf rkam )lo The man did not sell a horse sw%s rkam ymi Who sold a horse?
In the above sentences, the negative particle ()lo) and the interrogative pronoun (ymi) comes before the verb because they would take precedence.
Another time that a word may take precedence over the verb is when the writer wishes to place emphasis on a particular word.
The word to be emphasized would then be placed in the first position.
This is what happens in the following sentence: sw%s #Oy)ihf rkam yli.
The personal pronoun (yli) receives the emphasis in this sentence and thus it would be translated (cid:8216)to me the man sold a horse(cid:8217).
The second ground rule is that the subject (if it is to be used) would follow the verb.
A good example is, Myhilo)V rma)f which means (cid:8216)God said(cid:8217).
The third ground rule is that the subject would be followed by its modifiers.
Remember that the adjective would have to agree with the substantive in gender, number and definiteness.
Examine the following examples closely: bwO+%ha sw%sha the good horse MybiwO+%ha Mysiw%s%ha the good horses twObwO+%ha twOsw%s%ha the good mares 44 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax The first example is the masculine singular while the second is the masculine plural and the third one is the feminine plural.
Note the changes in the modifiers.
The demonstratives, if there is any, would come after the adjectives.
Remember also that the demonstratives behave like the adjective.
When it is used attributively, it carries the article and follows the substantive.
You can revise this as treated in the earlier unit.
Note that if the adjective is used, it would be followed by the demonstrative and the two would agree with the substantive in gender, number and definiteness.
Look at the following example closely: hz%eha bwO+%ha lwOq%ha this good voice.
In the above example, the substantive is singular and it carries the definite article.
It is followed by the adjective which is also singular and also carries the definite article.
Finally, it is followed by the demonstrative article which is also singular and carries the definite article.
The next sentence element in the structure is the direct object of the verb.
Remember also that if the direct object carries the definite article, it would be preceded by the particle t)''.
Look at the following example: sw%s%ha t)'' #Oy)ihf rkamf the man sold the horse.
In conclusion, the following is the regular word order in the Hebrew language: verb, subject (the modifiers and demonstrative pronoun), direct object (and its modifiers) and the indirect object.
Any deviation from the above word-order is mainly for the purpose of emphasis.
The following is a bigger emphasis: .#OwOdq%fha Nh''k%ola )yhiha hbfwO+%hA hsfw%s%ha t)'' hz%eha lwOdg%fha #Oy)ihf rkamf which would be translated (cid:8216)This great man sold that good mare to the holy priest(cid:8217).
3.3 The Comparative Degree In the Hebrew language, the comparative degree is expressed through the use of the preposition -Nmi.
For example, .Nb'%ha-Nmi #Oy)ihf lwOdg%f which would literally read (cid:8216)great is the man from the son(cid:8217) and thus in polished English would translate (cid:8216)the man is greater than the son(cid:8217).
45CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have exclusively dealt with the order of words in the Hebrew sentence.
You have been told that the verb usually takes the first position followed by the subject (if there is any) and then the modifiers of the subject.
After this, come the demonstrative pronouns which would be followed by the direct object and then the indirect object.
You have also been told that for the purpose of emphasis, any word can come to the first position.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The verb usually stands in the first position in the Hebrew sentence.
• The subject would normally follow the verb.
• The subject is followed by the modifiers.
• After this come the adjective which would behave like the adjective.
• The demonstrative comes after the adjectives • The direct object would come after the demonstrative • Finally, the indirect object would come last.
• However, for the purpose of emphasis, any word can take the first position.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following words to English: rbfd%fha hze, hz%eha rbfd%fha, b)fhf r#e)J #Oy)ihf, )w%hha rhfhf, bwO+%ha K7lem%eha )w%h .
)ybin%ha ymi, hz%eha #OwOdq%fha M#'Oha, tb%aha t)z%Oha Translate the following to Hebrew: This great house, who (is) the priest?
he (is) the perfect light, I (am) the good prophet, this (is) way to the holy mountain, lord and God to the man.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
46 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
47CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 7: THE PERFECT VERB IN HEBREW CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Introduction to the Verb 3.3 The Verb in the Perfect State 3.4 Vowel Changes in the Perfect Verb 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous modules we have studied other elements of the sentence, like the nouns, the pronouns and the adjectives among others.
In this unit however, we are going to zero in on the verbs.
Treating the verbs at this point is deliberate because there are very many aspects of the Hebrew verb.
In this unit however, we would be limited to the verb in its perfect state.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • State the functions of the state in the Hebrew verb.
• Define complete and incomplete state in the verb.
• Write out all the afformatives in the Hebrew perfect verb.
• Identify vocalic afformative.
• Define consonantal afformative.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English #Oqab%f he sought l#Oamf he ruled rkazf he remembered he blessed he cut he was great K7rab%f trak%f ldag%f 48 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax he spoke he gave rbad% Ntanf 3.2 Introduction to the Verb Unlike the verb of the other languages you have studied like the English and the Greek languages, the verb in the Hebrew language has no tense.
Remember that it is the tense that indicates the time of action.
The time of the action of the Hebrew verb is indicated by the context of the passage.
As a result of this, the inflections of the Hebrew verb indicate the state of action and not the time of action.
These infections of the Hebrew verb are called afformatives.
By way of definition, these afformatives are remnants of personal pronouns which are added to indicate variations in person, number and gender.
These would be studied later in this unit.
3.3 The Verb in the Perfect State As you have studied in the Greek language earlier, the fundamental part of any verb is the root of that verb.
Once you have determined the root of the verb, you would be able to identify its inflections and then know what the interpretation should be.
The root form or the lexical form (that is, the form of the verb you would be able to locate in the lexicon,) of the Hebrew verb is the third person masculine singular of the perfect state of the verb.
Under normal conditions, this root of the Hebrew verb is made up of three consonants.
If you examine all the vocabularies above, you would discover that all of them have three consonants.
The three consonant composition of the root of the verb is characteristic of all Semitic languages, of which Hebrew is one.
In fact, there are some verbs like l+aqf that are regarded as strong because in all their forms, they retained the three consonants.
As with the consonants of the verbs, the vowels of the third masculine singular perfect, that is, the root form of the verb would also remain unchanged except when the laws of syllable and tone requires a change when the afformatives are added.
The afformatives for the perfect state of the verbs are as follows: 49CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Singular Plural Person Gender Afformative English Afformative English Third Masculine (None) he they w% Third Feminine she h f Second Masculine you (m) you (m) t%f Mt%e Second Feminine you (f) you (f) t%; Nt%e First Common I we yt%i w%n 3.4 Vowel Changes in the Perfect Verb Before we begin to examine the vowel changes in the perfect verb, it is very important for us to see the changes in action by examining the full inflection of one of the perfect verbs in the Hebrew language.
In doing this, we shall use l+aqf as an example: Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine l+aqf he killed w%l+;qf they killed Third Feminine she killed hlf+;qf Second Masculine you killed you killed t%fl;+aqf Mte%l;+aq; Second Feminine you killed you killed t%;l;+aqf Nte%l;+aq; First Common I killed we killed yt%il;+aqf w%nl;+aqf If you examine the above paradigm very well, you would discover that as the afformatives were joined to the root word, some of the vowel pointing begins to change.
We will now point out the affromatives, define them and explain the rules guiding them.
Vowel Changes with Vocalic Afformatives A vocalic afformative (also known as vowel afformative) is an afformative beginning with a vowel.
There are two vocalic afformatives in the Hebrew language, and these are: h f and w%.
Since they begin with a vowel, it is not possible for them to form separate syllables, because they have to attach themselves to the final (last) consonant of the word.
The basic rule to follow in placing vocalic afformative is this: an open pre- tonic syllable before vocalic afformatives would volatilize, that is, become vocal.
Let us examine the word (cid:8216)l+aqf(cid:8217).
When you add the vocalic afformative of the third person feminine, instead of having hlf+aqf which 50 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax would have been the most logical thing, the word hlf+;qf is used.
As you can see, the pathah of the teth became a shewa, which is going to be a vocal shewa because it is a volatilized vowel resulting from the pull of the kamets from the adjoining vocalic afformative.
In terms of accent, the vowel preceding the shewa would receive the metheg.
Vowel Changes with Consonantal Afformatives The consonantal afformative is one that begins with consonants; in this case, Mt%e and Nt%e are the only consonantal afformatives that take the accent.
As with the vocalic afformative, the consonantal afformative before an open pre-tonic syllable will volatilize.
These consonantal afformatives draw the accent from the penult (if you have forgotten what this means, consult the Greek Grammar (CTH215) course material), and thus make the vowel of the antepenult to receive the metheg or volatilize, but most times it volatilize.
If you examine Mt%el;+aq: in the paradigm above, you would discover that the kamets of the first consonant of the word has to become a volatilized shewa.
The only exception to this rule of the consonantal afformatives is the second feminine singular afformative (cid:8216)t%;(cid:8217).
Because t%; cannot form a separate syllable on its own unlike Mte and Nte, it attaches itself to the ultima.
Let it be known to you that t%; is a remnant of t%;)a a word in which the shewa is vocal; this it retains the vocal aspect of the shewa.
For clarity sake, let us examine the word in which it appears: t;%l;+aqf.
The dagesh forte in the taw also show that the shewa of the l; is a syllable divider.
Since the l;+a is a closed syllable, the addition of t%; made it half open.
That syllable thus becomes a half-closed syllable.
Please note that if you want to form the simple perfect form of any strong verb, all you need to do is to exchange the three consonants of l+aqf with that of the new verb.
You can practice this with the vocabularies above.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have studied about the perfect state of the Hebrew verb.
You have been taught that the perfect state of the verb is the root of any verb in the Hebrew language and the simplest verb form is the third person masculine singular of the perfect verb.
You have also learnt that to indicate person, number and gender, vocalic and consonantal afformatives are added 51CTH316 Hebrew Syntax to the verb.
In the process of this addition, certain changes take place in the vowel pointing, the rules for which you have also learnt.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The perfect state of the verb is the root of any verb in the Hebrew language.
• The simplest verb form is the third person masculine singular of the perfect verb.
• To indicate person, number and gender, vocalic and consonantal afformatives are added to the verb.
• Before vocalic afformatives an open pre-tonic syllable will volatilize.
• Before consonantal afformatives an open pre-tonic syllable will volatilize.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following words to English: yt%l;#aOmf, w%tr;k%f, hnft;n,f Mt%el;dag%;, hlf#O;m,f Ntan,f t%;r;kazf, w%nr;bad%f, hlfd;g%f .Nt%ek;rab%, bwO+%ha #Oy)ilf tyrib%;ha t)' trak%f 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
52 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 8: THE IMPERFECT VERB IN HEBREW CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Introducing the Imperfect State 3.3 The Verb in the Imperfect State 3.4 Notes on the Imperfect Verb 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, we have been introduced to the verb.
You have been taught that the perfect state of the verb is the root of any Hebrew verb and that the masculine singular form of the perfect is the simplest form of the verb.
In this unit, we will begin to examine the imperfect verb, which seems to be the opposite of the perfect verb.
You need to note especially the differences between the two states of the verb.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • State the functions of the imperfect verb in the Hebrew language.
• Distinguish between the perfect and the imperfect of the verbal forms.
• Write out all the afformatives in the Hebrew imperfect verb.
• Write out all the preformatives in the Hebrew imperfect verb 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English #Orad%f tread, seek braqf draw near sbak%f wash burn cover break in pieces Pra#o rpak%f rba#O 53CTH316 Hebrew Syntax bury cast, throw rbaqf K7la#Of 3.2 Introducing the Imperfect State The imperfect state of the verb in the Hebrew language is used to express the unfinished action of the verb.
The imperfect state in its formation is preceded by the fragments of the personal pronouns and these are called preformatives.
The major distinguishing mark between the perfect and the imperfect is the use of the preformatives in the imperfect state.
While the perfect state of the verb never used the preformative but afformatives; the imperfect state uses the preformatives predominantly and also afformatives in some cases.
Though in the translations of these verbs in this course material, the past forms of the verbs would be used, you must remember that the action of these verbs could be in the present or past or future.
The main function of the imperfect state is to show what is known as the (cid:8216)incipient incomplete action(cid:8217) (this lays emphasis on the beginning of the action) or the frequentative incomplete action (this lays emphasis on the repetition of the action).
Please note that no matter the mood, or form, or person in which the imperfect state of the verb occurs, let your translation show the incomplete action.
3.3 The Verb in the Imperfect State As you have been taught earlier on, the imperfect state of the verb is formed using the fragments of the personal pronouns.
This would be expressed using the same word: l+aqf.
Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he began they began l+oq;yi w%l+;q;yi to kill to kill Third Feminine she began they began l+oq;t%i hnfl;+oq;t%i to kill to kill Second Masculine you began you began l+oq;t%i w%l+;q:t%i to kill to kill Second Feminine you began you began yli+;q;t%i hnfl;+oq;t%i to kill to kill First Common I began to we began l+oq;)e l+oq;ni kill to kill 54 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Examine the table above and note where the preformatives and the afformatives are used as this same paradigm that would be useful for any other strong Hebrew verb.
3.4 Notes on the Imperfect Verb The ground form for most imperfect is l+uq;ya.
But please note that the vowel of the preformative is hirek (which is derived from the original pathah) except that under the consonant ), it changes to seghol which that consonant prefers.
The next vowel for the imperfect is the defective holem.
This is the long tone for o that is heightened from the original kibbuts.
Please note that the stem vowel would volatize before the vowel afformative.
The preformative q;yi is a closed syllable.
Consequently, the shewa under the qoph is a syllable divider.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied the imperfect form of the Hebrew verb.
You have learnt that the imperfect form of the Hebrew verb is used mainly to express unfinished action or the repetitive action.
In whatever form it comes, the unfinished action must be carried out in its translation.
The imperfect is also distinguishable from the perfect form of the verb in its use of the preformative and sometimes the afformative in its various forms.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The imperfect state of the verb in the Hebrew language is used to express the unfinished action of the verb.
• The imperfect state in its formation is preceded by the fragments of the personal pronouns and these are called preformatives.
• The major distinguishing mark between the perfect and the imperfect is the use of the preformatives in the imperfect state.
• The main function of the imperfect state is to show what is known as the (cid:8216)incipient incomplete action(cid:8217) (this lays emphasis on the beginning of the action) or the frequentative incomplete action (this lays emphasis on the repetition of the action).
55CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write the full imperfect form of the following verbs: l#Oamf l+aqf rma#f btak%f Translate the following to Hebrew: I began to write, we will begin to speak, she proceeded to lie down, you visited the son and the daughter repeatedly, we began to sell a tent and a house, they began to judge by the word of the mouth.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
56 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax MODULE 2 Unit 1: The Imperative, Infinitive and Participles in Hebrew Verb Unit 2: The Stems of the Verb Unit 3: The Perfect of other Verb Stems Unit 4: The Imperfect of other Verb Stems Unit 5: The Imperatives, Infinitives and Participles of other Verb Stems Unit 6: The Irregular Verbs Unit 7: The Waw Consecutive Unit 8: The Numerals UNIT 1: THE IMPERATIVE, INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLES IN HEBREW VERB CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Imperative in Hebrew Verb 3.3 The Infinitive in Hebrew Verb 3.4 The Participle in Hebrew Verb 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you have learnt about the imperfect form of the Hebrew verb.
You have been taught that the imperfect is used mainly to express unfinished action with emphasis on the incipient and the repetitive actions.
You have also been taught that the major distinguishing mark between the perfect and the imperfect state of the verb is that the perfect never use the preformative while the imperfect use the preformative mainly and also the afformative alongside in some cases.
In this unit however, we would be discussing the imperative, the infinitive and the participle.
57CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Discuss the formation of the imperative in the Hebrew language.
• Identify the two forms of the infinitive in the Hebrew verb.
• Distinguish between the absolute and the construct infinitive.
• Discuss the functions of the infinitive.
• Discuss the function of the participle.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English btakf% he wrote dqap%f he visited #Obalf he put on he sold he kept he reigned rkamf rma#fO K7lamf he lay he judged bka#Of +pa#Of down 3.2 The Imperative in Hebrew Verb The imperative in the Hebrew language is used mainly for affirmative commands.
In its form, the imperative is identical with the second person imperfect verb except that it drops the preformative.
Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Second Masculine you kill you kill l+oq; w%l+;qi Second Feminine you kill you kill yli+;qi hnfl;+oq; You will discover in the above table that there are some words that the first consonants are pointed with the hirek.
This occurs because after the removal of the preformatives, two consonants pointed with shewa followed one another.
However because two simple shewas cannot stand together, the first shewa is pressed into a hirek.
This occurs only at the second feminine singular and the second masculine plural.
In the Hebrew language, the imperative is never used with a negative.
Prohibitions are expressed either by )lo (not) with the imperfect and l)a (not) with the jussive.
The jussive would be studied later.
58 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.3 The Infinitive in Hebrew Verb There are two forms of the infinitive in the Hebrew language, namely: the absolute infinitive which is very rare and the construct infinitive which is more common.
The Absolute Infinitive The absolute infinitive is written as lwO+qf and it does not permit the use of any prefix or suffix.
It characteristically throws the idea of the verb forward without defining time, action or subject.
It also paints an action without regard to agent, time or circumstance.
It usually accompanies a finite verb for added emphasis or to denote the continuance of the action.
Let us examine the following phrases: yt%ir;ma#O rwOm#Of keeping, I have kept K7lom;t%i K7wOlmf ruling, you begin to rule You need to be careful however that you do not confuse the absolute infinitive with the Hebrew participle.
The Construct Infinitive The usual form of the construct infinitive is written in the following form: l+oq;.
This form, unlike the absolute infinitive is used frequently with prepositions prefixed as in l+oq;li which would be transferred (cid:8220)to kill(cid:8221).
This form is usually identical with the second masculine singular imperative.
Please note this is the Hebrew infinitive that is comparable to the English infinitive.
3.4 The Participle in Hebrew Verb The Hebrew participle is presented as continuous and unbroken action.
In the simple stem, the verb has two forms: the active and the passive participle.
For example, examine the following forms: The active form: l+'wOq or (l+'qo) one who kills (killer) The passive form: lw%+qf killed (one killed, dead) 59CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Before we go into the next section of the verbs, let us run a summary of the forms of the verb that we have treated so far, using l#aOmf as the main verb: The Perfect Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine l#aOmf he ruled w%l#O;mf they ruled Third Feminine hlf#O;mf she ruled Second Masculine t%fl;#aOmf you did Mt%el;#aOm; you ruled rule Second Feminine t%;l;#aOmf you did Nt%el;#aOm; you ruled rule First Common yt%il;#aOmf I ruled w%nl;#aOmf we ruled The Imperfect Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine l#Oom;yi he was w%l#O;m;yi they were ruling ruling Third Feminine l#Oom;t%i she was hnfl;#Oom;t%i they were ruling ruling Second Masculine l#Oom;t%i you were w%l#O;m;t%i you were ruling ruling Second Feminine yli#O;m;t%i you were hnfl;#Oom;t%i you were ruling ruling First Common l#Oom;)e I was l#Oom;ni we were ruling ruling Please note that l#Oom;yi may be translated as (cid:8220)he began to rule(cid:8221).
The Imperative Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Second Masculine rule you rule you l#Oom; w%l#O;mi Second Feminine rule you rule you yli#Omi hnfl;#Oom; 60 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax The Infinitive Absolute Infinitive: lwO#Omf ruling Construct Infinitive: l#Oom; to rule The Participles Active Participle: l#O'wOm or l#O'm one who rules (a ruler) Passive Participle: lw%#Omf ruled (under subjection) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have studied three forms of the Hebrew verb, namely: the imperatives, the infinitives and the participles.
You have learnt that the Hebrew imperative is used only for afformative commands.
The imperative is never used with the negatives.
You have also learnt that there are two forms of the infinitive: the absolute and the construct infinitives.
You have also been taught that the construct infinitve is the one similar to the English infinitive.
The participle also represents a continuous or unbroken action.
It also has two forms: the active and the passive.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The Hebrew imperative is used only for afformative commands; it is never used with the negatives.
• There are two forms of the infinitive: the absolute and the construct infinitives.
• The construct infinitve is the one similar to the English infinitive.
• The participle represents a continuous or unbroken action.
It also has two forms: the active and the passive.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following to English: ypid;ri w%rm;#iO rmo#O;)e l#Oom; btok%; bwOtk%f dw%mlf hnfr;pos; w%n#O;daqf yli#O;mi w%bt;k%f .MwOy%ha t)' w%rk;zi 61CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Translate the following to Hebrew: We began to learnt to keep the head and the heart, you were repeatedly great, keeping you did regularly keep the covenant, we started pursuing the horse toward the mountain, they wrote in the way, the spirit blessed the prophet, he gave the burnt offering to the priest, I used to visit, they began to stumble, remember you.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
62 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 2: THE STEMS OF THE VERB CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 Introducing the Hebrew Verb Stem 3.3 Characteristics of the Hebrew Stems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you have been exposed to the three major elements of the Hebrew verb, namely: the imperative, the infinitive and the participles of the verb.
You have seen the difference between the absolute and the construct infinitive and the fact that the imperative in the Hebrew language is not used for negative command.
In this unit, you would be going to examine the stems of the Hebrew verb.
Before now, all that you have seen about the Hebrew verb is just only one stem.
In this unit, you would examine all the stems and the characteristics of these stems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • List all the stems of the Hebrew verb • List the characteristics of each of the verbs • Identify the stem of the verb through their characteristics • Differentiate between a weak and a strong verb 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English l#Oak%f he stumbled rpasf he numbered dkalf he captured 63CTH316 Hebrew Syntax #Odaqf he was holy dmalf he learned Pdarf he pursued #Orad%f tread, seek braqf draw near sbak%f wash 3.2 Introducing the Hebrew Verb Stem The form of the Hebrew verb you have studied so far is the Simple Qal stem of the verb.
Apart from this stem there are six other stems of the Hebrew verb.
Each of these stems represents a different aspect of the primary meaning of the verb.
You started with the qal stem because this is the basic stem.
All other stems are derived from the qal stem and are formed by means of prefixes, vowel changes and the doubling of some letters.
The meaning of the Hebrew verb is presented in three degrees, namely: the simple, the intensive and the causative.
As an example of these three degrees, let us use the word (cid:8216)love(cid:8217).
In the simple, it would be translated (cid:8216)to love(cid:8217); in the intensive, it would be translated (cid:8216)to love passionately(cid:8217) and in the causative, it would be translated (cid:8216)to cause to love(cid:8217).
It is also important for you note that each of these also have the active and the passive forms.
The intensive form also has the reflexive form.
Having come this far, we can now name the seven stems of the Hebrew verb, using l+aqf as our paradigm: The Simple Active (Qal) l+aqf he killed The Simple Passive (Niph(cid:8216)al) l+aq;ni he was killed The Intensive Active (Pi(cid:8216)el) l+%'qi he killed brutally The Intensive Passive (Pu(cid:8216)al) l+%aqu he was killed brutally The Intensive Reflexive (Hithpa(cid:8216)el) l+'%qat;hi he killed himself The Causative Active (Hiph(cid:8216)il) ly+iq;hi he caused to kill The Causative Passive (Hoph(cid:8216)al) l+aq;hf he was caused to kill 3.3 Characteristics of the Hebrew Stems QAL Qal is the simple verb stem of the Hebrew language.
Apart from this, it is the lexical form of the Hebrew verb.
Qal is identified by the absence of any adjoining letter.
64 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Niph(cid:8216)al Niph(cid:8216)al (l(ap;ni) is the passive form of the Qal stem.
It is characterized by the letter nun that is prefixed to the word.
This nun is usually supported by a syllable divider or it is assimlitated to the following consonant.
Please note that in some words, the niph(cid:8216)al may be reflexive.
Pi(cid:8216)el Pi(cid:8216)el (l('p%i) is always active but it is the intensive active.
It is characterized by the use of the hirek under the first consonant and the doubling of the middle consonant as in the example above.
The middle consonant is doubled by the use of the dagesh forte.
It may be iterative or emphatic.
Pu(cid:8216)al Pu(cid:8216)al (l(ap%u) is the intensive passive form of the verb.
It is characterized by the presence of the shurek under the first consonant and the doubling of the middle consonant through the use of dagesh forte.
Hithpa(cid:8216)el Hithpa(cid:8216)el (l('p%at;hi) is the reflexive stem of the Hebrew verb.
It is characterized by the use of the prefixing of t and the doubling of the middle consonant.
Hiph(cid:8216)il Hiph(cid:8216)il (ly(ip;hi) is the causative active form of the verb.
It is characterized by the prefixing of the h which is pointed with the hirek or the pathah.
Hoph(cid:8216)al Hoph(cid:8216)al (l(ap;hf) is the causative passive form of the verb.
It is characterized by the prefixing of the h which is pointed with the kamets.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been exposed to all the various stems of the Hebrew verb.
You have also been taught how to distinguish the seven stems from 65CTH316 Hebrew Syntax another and the proper way to translate these stems.
These stems are as follows: qal, niph(cid:8216)al, pi(cid:8216)el, pu(cid:8216)al, hithpa(cid:8216)el, hiph(cid:8216)il and the hoph(cid:8216)al.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • Qal is the simple verb stem of the Hebrew language.
Qal is identified by the absence of any adjoining letter.
• Niph(cid:8216)al is the passive form of the verb.
It is characterized by the letter nun that is prefixed to the word.
• Pi(cid:8216)el is the intensive active form of the verb.
It is characterized by the use of the hirek under the first consonant and the doubling of the middle consonant as in the example above.
• Pu(cid:8216)al is the intensive passive form of the verb.
It is characterized by the presence of the shurek under the first consonant and the doubling of the middle consonant through the use of dagesh forte.
• Hithpa(cid:8216)el is the reflexive stem of the Hebrew verb.
It is characterized by the use of the prefixing of t and the doubling of the middle consonant.
• Hiph(cid:8216)il is the causative active form of the verb.
It is characterized by the prefixing of the h which is pointed with the hirek or the pathah.
• Hoph(cid:8216)al is the causative passive form of the verb.
It is characterized by the prefixing of the h which is pointed with the kamets.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write all the seven stems of the Hebrew verb listing their functions and characteristics.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
66 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
67CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 3: THE PERFECT OF OTHER VERB STEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Perfect of the Niph(cid:8216)al 3.3 The Perfect of the Pi(cid:8216)el 3.4 The Perfect of the Pu(cid:8216)al 3.5 The Perfect of the Hithpa(cid:8216)el 3.6 The Perfect of the Hiph(cid:8216)il 3.7 The Perfect of the Hoph(cid:8216)al 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have been exposed to the other stems of the Hebrew verb, making seven stems in all.
You have been taught the characteristics of all the seven stems and how they are written as well as translated.
In this unit however, we are going to be concerned with the perfect from of the other stems because you have studied the perfect form of the qal stem.
You are required to study in details the how these stems are written because as far as the strong verbs are concerned, the only difference would be the three consonants of the verbs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Write all the stem of any verb • Identify any stem of the verb • Translate accurately the perfect form of these stems 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study 68 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English burn cover break in pieces Pra#fO rpak%f rba#Of bury cast, throw ruin rbaqf K7la#Of dda#Of hhf#Of bow down +xa#Of slaughter #O#Oaqf collect 3.2 The Perfect of the Niph(cid:8216)al As you have learnt earlier, the niph(cid:8216)al is the simple passive stem of the Hebrew verb.
The following are the forms of the perfect form of the niph(cid:8216)al: Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he was they were l+aq;ni w%l+;q;ni killed/he killed killed himself Third Feminine she was hlf+;q;ni killed Second Masculine you were you were t%fl;+aq;ni Mt%el;+aq;ni killed killed Second Feminine you were you were t%;l;+aq;ni Nt%el;+aq;ni killed killed First Common I was we were yt%il;+aq;ni w%nl;+aq;ni killed killed 3.3 The Perfect of the Pi(cid:8216)el Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he killed they killed l+'%qi w%l+%;qi brutally brutally Third Feminine she killed hlf+%;qi brutally Second Masculine you did you killed t%fl;+a%qi Mt%el;+%aqi kill brutally brutally Second Feminine you did you killed t%;l;+a%qi Nt%el;+%aqi kill brutally brutally 69CTH316 Hebrew Syntax First Common I killed we killed yt%il;+%aqi w%nl;+%aqi brutally brutally 3.4 The Perfect of the Pu(cid:8216)al Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he was they were l+%aqu w%l+%;qu killed killed brutally brutally Third Feminine she was hlf+%;qu killed brutally Second Masculine you were you were t%fl;+%aqu Mt%el;+%aqu killed killed brutally brutally Second Feminine you were you were t%;l;+%aqu Nt%el;+%aqu killed killed brutally brutally First Common I was we were yt%il;+%aqu w%nl;+%aqu killed killed brutally brutally 3.5 The Perfect of the Hithpa(cid:8216)el Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he killed they killed l+%'qat;hi w%l+%;qat;hi himself themselves Third Feminine she killed hlf+%;qat;hi herself Second Masculine you did you killed t%fl;+%aqat;hi Mt%el;+%aqat;hi kill yourselves yourself Second Feminine you did you killed t%;l;+%aqat;hi Nt%el;+%aqat;hi kill yourselves yourself First Common I killed we killed yti%l;+%aqat;hi w%nl;+%aqathi myself ourselves For this stem, there are certain rules that are to be observed and never to be forgotten: 70 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax a.
In cases where the prefix t;hi precedes the consonants known as the sibilants, that is, s, #o and #O, the t of the prefix would change place with the sibilant.
For example, the hithpa(cid:8216)el of rma#f would be written as rm%'t%a#Ohi (he kept himself).
b.
In cases where the prefix t;hi precedes the following consonants: d%, t% and +, the t of the prefix would be assimilated.
For example, the hithpa(cid:8216)el of rha+f would be written as rh'+%ahi (he purified himself).
c. In cases where the prefix t;hi precedes c, the t of the prefix would be changed to + and the two would be transposed.
For example, the hithpa(cid:8216)el of qd'cf would be written as qd%'+ac;hi (he sanctified himself).
3.6 The Perfect of the Hiph(cid:8216)il Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he caused they ly+iq;hi w%ly+iq;hi to kill caused to Third Feminine she caused kill hlfy+iq;hi to kill Second Masculine you did you t%fl;+aq;hi Mt%el;+aq;hi cause to caused to kill kill Second Feminine you did you t%;l;+aq;hi Nt%el;+aq;hi cause to caused to kill kill First Common I caused to we caused yt%il;+aq;hi w%nl;+aq;hi kill to kill 3.7 The Perfect of the Hoph(cid:8216)al Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he was they were l+aq;hf w%l+;q;hf caused to caused to kill kill Third Feminine she was hlf+;q;hf caused to kill 71CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Second Masculine you were you were t%fl;+aq;hf Mt%el;+aq;hf caused to caused to kill kill Second Feminine you were you were t%;l;+aq;hf Nt%el;+aq;hf caused to caused to kill kill First Common I was we were yt%il;+aq;hf w%nl;+aq;hf caused to caused to kill kill 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been given the perfect form of all the other Hebrew stems beginning from the nipha(cid:8216)al (the simple passive) to the hoph(cid:8216)al (the causative passive).
You have also been given the characteristics of each of these stem as they bring out the various forms in gender and person.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: a.
The following are the exceptional cases in the hithpa (cid:8216)el stem: b.
In cases where the prefix t;hi precedes the consonants known as the sibilants, that is, s, #o and #O, the t of the prefix would change place with the sibilant.
c. In cases where the prefix t;hi precedes the following consonants: d%, t% and +, the t of the prefix would be assimilated.
d. In cases where the prefix t;hi precedes c, the t of the prefix would be changed to + and the two would be transposed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following to English: Mt%ed;m%alu, w%nr;b%ad%i, hlfd%;g,%i t%fr;m%a#,O hnft;n,f Nt%er;b%aqi, Pd%aru, t%fr;p%as,u w%nr;k%az;hi l#'Ok%i, yt%il;#Oamf 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies 72 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
73CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 4: THE IMPERFECT OF OTHER VERB STEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Imperfect of the Niph(cid:8216)al 3.3 The Imperfect of the Pi(cid:8216)el 3.4 The Imperfect of the Pu(cid:8216)al 3.5 The Imperfect of the Hithpa(cid:8216)el 3.6 The Imperfect of the Hiph(cid:8216)il 3.7 The Imperfect of the Hoph(cid:8216)al 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have been exposed to the perfect form of all the stems of the Hebrew verb.
The word l+aqf was used as the guinea pig for the entire paradigm so that you can see the nuances from stem to stem, gender to gender, number to number and person to person.
In this unit, you would be going to study the imperfect form of all the other stems.
Remember that you have examined the imperfect of the qal stem earlier on.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Write the imperfect form of any verb in any stem • Identify any imperfect verb • Translate accurately the imperfect form of these stems 74 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English high place oracle collect, wait for MwOrmf M)un; hwfqf Queen (f) before small, younger hk%fl;ma dgene N+oqf leather bag plant (vb) wall d)nO (+anf ryqi 3.2 The Imperfect of the Niph(cid:8216)al Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he was they were l+'q%fyi w%l+;q%fyi being being killed killed Third Feminine she was they were l+'q%ft%i hnfl;+aq%ft%i being being killed killed Second Masculine you were you were l+'q%ft%i w%l+;q%%ft%i being being killed killed Second Feminine you were you were yli+;q%ft%i hnfl;+aq%ft%i being being killed killed First Common I was we were l+'q%f)e l+'q%fni being being killed killed If you observe the above table very well, you would discover that the vowel pointing are fairly regular, except for the first person common singular which began with aleph that prefers a seghol as its vowel.
3.3 The Imperfect of the Pi(cid:8216)el Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he began they began l+%'qay; w%l+%;qay; to kill to kill brutally brutally Third Feminine she began they began l+%'qat%; hnfl;+%'qat%; 75CTH316 Hebrew Syntax to kill to kill brutally brutally Second Masculine you did you began l+%'qat%; w%l+%;qat%; begin to to kill kill brutally brutally Second Feminine you did you began yli+%'qat%; hnfl;+%'qat%; begin to to kill kill brutally brutally First Common I began to we began l+%'qa)J l+'%qani kill to kill brutally brutally 3.4 The Imperfect of the Pu(cid:8216)al Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he was they were l+%aquy; w%l+%;quy; being being killed killed brutally brutally Third Feminine she was they were l+%aqut%; hnfl;+%aqut%; being being killed killed brutally brutally Second Masculine you were you were l+%aqut%; w%l+%;qut%; being being killed killed brutally brutally Second Feminine you were you were yli+%;qut%; hnfl;+%aqut%; being being killed killed brutally brutally First Common I was we were l+%aqu)J l+%aqun; being being killed killed brutally brutally 76 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.5 The Imperfect of the Hithpa(cid:8216)el Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he began they began l+%'qat;yi w%l+%;qatyI to kill to kill himself themselves Third Feminine she began they began l+%'qat;t%i hnfl;+%'qat;t%i to kill to kill herself themselves Second Masculine you did you began l+%'qat;t%i w%l+%;qat;t%i begin to to kill kill yourselves yourself Second Feminine you did you began yli+%;qat;t%i hnfl;+%'qat;t%i begin to to kill kill yourselves yourself First Common I begin to we began l+%'qat;)e l+%'qat;nii kill myself to kill ourselves 3.6 The Imperfect of the Hiph(cid:8216)il Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he began they began ly+iq;ya w%ly+iq;ya to cause to to cause to kill kill Third Feminine she began they began ly+iq;t%a hnfl;+'q;t%a to cause to to cause to kill kill Second Masculine you did you began ly+iq;t%a w%ly+iq;t%a begin to to cause to cause to kill kill Second Feminine you did you began yliy+iq;t%a hnfl;+'q;t%a begin to to cause to cause to kill kill First Common I began to we began ly+iq;)a ly+iq;na cause to to cause to 77CTH316 Hebrew Syntax kill kill 3.7 The Imperfect of the Hoph(cid:8216)al Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Third Masculine he was they were l+aq;yf w%l+;q;yf being being caused to caused to kill kill Third Feminine she was they were l+aq;t%f hnfl;+aq;t%f being being caused to caused to kill kill Second Masculine you were you were l+aq;t%f w%l+;q;t%f being being caused to caused to kill kill Second Feminine you were you were yli+;q;t%f hnfl;+aq;t%f being being caused to caused to kill kill First Common I was we were l+aq;)f l+aq;nf being being caused to caused to kill kill 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taken through the imperfect of the remaining stems of the Hebrew verb.
If you have observed the table very well, you would discover that there are some words that are the same for different persons and gender.
In this case, it is the context that would help you to determine what the right interpretation or translation would be.
You need to memorize these paradigms and it would help you to get the imperfect stem of every other strong verb.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: 78 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax • The imperfect of the Hebrew verb is characterized by the use of prefixes and sometimes suffixes.
• There are times when words in different persons and genders would be identical.
In such cases, the context would help you to determine the right translation.
• These paradigms are identical with other strong or regular Hebrew verbs.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Translate the following to English: ,rb'#%Ofyi ,w%#Od%;qay; ,rb'%dat%; ,w%dq;p;yf ,byriq;)a ,ybir;q;t%i ,ryk%iz:na ,Nt'nfyi ,lyd%ig;na .tr'k%fni ,rb'#%Of)e ,rb%'d%at;)e ,w%rp%;sy: ,l#O'k%f)e ,w%kyli#O;t%a 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
79CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 5: THE IMPERATIVES, INFINITIVES AND PARTICIPLES OF OTHER VERB STEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Imperatives of the other Stems 3.3 The Infinitives of the other Stems 3.4 The Participles of the other Stems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have been exposed to the imperfect form of all the stems of the Hebrew verb.
The word l+aqf was used as the guinea pig for the entire paradigm so that you can see the nuances from stem to stem, gender to gender, number to number and person to person.
In this unit, you would be going to study the imperatives, the infinitives and the participles of all the other stems.
Remember that you have examined the imperatives, the infinitives and the participles of the qal stem earlier on.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Write the imperatives of any verb in any stem • Identify the infinitives of any verb in any stem • Identify the participles of any verb in any stem • Translate accurately these forms of any verb in any stem 80 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English dgab%f deal K7masf support #opat%f seize, catch treacherousl y separate was strong thrust, strike ldab%f rbag%f (pat%f (Hiphil) shut, close cease, rest collect rgasf tba#Of #O#Oaqf 3.2 The Imperatives of the other Stems The stem of the imperative is identical with the stem of the imperfect.
Please note that the passive stems, that is, the pu(cid:8216)al and the hoph(cid:8216)al have no imperatives.
Remember also that the imperative is only available in the second person (both in the masculine and feminine as well as the singular and the plural).
Remember that the imperative in the Hebrew language is used mainly for affirmative commands.
The Imperative of the Niph (cid:8216)al Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Second Masculine be killed be killed l+'q%fhi w%l+;q%fhi (kill (kill yourself) yourselves) Second Feminine be killed be killed yli+;q%fhi hnfl;+aq%fhi (kill (kill yourself) yourselves) The Imperative of the Pi (cid:8216)el Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Second Masculine you kill you kill l+'%qa w%l+;%qa brutally brutally Second Feminine you kill you kill yli+;%qa hnfl;+%'qa brutally brutally 81CTH316 Hebrew Syntax The Imperative of the Hithpa (cid:8216)el Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Second Masculine kill kill l+'%qat;hi w%l+;%qat;hi yourself yourselves Second Feminine kill kill yli+;%qat;hi hnfl;+%'qat;hi yourself yourselves The Imperative of the Hiph(cid:8216)il Singular Plural Person Gender Hebrew English Hebrew English Second Masculine cause one cause one l+'q;hi w%ly+iq;hi to kill to kill Second Feminine cause one cause one yliy+iq;hi hnfl;+'q;hi to kill to kill Note that except for the Pi(cid:8216)el all the imperatives form have the h throughout.
Note also the change of y i in the hiph(cid:8216)il imperfect to ' in the hiph(cid:8216)il imperative second person masculine singular.
3.3 The Infinitives of the other Stems As you have learnt earlier on, there are two forms of the infinitve called the absolute and the construct infinitive.
Remember also that in using the infinitives prepositions and suffixes may be added.
Stems Absolute English Construct English Niph(cid:8216)al being killed to be killed l+oq%fhi l+'q%fhi (l+oq;ni) Pi(cid:8216)el l+o%qa (l+%'qa) killing brutally l+'%qa to kill brutally Pu(cid:8216)al being killed to be killed l+o%qu l+%aqu brutally brutally Hithpa(cid:8216)el killing one(cid:8217)s self to kill one(cid:8217)s l+o%qat;hi l+'%qat;hi self Hiph(cid:8216)il causing to kill to cause to kill l+'q;ha ly+iq;ha Hoph(cid:8216)al being caused to to be caused to l+'q;hf l+aq;hf kill kill 82 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Note: • To form the infinitive of any strong verb, all you need to do is to write the imperfect form and remove the preformatives along with its characteristic vowels.
• The characteristic vowel of the infinitive absolute is the o or wO except in the causative stems that uses the ' while the infinitive construct retains the vowel of the imperfect.
• The Hithpa(cid:8216)el infinitive absolute and the pu(cid:8216)al infinitive construct are not found in the Hebrew Old Testament.
• There are two forms of the infinitive absolute for the niph(cid:8216)al and the pi(cid:8216)el.
You may come across either form as they are both correct.
3.4 The Participles of the other Stems Each of the Hebrew stem as you have learnt earlier has a participle form.
Because you have studied the participle of the qal stem before, we will concentrate here on the remaining stems.
Stem Participle Meaning Niph(cid:8216)al killed (one killed) or killing one(cid:8217)s self l+fq;ni Pi(cid:8216)el killing brutally (one killing brutally) l+%'qam; Pu(cid:8216)al being killed brutallt (one killed brutally) l+%qum; Hithpa(cid:8216)el killing one(cid:8217)s self (one who kills himself) l+%'qat;mi Hiph(cid:8216)il causing to kill (one who causes to kill) ly+iq;ma Hoph(cid:8216)al caused to kill (one caused to kill) l+fq;mf Note: • The final vowel of each form of the participle must be a long vowel.
• The niph(cid:8216)al participle is identical with the niph(cid:8216)al third person masculine singular, except that the final vowel in a long form.
• The characteristics of the intensive and the causative participles is the m which replaces the y of the imperfect along with the long final vowel.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the forms of the imperatives, the infinitives and the participles of the remaining stems of the verb forms.
You have been taught that the passive stems (pu(cid:8216)al and hoph(cid:8216)al) have no 83CTH316 Hebrew Syntax imperatives.
You have also seen the two forms of the infinitive for each of the stems and the participles.
The final vowel of the participle is always long and the m is characteristic of the intensive and the causative participles as it replaces the y of the imperfect form.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The passive stems (pu(cid:8216)al and hoph(cid:8216)al) have no imperatives.
• There are two forms of the infinitive for each of the stems namely the absolute and the construct.
• The final vowel of the participle is always long and the m is characteristic of the intensive and the causative participles as it replaces the y of the imperfect form.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Translate the following words to English: tb%o#;Oli dw%mlf rb%'dal; lydi%b;ma rg%fs;ni #Od%fqum; rb%'d%a byriq;ma dqfp;mf rm'#%Ohi K7m%'sa tr'k%fhi y#Oiq%;b%a trok;li #Od%'qat;hil; 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
84 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 6: THE IRREGULAR VERBS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Statives 3.3 The Weak Verbs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have been exposed to the imperative, the infinitive and the participle forms of the remaining stems of the Hebrew verb.
The word l+aqf was used as the guinea pig for the entire paradigm so that you can see the nuances from stem to stem, gender to gender, number to number and person to person.
Up to this point, all the verbs that you have learnt are the so called strong and regular verbs.
In this unit, we are going to begin the examination of the verbs known as the irregular verbs which is made up of statives and weak verbs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Explain the irregularity in the irregular verbs • Define the statives • Identify the weak verbs • List all the classes of the weak verbs • Enumerate the characteristics of each class of weak verbs • Identify any of the irregular verb in the Hebrew text 85CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English steal collect escape bnagf Cbaqf +lamf mourn overflow rise early dpasf P+a#Of Mka#Of (Hiph(cid:8216)il) rain fall was heavy r+amf lpanf db'k%f 3.2 The Statives Welcome to the beginning of your study of the irregular verbs in the Hebrew language.
We are starting with the study of the statives.
How do we explain the statives?
The statives can be likened to the English verbs that are known as the intransitive verbs.
They are characterized by the fact that they usually express a state of being or condition, and thus they do not take the direct object.
These statives, in the qal are intransitive and in the pi(cid:8216)el are transitive.
For example, the Hebrew word dmalf in the qal would mean (cid:8216)learn(cid:8217) but in the pi(cid:8216)el would mean (cid:8216)teach(cid:8217).
Despite the difference of these verbs however, they still follow same rules and patterns as followed by the strong verbs.
The following are the more common statives you will come across: Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English was heavy was great was wise db'k%f ldag%f lka#of was old was able was bereaved Nq'zf lkoyf lko#Of was small was strong was afraid N+oqf qzaxf )r'yf qdacf was bka#Of he lay down #Odaqf was holy righteous was whole was near was far off Ml'#Of braqf qxarf 3.3 The Weak Verbs By now you must be used to the vowel pointing of the regular and strong verbs and the principles that are behind these vowel pointing.
If you are not yet sure of your mastery of these vowel pointing, I would advise that you go back and undertake a full revision of all the verbs to this point.
This is because our study of the weak irregular verbs would only contain the conditions that cause variations in the vowel pointing.
86 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax The first of these are the gutturals and the letter r. You need to go back and refer to our study of the gutturals and their characteristics that affect the vowels that accompany them.
These verbs would still retain their consonantal form but the changes would affect the vocalization.
The second set of letters that also affect vocalization are n, y and w. There are conditions that would make these consonants disappear entirely or change them to vowels.
These would also be studied later.
The third and the last set of these are the verbs that have identical letters for their second and third consonants.
A convenient system for classifying these weak verbs have been developed through the use of the old Jewish paradigm word: l(ap%f.
The consonants of this word is very instructive as the first letter p stands for the first consonant; the second letter ( stands for the second and the last letter l stands for the third consonant.
Thus, as an example, a Pe Nun verb is a verb that has a nun as its first consonant.
Using this paradigm word, the weak verbs can be classified into eleven separate categories: 1.
Pe Guttural 2.
(cid:8216)Ayin Guttural 3.
Lamedh Guttural 4.
Pe Nun 5.
Lamedh (cid:8217)Aleph 6.
Lamedh He 7.
Double (cid:8216)Ayin 8.
(cid:8216)Ayin Waw 9.
(cid:8216)Ayin Yodh 10.
Pe Yodh 11.
Pe Waw From now, these eleven categories would now be studied on their own thus allowing you to see their peculiarities.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have studied the two forms of the irregular verbs called the statives and the weak verbs.
You have learnt that the statives are similar to the intransitive verbs in the English language and the usually express a state of being rather than an action.
The weak verbs on the other hand are the verbs that do not follow the regular vowel pointing because of the presence of a guttural in the word.
87CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • Statives are similar to the intransitive verbs in the English language.
• Statives express state of being rather than an action.
• Weak verbs are verbs that do not follow the normal vocalization rules because of the presence of a guttural in the word.
• There are eleven categories of the weak verb.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List the eleven categories of the weak verb with an example each and explain the reasons for the changes in its vocalization.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
88 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 7: THE WAW CONSECUTIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Vocabulary Study 3.2 The Imperfect with Waw 3.3 The Perfect with Waw 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we have examined the use of pronominal suffixes with both the substantives and the verbs.
You have learnt that when the direct object of the verb happens to be a pronoun, it may be written as a pronominal suffix to the verb.
In this unit, we are going to study the use of the waw into details.
If you would recall, we have studied the use of the waw as a conjunction earlier but this time we would look into the use of the waw as the waw consecutive.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Differentiate between the waw conjunction and the waw consecutive • Explain the form of verb that the waw consecutive would follow 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Vocabulary Study Hebrew English Hebrew English Hebrew English eat be lift up lka)f hyfhf )#Ofnf say know stand rma)f (dayf dma(f come in, go out, exit do, make )wOb% )cfyf h#of(f enter 89CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.2 The Imperfect with Waw As you have studied earlier, waw can be used as a simple conjunction.
It is usually written as w: except when it becomes w% before b, m and p. This usage is called the waw conjunctive.
The waw conjunctive is used to join two words together whether nouns or verbs.
It is usually prefixed to the noun or verb no matter its form.
The simple conjunction is usually translated (cid:8216)and,(cid:8217) (cid:8216)but,(cid:8217) or (cid:8216)for(cid:8217).
When contrary to the regular shewa pointing, the waw is pointed with a pathah and a dagesh in the following consonant, it would now be called a waw consecutive.
The waw consecutive is usually prefixed to the imperfect form of the verb.
In its usage, it joins the imperfect to its precedent and also shows that the imperfect is a definite consecution of its precedent.
As a consequence, it would be translated as (cid:8216)and,(cid:8217) (cid:8216)and then,(cid:8217) (cid:8216)and as a consequence,(cid:8217) (cid:8216)furthermore,(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)as a result(cid:8217).
For example, rwO) yhiy: would be translated (cid:8220)let there be light(cid:8221) and rwO) yhiy:wa would be translated (cid:8220)and then there began to be light(cid:8221).
It is important for you to note that unlike the older translations of the Bible that expresses the imperfect as perfect (see the King James(cid:8217) Version as an example) with the waw consecutive, the imperfect verb would form series of actions which are judged from the point of view of the first verb and beginning from that point are verbs expressing incomplete action in consecution.
An action in consecution would not be viewed as the completion of an action.
This understanding would change the meaning of many Bible passages.
Let us take the verse used as an example above.
The King James(cid:8217) Version rendered it as (cid:8220)let there be light and there was light(cid:8221) but the correct interpretation would be (cid:8220)let there be light and there began to be light(cid:8221) which implies that even the light we have now is still the same light we have until now.
3.3 The Perfect with Waw There are cases however where after a simple imperfect, the verb or verbs that would follow are going to be in the perfect state with the waw consecutive.
In this case, the verbs connected with w would form in the mind of the author one series in which all the verbs with the waw consecutive are judged from the point of view of the first verb.
A good example is the sentence below: 90 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax The man will keep (rmo#O;yI) the law and he will rest (tba#Ofw:) on the Sabbath and he will not sell (rko%m;yi )lo) anything.
In this sentence, the first verb is in the imperfect, the second verb is the perfect with the waw and the third verb is also in the imperfect.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have examined the use of the waw consecutive wherein the waw is used along with the imperfect verb to convey the idea of a series of actions that are not competed as the imperfect state of the verb always convey the incomplete action.
As you have been taught, the understanding of the waw consecutive would change our understanding of some traditional understanding or translation of the Bible verse.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The waw pointed with a pathah and a dagesh forte in the following consonant is called a waw consecutive • The waw consecutive is usually prefixed to the imperfect form of the verb • It thus expresses an incomplete action in consecution 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the waw consecutives in the following sentences and translate: r#Oe)j htfpar;cf K7l' Mw%q .rmo)l' wylf)' hwhy-rbd; yhiy:wa .K1lek%;kal; hnfmfl;)a h#%O)i M#Of ytiyw%Ici hn%'hi M#Of t%fb;#Oayfw: NwOdycil; 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
91CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
92 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 8: THE NUMERALS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Numerals 3.2 The Cardinal Numbers 3.3 The Ordinals 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit we have examined the use of the waw into details.
Apart from the use of the waw as a conjunction that has been studied earlier you have also studied the use of the waw as the waw consecutive.
In this unit, we are going to examine the numerals that are commonly used in the Old Testament.
This is to enable you translate many passages on the Old Testament after you have come to an end of this course and as you prepare for the next one.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Identify cardinal numbers • Identify ordinal numbers • Write the numbers in the construct and the absolute forms 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Numerals In the Hebrew language, unlike the Greek and the English language, there are both masculine and feminine forms for the cardinal numbers from one to ten.
Apart from this, we also have the absolute and the construct forms of these numbers as you would see in the sub-section below.
93CTH316 Hebrew Syntax The number one, is an adjective dxf)e. In its usage, it usually stands after its noun and then agrees with it, especially in number.
For example, dxf)e #Oy)i would be translated (cid:8216)one man(cid:8217) and txa)a h#O%f@)i would be translated (cid:8216)one woman(cid:8217).
The numeral two is a noun.
In the masculine it is written as MyIna#O; and in the feminine it is written as MyIt%a#O;.
It usually stands before its substantive and agrees with it in number.
For example, My#Oinf)j yn'#;O (this could also be written as My#Oinf)j MyIna#;O) would be translated (cid:8216)two men (cid:8216)and My#Oinf yt%#O; (this could also be written as My#Oinf MyIta%#O;) would be translated (cid:8216)two women(cid:8217).
The numbers three to ten are nouns and they disagree in gender.
In other words, where there is a masculine noun, the number form would be feminine and vice versa.
They may stand before the noun in construct or either before or after it in the absolute state.
For example, Mynibf h#%Ofmixj would be translated (cid:8216)five sons(cid:8217).
This could also be written as Mynib%f t#Oem'xj or h#%Ofmixj Mynibf.
The numbers eleven to nineteen are formed by the use of two separate words, that is, the unit along with the ten.
The unit would be written in the possessive and the noun is usually placed in the plural.
For example, the following words Mynib%f r#of(f h#O%fmixj would be translated (cid:8216)fifteen sons(cid:8217).
As you have seen in this example, fifteen is written as ten and five.
The numbers thirty, forty, fifty, sixty, seventy, eighty and ninety are formed from the corresponding units with plural terminations.
This would be written explicitly below later and ensure that you study them carefully.
Twenty is written as the plural of ten.
Please note that when these words are used, the numeral precedes the noun if the noun is singular and when the numeral comes after the noun, then the noun is plural.
3.2 The Cardinal Numbers Below are the list of cardinal numbers in both the masculine and the feminine as well as in the construct and the absolute states.
Masculine Noun Feminine Noun Numbers Absolute Construct Absolute Construct 1 dxf)e dxa)a txa)a txa)a 94 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 2 MyIna#O; yn'#O; MyIt%a#O; yt%'#O; 3 h#Ofl#O; t#Oel#O; #Ol#fO #Ol#O; 4 h(fb%fr;)a t(ab%ar;)a (b%ar;)a (b%ar;)a 5 h#%Ofmixj t#Oem'xj #Om'xf #Om'xj 6 h#%fO#iO t#Oe#O' #O#O' #O#O' 7 h(fb;#Oi t(ab;#Oi (ba#Oe (ba#O; 8 hnfmo#O; hnamo#O; hnemo#O; hnemo#O; 9 h(f#;Ot%i h(a#;Ot%i (#aOt'% (#aOt%; 10 hrf#of(j tre#oe(j r#oe(e r#oe(e 11 r#of(f dxa)a or r#of(f yt%'#O;(a hr'#o;(e txa)a or hr'#o;(e yt%'#O;(a 12 r#of(f Myn'#O; or r#of(f yn'#O;a hr'#o;(e Myt%'#O; or hr'#o;(e yt%'#O; 13 r#of(f h#fOl#;O hr'#o;(e #Ol#O; 14 r#of(f h(fb%fr;)a hr'#o;(e (b%ar;)a 15 r#of(f h#%Ofmixj hr'#o;(e #Om'xj 16 r#of(f h#%Of#Oi hr'#o;(e #O#O' 17 r#of(f h(fb;#Oi hr'#o;(e (ba#O; 18 r#of(f hnfmo#O; hr'#o;(e hnemo#O; 19 r#of(f h(f#;Ot%i hr'#o;(e (#Oat%; From this point you would just be given a few numbers which would guide you on how to write the other numbers.
The first set of numbers would be given with masculine nouns while the second set would be given with feminine nouns.
Numbers with Masculine Nouns Figures Numbers in Hebrew 20 Myri#o;(e 21 Myri#o;(ew: dxf)e 30 My#Oil#;O 40 My(ib%fr;)a 50 My#Oimixj 60 My#Oi#Oi 70 My(ib;#Oi 80 Mynimo#O; 90 My(i#O;t%i 95CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 100 txa)a h)fm' 200 twO)m' yt%'#O; 300 twO)m' #Ol#O; 400 twO)m' (b%ar;)a 500 twO)m' #Om'xj Numbers with Feminine Nouns Figures Numbers in Hebrew 600 twO)m' #O#O' 700 twO)m' (ba#O; 800 twO)m' hnemo#O; 900 twO)m' (#Oat%; 1000 dxf)e Ple)e 2000 Mypilf)j yn'#O; 3000 Mypilf)j t#Oel#O; 4000 Mypilf)j t(ab%ar;)a 5000 Mypilf)j t#Oem'xj 6000 Mypilf)j t#Oe#O' 7000 Mypilf)j t(ab;#Oi 8000 Mypilf)j tnamo#O; 9000 Mypilf)j t(a#O;t%i 10000 Mypilf)j tre#Oe(j or hbfbfr; 3.3 The Ordinals The ordinals are only separate in form from the cardinals in only numbers one to ten because from number eleven, the forms of the cardinals are used for the ordinals too.
The ordinals from numbers one to ten are however written as adjectives formed from the corresponding cardinal numbers.
The adjectives are formed by the addition of the termination y i.
Where possible, the y is also inserted between the second and the third consonant.
The first ten ordinals are written thus: 96 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Ordinal Hebrew Form Ordinal Hebrew Form First Sixth NwO#O)ri y#Oi#Oi Second Seventh yni#O' y(iybi#O; Third Eighth y#Oiyli#O; yniymi#O; Fourth Ninth y(iybir; y(iy#Oit%; Fifth Tenth y#Oiymixj yriy#oi(j 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt how the numerals are written in the Hebrew language.
You have learnt that there are two forms of numerals: the cardinals and the ordinals.
You have also learnt that there are both the masculine and feminine forms for the cardinals from number 1 to 10 as well as the absolute and construct form of these numbers.
You have also learnt that the ordinals are separate from the cardinals only in numbers 1-10 but are similar from number 11 upwards.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • There are two forms of numerals: the cardinals and the ordinals.
• There are both the masculine and feminine forms for the cardinals from number 1 to 10.
• There are the absolute and construct form of numbers 1-10.
• The ordinals are separate from the cardinals only in numbers 1-10 but are similar from number 11 upwards.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write the following numbers in Hebrew: 35, 55, 105, 215, 10, 4, 61, 82, 47, 99 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
97CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and The Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
98 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax MODULE 3 Unit 1: Hebrew Verbs and the Principles of Syntax Unit 2: The Verb in the Indicative Mood Unit 3: The Verb in the Subjunctive and Voluntative Mood Unit 4: The Imperative and the Infinitive Unit 5: The Participles Unit 6: Practical Examples of Syntatic Relations Unit 1: Hebrew Verbs and the Principles of Syntax CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The State of the Verb 3.2 The Time of the Verb 3.3 The Mood of the Verb 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION If you have followed this course from the beginning, you would have noticed that unlike the Biblical Greek where the verb as well as the noun is inflected, the verb is the only portion of the Hebrew language that is inflected.
This thus shows that the study of the Hebrew verb is of prime importance in understanding the various nuances of these verbs.
In this unit, you will begin the study of the three fundamental principles that are important and necessary for the proper understanding of the Hebrew verb.
Please note that despite the importance of the context, the context still work in conjunction with these three principles.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Define the perfect state of the verb 99CTH316 Hebrew Syntax • Describe the imperfect state of the verb • Describe the concept of time in the Semitic mind • Identify the various moods of the Hebrew verb • Define each mood of the verb 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The State of the Verb The state of the verb is used to describe the action of the verb.
There are however only two concepts of action: complete or incomplete.
The state of action wherein the writer wishes to express an action that has been completed in his mind, whether that action is in the present, past or future time, it would be presented in the perfect state.
Thus, it is important in the translation of the Hebrew verb to interpret the condition of the action and not the time of the action.
The other state is the imperfect state.
This is used to describe the action that is incomplete, continuing and incoming.
It dosent matter whether it is an ongoing action or repeated or connected in sequence in the past or in the future time.
The state of the verb is easily locatable by the form of the verb.
You can go back to the module two and read again the perfect and the imperfect form of the verb so that you would be able to differentiate between the two states of the verb.
However, the perfect form is objective while the imperfect is subjective.
Please note that by virtue of the form, the imperative verb is derived from the imperfect.
The rationale is that since the imperative expresses a wish or command, which is an action that is yet to be done, it has to be regarded as an incomplete action, thus treated as the imperfect.
Infinitives, on the other hand are not related to any of the state of the verb.
This is because though they develop as verbal forms, their true nature is nominal or adverbial.
They are thus treated as nouns or adverbs.
3.2 The Time of the Verb Unlike the contemporary distinction of time in the verbs, the discernment of the time of action in the Semitic mind is not of any vital importance.
In interpreting or translating, try to avoid placing any undue attention on the time of the action.
As have been explained earlier, try to look more for the state of the action and also check whether the action is a single action that 100 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax dose not have direct relation to any other action or whether it is viewed as an antecedent to another action.
3.3 The Mood of the Verb Since actions were viewed as uncomplicated, dependent or volitional, the mood of the verb is of tremendous importance to the Old Testament.
Four classes of mood are available in the Hebrew thought, and these are: the indicative mood, the subjunctive mood, the imperative mood and the voluntative mood.
The Indicative Mood The indicative mood has no distinctive form to indicate its presence.
This is because as far as the Semitics are concerned; the perfect state of the verb is the indicative mood, since no contingency or volition can alter an action that is already completed.
The Subjunctive Mood This is the mood of contingency.
This contingency may be either in form of dependency or condition.
These contingencies or conditions may be classed as follows: possibilities, desirabilities or responsibilities.
In the form, there would be a particle to indicate the presence of the condition but it is also possible that the condition may be disclosed only through the context.
Please, do not expect an external condition for each subjunctive mood.
The Imperative Mood This is the mood of command or strong desire.
The positive commands are expressed by the imperative mood.
Note, however, that the negative commands, that is, prohoibitions, are expressed by the imperfect form along with a particle of negation in an imperative context.
Please, note that any imperfect form in an imperative context may be in the imperative mood.
The Voluntative Mood This is the mood that is used to express the volition of the speaker.
The cohortative and the jussive belong to this mood.
These two are used to express desire or urgency.
Please take note that the cohortative is the voluntative mood in the first person and the jussive is the voluntative mood in the second or third person.
101CTH316 Hebrew Syntax While the cohortative is indicated by the addition of h F to the imperfect form followed most of the time by the voluntative particle )nF the jussive is indicated by an internal vowel change or the specific negative or just by the context alone.
Please note that it is not only in the voluntative mood that the internal vowel change can occur.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have been told that syntactically, three elements of the Hebrew verb are very important, and these are the state, the time and the mood of the verb.
You have also learnt that there are two states: the perfect and the imperfect.
You have also learnt that unlike most modern languages that see the time of the verb in terms of present, past and the future, in the Hebrew language, what is important is the relationship of the action in the verb to another action, that is, whether it is contemporaneous or antecedent or subsequent.
You have also learnt that there are four types of mood in the Hebrew verb, namely: indicative, subjunctive, imperative and voluntative.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The three elements of the Hebrew verb that are very important are the state, the time and the mood of the verb.
• There are two states of the verb: the perfect and the imperfect.
• Unlike most modern languages, the Semitic Hebrew did not see the time of the verb in terms of present, past and the future.
• What is important in the verb is the relationship of the action in the verb to another action, that is, whether it is contemporaneous or antecedent or subsequent.
• There are four types of mood in the Hebrew verb, namely: indicative, subjunctive, imperative and voluntative.
• The perfect state of the verb is always in the indicative mood • The subjunctive mood is the mood of dependency or condition • The imperative mood is the mood of command or strong desire • The voluntative mood expresses the volition of the speaker.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss each of the mood and their functions.
102 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and the Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
103CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 2: THE INDICATIVE MOOD Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Indicative Perfect 3.2 The Indicative Imperfect 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied about the three elements of the verb that are necessary for close examination for any meaningful syntactical analysis.
These are: the state of the verb, the time of the verb and the mood of the verb.
In this unit, you will begin to examine the interplay of these three elements in the verb.
In this unit, we are going to look at the verb in the indicative mood.
Remember that we have said earlier that the indicative mood most of the time is the mood of the perfect state, but you will be learning more here.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Differentiate between the indicative perfect and the indicative imperfect.
• Identify the different uses of the indicative perfect • Identify the various uses of the indicative imperfect 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Indicative Perfect As we have indicated earlier, the perfect state of the Hebrew verb is the state that is used to designate an action or a state of being as being completed.
The completion of the action or the state however can be either in reality or in the thought of the speaker.
Please note that this does not 104 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax mean that the action must have necessarily occurred but it must have been pictured as being completed.
No matter the time of the action, the action must have been completed or finished.
The following are the various uses of the perfect indicative in the Greek verb: Narative Perfect (Perfect of Narration) This is the use of the perfect to indicate an action or state of being that has been completed with no reference to any other event.
It is used to designate an action that has either been completed or in the process of completion, thus it can be in the present or in the past time.
Please note that the perfect state is used in the future time, certain conditions must exist to place in within the range of the perfect of narration (and these would be discussed later).
The following are examples of the perfect of narration: Myhilo)v )rFb@ ty#Oi)r'b;;@ which would be translated (cid:8220)In beginning God created....(cid:8221) The word )rFb@ here is the perfect of narration denoting the past time.
Please remember that in most cases in the Hebrew thought, the context would denote the time of the action.
rma)f h#@O)ihf-l)e which would be translated (cid:8220)To the woman he said...(cid:8221) The word rma)f here is the perfect of narration denoting the past time.
MhfrFb;)a-t)e hs@ni Myhilo)vhfw: which would be translated (cid:8220)And God proved Abraham(cid:8221).
The word hs@ni here is the perfect of narration denoting the past time.
twOyh;li ytiyw@ci wOt)ow: yt@fx;t@a K7lom;yI )w@hw: which would be translated (cid:8220)And him I have appointed to be prince(cid:8221).
The word ytiyw@ci here is the perfect of narration denoting the present time.
By virtue of the context, since the person being spoken about is the reigning prince, then the time has to be in the present.
Relative Perfect (Perfect of Relation) The perfect of relation is used to denote a simple action that is completed in relation to another action.
It is usually a completed action completed at a time that is previous to another action and the two actions would result in a completed state.
However there are instances where the completed action would be viewed in relation to another action that is still in the past.
The following are examples of the perfect of relation: 105CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Action in Relation to a Previous Action This type of perfect of relation is also called the pluperfect by some grammarians.
In this class, the action would be conceived of as finished action prior to a point in the past, that is, a previous time.
The following are examples of the class of perfect of relation: rcfyF r#Oe)J Mdf)fhf-t)e M#Of M#oey@FwA which would be translated (cid:8220)And he put there the man whom he had formed(cid:8221).
The verb rcfyF here is pictured in relation to the previous action of the forming of the Garden of Eden which has been completed before the forming of man.
MwOy@ha-lk@f Mxele lka)f )lo yk@i which would be translated (cid:8220)For he had not eaten bread(cid:8221).
The verb lka)f here is also viewed in relation to another action in the past.
Action in Relation to a Present Time This use of the perfect of relation is very close to, if not identical, with the Greek perfect.
In this usage, the action is pictured as completed at some specific moments in the past but the effects of that action continues into the present time.
The present time as used here would be the previous present or the simultaneous past, that is, the present time of the speaker.
An example of this usage is: hwFhy:-t)e w@bz:(f which would be translated (cid:8220)They forsook Yahweh(cid:8221).
The concept here is that at a point in time, the Israelites turned away from the Lord and as at the point of the prophet(cid:8217)s statement; they were still away from the Lord.
Therefore, the verb here w@bz:(f, describes an action that took place in the past but it is still having effect into the present.
Action in Relation to a Future Time This usage is also very close to the future perfect in English.
In this usage, the finished action is viewed in relation to another action still in the future.
A good example here is: hwFhy: )cfyF which would be translated (cid:8220)Yahweh will have sent thee away(cid:8221).
106 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Perfect of Experience The usage of the perfect of experience designates a statement that is considered to be true because things of similar kinds have happened previously.
Based on this, the speaker is certain that such proposition of a general character will hold generally.
It is also known as the characteristics perfect.
Examples of this usage are: K7lay'wa Nnf(f hlfk@f which would be translated (cid:8220)the cloud dissolves and goes(cid:8221).
In this usage the verb hlfk@f is used to tell what the cloud would normally do.
w@hn'qo rwO# (dayf which would be translated (cid:8220)An ox knows his master(cid:8221).
The verb here (dayf is used to describe the attitude of the ox generally.
Perfect of Dependency or Perfect of Contigency In the usage of the perfect of dependency, the action is viewed as completed though there are some conditions present.
These conditions may be time, a condition or the fact that the action is based on the accomplishment of another action.
There are various usages of the perfect of dependency and they are as follows: Perfect of Certainty This usage describes an action in the future time that is viewed as completed based upon the authority of the speaker.
In other words, the speaker is certain of the outcome or that he has fully determined to make certain actions occur.
This is usually used for promises, decrees and threats where the certainty of the fulfilment can make it be viewed as an already completed action.
Please note that the statements of God and about God are usually placed in the perfect of certainty as in the following examples: CrE)fhf-t)e yt@itanF K1(Jr:zal; which would be translated (cid:8220)To thy seed I will give this land(cid:8221).
The verb yt@itanF here is placed in the perfect of certainty because God is sure of what he has said.
wOhy#iOm; hwFhy: (ay#iOwOh yk@i which would be translated (cid:8220)For I know that the LORD will save his anointed(cid:8221).
The verb (ay#iOwOh here is placed in the perfect of certainty because the prophet is sure of what God will do.
107CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Perfect of Prophecy This is the use of the perfect in the future time which is viewed as complete based solely on the authority of God.
In this case, the perfect portrays vividly and boldly a confidence that the speaker or the prophet has in the fulfilment of the prediction.
Please note that the perfect of prophecy is found in the highest type of prophetic diction and is often thrown into the midst of imperfects to indicate absolute confidence.
The following are examples: w@nlf-dl@ayu dleye-yk@i would be translated (cid:8220)For a child shall be born(cid:8221).
Please note that as a result of the degree of certainy of the prophet, there are translations that reder the verb as (cid:8220)For unto us a child is born(cid:8221).
bqo(jy@ami bkfwOk@ K7rAdF@ would be translated (cid:8220)A star shall proceed from Jacob(cid:8221).
Note that the prophet has spoken with a high degree of certainty and that is why the translation has used the word (cid:8216)shall(cid:8217) as an auxiliary verb.
Perfect of Condition There are cases where some conditional sentences would carry the perfect verb.
Remember in conditional sentences, the protasis states a condition which would create a responsibility, obligation or necessity that are often deemed unavoidable.
The apodosis would then use the perfect to express the inescapable nature of the responsibility, obligation or necessity.
A good example of this is the statement of prophet Isaiah in 1:9: w@nymdi @F hrFmo(jla w@nyyIhf Mdos;k@i +(fm;k@i dyrI#of w@nlf rytiwOh twO)bfc; hwFhy: yl'w@l which would be translated (cid:8220)Except the LORD of hosts had left us a very small remnant, we would have become as Sodom(cid:8221).
In this statement, the apodosis made use of the perfect verb w@nyyhI to express the inescapable nature of the punishment.
Perfect of Concurrency By this usage, the action is viewed as complete based on the occurrence of a preceeding action.
In these perfect forms, the simple waw is attached as a prefix.
Thus they can be easily identified.
Please note that the perfect of concurrency may follow any form of verb be it another perfect, an imperfect, an imperative or even an interjection.
In the process of narration, the speaker states the narrative action and without drawing the strict attention from the starting action, points out what also is true.
Even though 108 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax the originating action is incomplete, on the basis of the indicativeness of the action, the following action is viewed as complete.
The following are examples: Kxf)e r#ofbfl; w@yhfw: wOt@#;O)ib@; qbadfw: wOm@)i-t)ew: wybi)f-t)e #Oy)i-bzf(jya Nk@'-l(a which would be translated (cid:8220)Therefore, let a man forsake his father and his mother and (that having been done) he cleaves to his wife and (that being done) they are one flesh(cid:8221).
If you examine the above sentence very well, you would first discover that the two perfect of concurrency in the sentence are prefixed with a simple waw (qbadfw: and w@yhfw:).
Apart from this, their being completion is based on the completion of earlier actions.
For example, before cleaving can be completed, the man must have left his father and mother.
Also, before becoming one flesh, the cleaving must have taken place.
Another good example is in Isaiah 40:4-5.
You can look at this passage in the English versions and also in the Hebrew if you have a copy of the Biblia Hebraica.
Please note that the concurrent perfect is always in explanation or description of the originating action.
Anytime the prerequisite action has taken place, the description of the concurrent act would naturally fall into place, thereby taking its completed state.
In the bid to properly understand and interpret the language and thought pattern of the Hebrew system, some grammarians have viewed the waw preceeding the perfect as (cid:8220)waw conversive(cid:8221) or (cid:8220)waw consecutive(cid:8221).
However, the true position is that in a statement of successive events or acts in the future, waw with the perfect is used after the main verb in the imperfect or imperative.
The verb fixes the starting point as the speaker passes successively forward in thought viewing each as completed in its turn.
A good example is Leviticus 4:13 which reads: txa)a w@#o(fw: lhfq@fha yn'y('m' rbfd@f Mla(;new: w@g@#;OyI l)'rF#o;yI tda(J-lk@f M)iw: .w@m#O')fw: hnfy#e(ft'-)Ol r#O)J hwfhy: twOc;mi-lk@fmi The above sentence would be translated as follows: If Israel shall err (w@g@#;OyI) and it be hid (Mla(;new:) and they do (w@#o(fw:) and shall be guilty (w@m#O')fw:) 109CTH316 Hebrew Syntax If you study the above sentence very well, you will discover that the main verb (w@g@#;OyI) is in the imperfect and the following verbs all started with the waw.
This usage could also be used in a conditional or subjunctive sense to express command or volition and following telic particles.
The following are example: Every man should come ()yboyF) to me and I would do him justice (wyt@iq;d@ac;hiw:) 2 Samuel 15:4.
It can also be used with the imperfect to express what is general or customary in the present or the past.
A good example is Genesis 2:6 which states: A mist used to go up (hle(Jya) and water (hqf#O;hiw:) the earth.
3.2 The Indicative Imperfect Any verb presented in the verb pictures an unfinished or incompleted action whether in the past, present or future.
Consequently, the action is usually presented in movement rather than (cid:8220)in a condition of rest(cid:8221).
It has to be noted that it is used mostly in two ways: the incipient (just beginning) and the frequentative or iterative (repeated).
It however does not imply mere continuance of action.
To show continuance of action in Hebrew, the participle is used as in Genesis 2:10: A river proceeding ()c'yO) out of the garden.
The participle ()c'yO) is used here to show the continuous action of the flowing of the river.
Now to the usages of the indicative imperfect: Incipient Imperfect This is an action that begins at a time subsequent to another action or state.
It is an action that may have its beginning in the mind of the author.
The continuation of the action after the beginning may be visualized, but the beginning of that action is also in view.
This could also be used in two ways: The Simple Incipient The simple incipient imperfect is an imperfect which pictures only the beginning of the action.
This is why in translation, such incipient imperfect 110 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax would begin with (cid:8220)began to, or begin to, or will begin to(cid:8221).
These imperfects may be either past, present or in the future.
Let us examine the following examples: h#eOm-ry#OiyF z)f which would be translated (cid:8220)Then Moses began to sing(cid:8221) (Exodus 15:1).
The emphasis is on the starting of the singing by Moses.
This is also an action in the past.
Cre)e-yk'l;ma w@bc;yat;yI which would be translated (cid:8220)Kings of the earth begin to set themselves(cid:8221).
The emphasis here is on the seting together of the kings.
The action here is also in the present.
The Progressive Incipient The progressive incipient imperfect pictures an action that has started but with emphasis on the progression of the action.
Consequently, the translation would make use of the phrase, (cid:8220)proceeded to(cid:8221).
As with the simple incipient, it could also be in the past, present or future.
The following are examples: Mykib@oh@a-l)e lg@fl;g@ha-Nmi hwFhy:-K7)al;ma l(ay@AwA which would be translated (cid:8220)I proceeded to bring you up out of Egypt(cid:8221) (Judges 2:1).
The emphasis here is on the process of leading the children of Israel out of Egypt.
It is an action in the past.
A good example for the present time is found in Psalm 2:2 which would be translated kings of the earth begin to set themselves against the Lord.
The verb pictures the commencement of action in the present time.
For an example of the use of the incipient imperfect in the future, a good one is found in Numbers 24:17 which would be translated (cid:8220)I begin to see him (w@n@)er;)e) but not now; I begin to behold him (w@n@rew@#O)j) but not near(cid:8221).
The two verbs here picture the commencement of an action in the future.
The progressive incipient pictures an action that has started, but the emphasis of this usage is on the progression of the action.
These they of verb are translated with the use of phrases like (cid:8220)proceeded to(cid:8221).
These types of verb may also be in the past, present or the future.
In the present time, Judges 2:1 offers a good example: Mket;)e )ybi)fwF MyIrac;m@imi Mket;)e hle(j)a rme)Oy@wA 111CTH316 Hebrew Syntax This sentence would be translated (cid:8220)And he said, I proceeded to bring you up (hle(j)a) out of Egypt(cid:8221).
In the present, we have a good example in 1 Samuel 24:21 which would be translated (cid:8220)I know that thou will surely proceed to be king(cid:8221).
The verb (K7lom;t@i) pictures the state of the man cuurently enthroned as king.
For the future time, another example is in Exodus 9:5 which will be translated (cid:8220)Tomorrow the LORD will proceed to do (h#oe(jyA) this thing in the earth(cid:8221).
The Frequentative Imperfect The frequentative imperfect is used to describe reiterated actions, habits, customs or universal truths.
The following are the sub-usages of the frequentative imperfects: The Simple Frequentative The simple frequentative is an action, which though has occurred repeatedly, has no reference to habit, custom or progress.
A good example of this usage is Isaiah 1:11 which would be translated (cid:8220)For what to me is the multitude of your sacrifices(cid:8221).
In this passage, the verb (cid:8216)said(cid:8217)is in the simple frequentatives ansd would be properly translated (cid:8220)the LORD said repeatedly(cid:8221).
The repeatition of the statement does not mean that it has become a habit.
Another example is Genesis 24:19 which would be translated (cid:8220)I shall draw water for thy camel(cid:8221).
The verb translated (cid:8216)draw(cid:8217) is put in the simple frequentative thus would be better translated (cid:8216)draw water repeatedly(cid:8217).
The drawing of the water does not become a habit in any way.
The Characteristic Frequentative The characteristic frequentative are actions that are accustomed to occur often in certain limits and truths universally admitted and facts that may occur at any time.
A good example could be found in Psalm 15:4 which would be translated (cid:8220)those who fear the LORD he honours(cid:8221).
The characteristic frequentative here used implies that the LORD will honour those who fear him at all times.
112 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax The Progressive Frequentative The progressive frequentative is the use of the imperfect in which the author views the action as being either in the process of being repeated or of progressing in the frequent actions.
A good example here is Exodus 1:12 which would be translated (cid:8220)And just as they continued to afflict them so they continued to multply(cid:8221).
The Consecutive Imperfect The consecutive imperfect is the use of the imperfect to complete the consecution of an action.
To do this, the two primary forms (that is, the perfect and the imperfect) and supplemented in the Hebrew by a secondary form by adding adding waw consecutive as a prefix to the imperfect form of the verb.
In usage as a narrative sentence, it would begin with a simple perfect and is followed by one or two verbs in the imperfect prefixed by waw consecutive.
The waw consecutive, as you have been taught in Hebrew Grammar is use of consonant waw pointed with a pathah with a dagesh forte in the waw (wA@).
The waw consecutive is always prefixed to an imperfect and portrays the action which is consecutive in time, purpose or result to the preceeding action.
It is also called the historical or narrative construction.
Please note that when the imperfect carries a waw consecutive, it is usually the progressive incipient imperfect and thus would be translated with the phrase (cid:8220)and then proceeded to be(cid:8221).
They are usually used in narration or prediction to carry forward the same idea as the originating verb indicates.
Let us the usage of this construction in Genesis 3:13 which would be translated (cid:8220)the serpent deceived me and so I proceeded to eat(cid:8221).
In this construction, the picture is that the eating of the apple is the consequence or the result of the deceit of the serpent.
Apart from this, the construction can also be used as a perfect of experience, a prophetic perfect.
Below are examples of the prophetic perfect that is continued by imperfects with narrative force.
A good example is Genesis 39:18 which would be translated as (cid:8220)A son shall be given to us...shall procced to be...and shall proceed to call(cid:8221).
Another example could be found in Numbers 22:21 whihc would be translated (cid:8220)And then Balaam procceded to arise (Mqfy@Fwa) and proceeded to saddle (#Obxjy@AwA) and proceeded to go (K7ley@AwA) and then the anger of God proceeded to be kindled (rxay@IwA)(cid:8221).
113CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 4.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied the indicative mood and its usages in the perfect and the imperfect verbs.
in the indicative perfect, we have the perfect of narration (this is used to indicate an action that has been completed or in the process of being completed without reference to any other action); the perefect of relation (this is used to denote a simple action that is completed in relation to another action which may be in the past, present or future); the perfect of experience (which designates a statement considered to be true because of similarity to previous actions).
Other forms of perfect includes the perfect of contingency, the perfect of certainty, the perfect of prophecy, the perfect of condition and the perfect of concurrency.
The indicative imperfect pictures an unfinished action whether in the past, present or future.
There are the incipient imperfect (which dsescribes an action that begins at a subsequent time to another action); the frequentative imperfect and the consecutive imperfect.
5.0 CONCLUSION The following are the major things you have learnt in this unit: • The indicative mood can be used in the perfect and the imperfect verbs.
• In the indicative perfect, we have the perfect of narration, the perefect of relation, the perfect of experience.
• Other forms of perfect includes the perfect of contingency, the perfect of certainty, the perfect of prophecy, the perfect of condition and the perfect of concurrency.
• The indicative imperfect pictures an unfinished action whether in the past, present or future.
• There are the incipient imperfect, the frequentative imperfect and the consecutive imperfect.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the sentence below and bring out the various verbs indicative mood and analyze their usage: (1) -l)e lb@')at;mi ht@f)a ytamf-d(a l)'w@m#:O-l)e hwhy rme)Oy@wa K7l'w: Nme#eO K1n;r;qa )l@'ma l)'rf#o;yI-l(a K7lom@;mi wyt@is;)am; yni)jwA lw@)o#O .K7leme yli wynfbfb@; ytiy)irf-yk@i ymix;l@aha-tyb@' y#OayI-l)e K1xjlf#O;)e 114 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies.
Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and the Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
115CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 3: THE SUBJUNCTIVE AND VOLUNTATIVE MOOD Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Subjunctive Imperfect 3.2 The Subjunctive Perfect 3.3 The Voluntative Mood 3.4 The Cohortative 3.5 The Jussive 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied about the indicative mood in the Hebrew language.
Under this mood, you have explored all the various ways in which the indicative mood can be used.
Expectedly, a lot of materials had to be taken at a time and resulted in the large materials.
In this unit, you would be studying the subjunctive and the voluntative mood.
The subjunctive mood is next to the indicative mood judging by the degrees of closeness to reality.
The voluntative mood as you have learnt earlier, mood is the mood that is used to express the volition of the speaker.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define the subjunctive mood • Explain the various possibilities of the subjunctive mood • Differentiate between the subjunctive imperfect and the subjunctive perfect.
• Describe the form of verb used in the voluntative mood • Explain the two major sub-forms of the voluntative mood • Identify the persons in which the voluntative can appear 116 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Subjunctive Imperfect As you have learnt earlier, the subjunctive mood is the mood of contingency.
It has also been said that the contingency may be in form of dependency or condition.
You have also learnt that the dependency and or condition can be further sub-divided into possibilities, desirabilities and responsibilities.
The conditional ideas of the subjunctive mood are naturally expressed by the imperfects.
It is only in rare conditions, which usually occurs only in the conditional sentences, that the perfect form of the verb may be used.
It has to be noted that the entire subjunctive mood are usually placed in the future time.
As it is, the variations in the translations would be due to the nature of the contingency that is expressed in the context, that is, whether it is a possibility, desirability or responsibility.
Possibility Possibilities are usually expressed by the auxiliary (cid:8216)could(cid:8217).
It is also however possible that the other forms (cid:8216)can, may and might(cid:8217) also occur.
The following are good examples of the use of the subjunctive to express possibilities: Isaiah 1:18 would be translated (cid:8220)though your sins be as scarlet they may be white as snow(cid:8221).
In this statement, the verb w@nybi@l;yA is in the subjunctive and expressing the possibility of turning the red sin into white.
Please note that the above verb is an imperfect state of the verb.
Psalm 24:3 is another good example.
It would be translated (cid:8220)Who may ascend into the hill of the LORD(cid:8221).
The verb used here is hle(JyA and it is used to list the possibilities of people who can go up and see the LORD.
Desirability In the translation of the subjunctive of desirability, the auxiliary verb (cid:8216)would(cid:8217) is usually used.
Please note however, that the use of these auxiliaries is subjected to variation.
A very good example of this could be found in 1 Kings 13:8 which would be translated (cid:8220)If you would give me half thy house, I would not go in with you(cid:8221).
The verbs used here are (cid:8216)give(cid:8217) 117CTH316 Hebrew Syntax (Nt@et@i) and (cid:8216)go in(cid:8217) ()bo)f).
The use of would in the context of the two verbs is an indication of its expression of desirability.
Responsibility In the translation of the subjunctive of responsibility, the auxiliary verb (cid:8216)should(cid:8217) is usually used.
Since, the idea of responsibility has different shades such as (cid:8216)obligation(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)necessity(cid:8217) other auxiliary verbs such as (cid:8216)ought(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)must(cid:8217)can also be used.
A good example can be found in Exodus 3:11 which can be translated, (cid:8220)Who am I that I should go to Pharaoh?
(cid:8221) The verb here is (cid:8216)go to(cid:8217) (K7l')') and the use of the auxiliary verb (cid:8216)should(cid:8217) is an indication that it is a subjunctive of responsibility.
An example expressing the shade of necessity is 1 Chronicles 12:33 which would be translated: (cid:8220)To know what Israel ought to do(cid:8221) (h#oe(jyA).
The verb h#oe(jyA expresses the idea of necessity.
3.2 The Subjunctive Perfect As you have been taught already, the thought pattern of the Hebrew perfect state is not used in the subjunctive.
In fact, some expressions which would have been in the subjunctive in the English language would be phrased differently in the Hebrew language, being a Semitic language.
3.3 The Voluntative Mood As had been said earlier, the voluntative mood is the mood that is used to express the volition of the speaker.
It is actually a modified form of the imperfect state that is used to give expression to desire on the part of the speaker.
It is an incipient incomplete state that is used to express a varying mood.
This is also a feature of the Arabic language, but you must note that both languages are Semitic in form.
When the cohortative is used in the first person, it would be used to express the intention, will or desire of the author when he is the subject of the action.
The jussive would be in the second and third persons, it would be used to express the desire, will or command of the author when some other person is the subject of the action.
3.4 The Cohortative The cohortative expresses the will of the speaker in reference to his own actions.
When the speaker is free, it expresses his desire or determination 118 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax and when the speaker is dependent on others, it expresses a wish or request.
Please, note that the form may be made more emphatic by the addition of the particle )nf.
The cohortative may be used in the following ways: To express strong determination as in Deuteronomy 12:20 which would be translated (cid:8220)I will eat flesh(cid:8221).
The verb hlfk;)o used here expresses the determination of the speaker to eat flesh.
It could also be used as an exhortation, especially if it appears in the plural form.
A good example could be found in Numbers 14:4 which would be translated (cid:8220)Let us return to Egypt(cid:8221).
The verb hbfw@#Onf as used here pictures the speaker as exhorting others to follow in an action he intends to undertake.
It could also be used to express a self-excitement as in Psalm 2:3 which would be translated (cid:8220)Let us break assunder(cid:8221).
The verb used here is hqft;nan:.
The cohortative could also be used to express a request or entreaty as in Genesis 50:5 which would be translated (cid:8220)Let me go up, I pray(cid:8221).
The verb used here is )n@f-hle(e)e. It could also be used to express a simple consent, especially when yielding to constraint.
A good example of this could be found in Genesis 46:30 which would be translated (cid:8220)Now let me die(cid:8221).
The verb used here is htfw@m)f. Finally, the cohortative can be used as a conditional or final sentence as in Psalm 2:8 which would be translated (cid:8220)Ask of me and I will give(cid:8221).
The verb used here is hnft@)ew:.
3.5 The Jussive The jussive, unlike the cohortative is used in the second and the third persons and could be used in any of the following ways: It could be used to express a command or injunction or prohibition in form of a wish.
Examples include Genesis 1:12 which would be translated (cid:8220)Let there began to be light(cid:8221).
The form of the imperative used here is yhiy:.
It could be used to express a simple wish as in 1 Samuel 1:23 which would be translated (cid:8220)Let the LORD begin to establish his word(cid:8221).
The imperefect used here is Mq'yF.
119CTH316 Hebrew Syntax It could also be used to express permission as in Ezra 1:3 which would be translated (cid:8220)Let him begin to go up and build(cid:8221).
The two verbs here are used to express the permission to go up (l(ayA) and that to build (NbeyIw:).
It could also be used to give advice or suggestion as in Genesis 41:33 which would be translated (cid:8220)Let Pharaoh look out a man(cid:8221).
The verb used here is )rey'.
Finally, the jussive could be used to express entreaties, petitions or prayers as in Genesis 44:33 which would be translated (cid:8220)Let thy servant remain, I pray(cid:8221).
The verb used here is )nf-b#ey'.
Please note that when you are in the voluntative mood, the negative particle would be l)a and not )lo.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt about two important moods: the subjunctive and the voluntative mood.
The subjunctive mood is used to express conditional ideas and thus, the imperfect is naturally used.
The three possibilities that could be expressed are: possibility, desirability and responsibility.
The voluntative mood on the other hand is used to express the volition of the speaker.
In the cohortative, the first person is used to express the intention, will or desire of the speaker as he is the subject of the action.
In the jussive, the second and the third persons are used and it will express the desire, will or command of the speaker, but with some other people as the subject of the action.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The subjunctive mood is used to express conditional ideas and thus, the imperfect is naturally used.
• The three possibilities that could be expressed are: possibility, desirability and responsibility.
• The voluntative mood on the other hand is used to express the volition of the speaker.
• In the cohortative, the first person is used to express the intention, will or desire of the speaker as he is the subject of the action.
120 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax • In the jussive, the second and the third persons are used and it will express the desire, will or command of the speaker, but with some other people as the subject of the action.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the verbs in the sentences below and bring out the verbs in the subjunctive and the voluntative mood and examine their usage: hwhy rme)Oy@wA ynigarfhjwA lw@)#Of (ma#Ofw: K7l')' K7y)' l)'w@m#;O rme)yO@wA (2) .yti)b@f hwhyla xab@oz:li t@fr;ma)fw: K1deyfb@; xq@at@i rqfb@f tlag:( e (3) h#oe(jt@a-r#Oe)j t)' K1(jydIwO) ykinO)fw: xbaz@fb@a y#aOyIl; tf)rfqfw: .,K1yle)' rma)o-r#Oe)j t)' yli t@fx;#Oamfw@ 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies.
Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and the Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
121CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 4: THE IMPERATIVE MOOD AND THE INFINITIVE Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Positive Commands 3.2 Negative Commands 3.3 The Infinitive Absolute 3.4 The Infinitive Construct 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you have studied the subjunctive as well as the voluntative moods.
You have learnt that while the subjunctive mood is used to express conditional ideas, the voluntative is used to express the volition of the speaker.
The various ways in which the voluntative mood can be used have also been clearly expressed.
In this unit, you are going to study the imperative mood and the infinitive, which combines both the qualities of the verb and the noun.
The imperative mood is the mood is used for expressing commands.
The two forms of command in this case, both the negative and the positive commands would be examined and their formation explained.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • Explain the use of the imperfect to form positive commands.
• Explain the role of the context in forming commands.
• Explain the formation of the negative command • Describe the formation of the infinitve absolute • List the functions of the infinitve absolute • Describe the formation of the infinitive construct • List the functions of the infinitive construct • Explain the differences between the infinitive absolute and the infinitive construct.
122 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Positive Commands Positive commands are usually expressed either by a special form of the imperative or the imperfect in an imperative context.
The force of the imperfect in an imperative context appears to be practically the same as that of the special from of the imperative.
Though the imperative imperfect may be more polite in certain situations, the two forms can also be used interchangeably.
Please note the following constructions: The imperative form can indicate positive commands without the use of any negative particle.
This is possible because since the imperative form would not take a negative particle, it is easy to use it for a positive command.
You should also remember that the imperative form of the Hebrew verb is built on the form of the imperfect.
It is thus, of the incomplete state and will usually be of the simple incipient incomplete state.
The imperative form is always used with the second person and may express the following: a.
A Command Examples of using the imperfect to issue positive commands could be found in the passages: l)'rF#o;yI yn'b@;-l)e rb@'d@a which would be translated (cid:8220)Speak unto the children of Israel(cid:8221) (Leviticus 1:2).
The imperfect rb@'d@a is used to express the command here.
hw'n:ynI-l)e K7l' Mw@q which would be translated (cid:8220)Arise, go to Nineveh(cid:8221) (Jonah 1:2).
The imperfects used here are K7l' and Mw@q and they are used to express commands.
b.
An Exhortation As an exhortation, this form can be used to urge or persuade people to take certain actions.
Examples of this can be found in the following passage: ryni Mkelf w@ryni which would be translated (cid:8220)Break up your fallow ground(cid:8221).
The imperfect used here is w@ryni and it is used to exhort the listerners to take a particular action.
123CTH316 Hebrew Syntax c. An Entreaty The imperfect can also be used as an entreaty.
In this case it is used as a serious and passionate request.
A good example can be found in Psalm 44:27: w@nlf@ htfrFz:(e hmfw@q which would be translated (cid:8220)Arise and save us(cid:8221).
The imperfect hmfw@q is used here as an entreaty to God and not just a simple command.
d. Permission The imperfect form can also be used in this form to express permission.
A good example can be found in Genesis 20:15: b#' K1yney('b@; bwO+@b@a K1ynepfl; ycir:)a hn@'hi K7lemeybi)j rme)Oy@wA which would be translated (cid:8220)And Abimelech said, (cid:8216)Where it is good in thine eyes, dwell(cid:8217)(cid:8221).
The imperfect b#' is used here to expresss permission on the part of the speaker.
e. Strong Assurances The strong assurances that can be used here can either be in form of promises or threats.
A good example here is the assurance given in Psalm 28:5: Mlf#Ofw@ry: bw@+b@; h)'r:w@ which would be translated (cid:8220)thou shalt see the prosperity of Jerusalem(cid:8221).
Please note that there are occasions when the voluntative h would be added to an imperative.
Since this h is the symbol of the cohortative, the addition of the cohortative to the imperative emphasizes the earnestness of the command.
This indicates that the author do not just call for the fulfilment but also desire it earnestly.
An example of this usage could be found in Psalm 51:14: K1ykerFd@: My(i#;Opo hdFm@;la)j which would be translated (cid:8220)Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation(cid:8221).
The presence of the h would make the translation to literally read (cid:8220)please, restore unto me the joy of thy salvation(cid:8221) with a lot of emphasis on the please.
All that have been treated above are the various uses of the imperfect to express a positive command.
Now, we are going to see some examples of the use of the imperfect form in an imperative context.
Please note that this formation can also be used for negative commands.
The first example would be taken from Genesis 3:14: K7l''t'' K1n:xog:@-l(a which would be translated (cid:8220)upon thy belly thou shalt go(cid:8221).
The second example could be 124 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax found in Exodus 20:9: K1t@ek;)lam;-lk@f tfy#io(fw: dbo(jta MymiyF t#e#' which would be translated (cid:8220)six days you shall labour(cid:8221).
3.2 Negative Commands Negative commands, that is, prohibitions, can be expressed only by the use of the imperfect form in an imperative context with a negative particle.
The following examples from the book Exodus are good examples: xcfr:t@i )lo which would betranslated (cid:8220)you shall not kill(cid:8221) (Exodus 20:13) bnig:t@i )lo which would betranslated (cid:8220)you shall not steal(cid:8221) (Exodus 20:15).
The distinction between the prohibitions expressed by the imperfect and that expressed by the jussive should be made clear.
In the prohibition expressed by the imperfect, in the second person, )lo (shall not) would be used; the jussive would however take l)a (do not).
In the third person, the ordinary imperfect would take )lo (he shall not) while the jussive would take )lo (let him not).
3.3 The Infinitive Absolute The infinitive absolute can be defined as the use of the verbal noun to express the bare idea of the verbal action.
It can also be used along with the inflected form to give emphasis to the action that is being expressed.
It can also stand alone and it this case, it can be used with the force of an exclamation or it could be used standing alone to express an adverb.
Please note that the infinitive do not take the article.
Please note the following uses of the infinitive absolute: 1.
The infinitive may be used instead of the finite verb to express the essential idea of the verb, albeit, vivdly and emphatically.
The following are good examples of the use of the infinitive instead of the finite verb: )bowF #op'xat;hi +pf#OfwOxy:-l)e l)'rF#o;yI K7leme rme)Oy@wA which would be translated (cid:8220)and the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, distinguishing and coming ....(cid:8221) (1 Kings 22:30).
The infinitves used here are distinguishing (#op'xat;hi) and coming ()bow) and they are to express the idea of the finite verb here.
N)Oc +xo#fOw: rqfb@f grohf NyIyF twOt#Ofw: r#ofbf@ lko)f These two phrases would be translated (cid:8220)killing of catle and slaughtering of sheep, eating of meat and drinking of wine(cid:8221) (Isaiah 125CTH316 Hebrew Syntax 22:13).
The infinitives used here are killing (grohf), slaughtering (+xo#fO), eating (lko)f) and drinking (twOt#Of).
2.
The infinitive may be used with the finite verb to add emphasis to the verb or to describe the action of the accompanying verb.
Please note that when the infinitive is placed before the finite verb, it adds an expression of intensity.
Examine the following examples carefully: dwIdF yn@ime@mi l)a#O;nio l)o#O;ni t@fr:ma)fw: which would be transalted (cid:8220)David earnestly besought me(cid:8221) (1 Samuel 20:6).
This is an example of the use of the infinitive along with the finite verb to express intensity.
If you look at the example very well, you would discover the two words standing together (l)a#O;nio l)o#O;ni).
w@nyl'(f K7lom;t@i K7lomfhj wyxf)e wOl w@rm;)Oy@wA which would be translated (cid:8220)And they said unto him, will you indeed rule over us?
(cid:8221) (Genesis 37:8).
In this usage, the imperfect is used to add emphasis to the finite verb and that is why in the translation (cid:8216)indeed(cid:8217) is used to reinforce the emphasis.
3.
The infinitive absolute can also be used to express constant progress or the complete existence of the action.
In this case, the infinitive absolute stands after the accompanying verb.
The following is an example of this usage: wOm@(i twO)bfc; hwFhywA lwOdgfw: K7wOlhf dywId@F K7ley@'wA which would be translated (cid:8220)David became greater and greater(cid:8221) (1 Chronicles 11:9).
In this case, the infinitive absolute is used to describe constant progress.
3.4 The Infinitive Construct The infinitive construct, is also an abstract verbal noun that is used like the gerund.
Thus, it can take suffixes and prepositions and at the same time has the government of its verb.
The following are the various uses of the infinitive construct: In the first instance, the infinitive construct may be used alone.
When used alone, it may be nominal or verbal.
If it appears as a noun, it can be used in all the cases of a noun or along with a preposition.
If it appears as a verb, it 126 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax can take a subject, an object or both.
Let us examine the following examples: wOd@g:nek@; rze(' wOl@-h@#oe(v)e wOd@bal; MdF)fhf twOyhv bwO+-)lo Myhilo)v hwFhy: rme)yo@wA which would be translated (cid:8220)And the LORD God said, man(cid:8217)s being alone is not good(cid:8221) (Genesis 2:18).
In this case, the infinitive construct twOyhv is used as the subject of a nominal sentence.
Let us examine this phrase: Cre)e Myhilo)v hwFhy: twO#(j MwOyb@; which would be translated (cid:8220)In the day of the LORD God(cid:8217)s making of the earth(cid:8221) (Genesis 2:4).
In this case, the infinitive construct twO#(j is placed in the genitive.
In 1 Kings 3:7, there is a phrase )ObwF t)c' (da)' )lo which would be translated (cid:8220)I know not to go out or come in(cid:8221).
In this case, the infinitive construct )ObwF t)c' is used in the accusative as the object of the verb.
In the second instance, the infinitve construct may be used with the preposition l;.
In such usages, it could be used for any of the following: It could be used to express design or purpose.
A good example of this usage could be found in 1 Samuel 1:3: hb@ez;liw: twOxjt@a#O;hil; hmfymiyF Mymiy@Fmi wOry(im' )w@hha #Oy)ihf hlf(fw: which would be translated (cid:8220)now this man would go up from his city yearly to worship and to sacrifice(cid:8221).
In this case, the infinitive constructs hb@ez;liw: twOxjt@a#O;hil are being used to express purpose.
It could also be used to express the result of an action as in 1 Kings 2:3: rmo#O;li wykfrfd;b@i tkeleli K1yhelo)v hwFhy: trem#e ;Omi-t)e t@fr:ma#Ofw: which would be translated (cid:8220)thou shall keep the charge of the LORD your God so as to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes(cid:8221).
The infinitive constructs tkeleli and rmo#O;lare used here to express the result of keeping the charge of Yahweh.
It could also be used to express the time of an action as in 2 Samuel 18:29. xalo#O;li lwOdg@fha NwOmhfhe ytiy)irF C(amayxi)j rme)Oy@wA which would also be translated (cid:8220)And Ahimaaz said, when Joab sent(cid:8221).
The infinitive construct here is xalo#O;li and it is used to tie an event to the time of another action.
The infinitive construct could also be used to express the periphrastic future.
A good example of this could be found in Genesis 15:12: 127CTH316 Hebrew Syntax )wOblf #Ome#@Oeha yhiy:wA which would be translated (cid:8220)it began to be that the sun was about to set(cid:8221).
Finally, the infinitve construct can also be used as a gerundive.
A gerundive is a Latin adjective ending in (cid:8220)-ndus(cid:8221).
It is formed from a verb and it actually means (cid:8216)must(cid:8217) or (cid:8216)ought(cid:8217) or (cid:8216)is to be(cid:8217).
A good example is in 2 Kings 4:13: K7lf twO#o(jla hme t)Oz@ha which would be translated (cid:8220)What is it to be done for you?
(cid:8221) Please note that to form the negative with the infinitive, the particle yti@l;b@i has to be used prefixed with l;.
An example of this could be found in Genesis 3:11: lkf)j yt@il;bil; which would be translated (cid:8220)I commanded you not to eat(cid:8221).
With the periphrastic or the gerundive, the negative particle is formed with either the l; or )lo.
A good example could be found in Amos 6:10: hwFhy: M#O'b@; ryk@iz;hal; which would be translated (cid:8220)the name of Yahweh must not be mentioned(cid:8221).
In this gerundive, the negative particle l;, is used here as the negative participle for the gerundive.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have studied the imperative mood and the infinitive.
The imperative mood is the mood used to express commands.
There are two forms of command: the positive and the negative commands.
While positive commands are formed either by a special form of the imperative, or the imperfect in an imperative context, the negative commands, which are prohibitions, are formed by the use of the imperfect in an imperative context with a negative particle.
The infinitive absolute is the use of the verbal noun to express the bare idea of the verbal action.
It is usually used with the inflected form to emphasize the action or be used alone with the force of an exclamation or as adverb.
The infinitive construct is the use of the infinitive as a gerund or as a gerundive.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The imperative mood is the mood used to express commands.
• There are two forms of command: the positive and the negative commands.
• While positive commands are formed either by a special form of the imperative, or the imperfect in an imperative context, the negative 128 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax commands, which are prohibitions, are formed by the use of the imperfect in an imperative context with a negative particle.
• The infinitive absolute is the use of the verbal noun to express the bare idea of the verbal action.
• The infinitive absolute is usually used with the inflected form to emphasize the action or be used alone with the force of an exclamation or as adverb.
• The infinitive construct is the use of the infinitive as a gerund or as a gerundive.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the various ways in which the imperative may be used?
2.
Differentiate between the functions of the infinitive absolute and the infinitive construct.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies.
Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and the Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
129CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 5: THE PARTICIPLES Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Participle 3.2 The Participle as a Verb 3.3 The Participle as a Noun 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcomed to the second to the last unit of this course on Hebrew Syntax.
At this point, all to be learnt about Hebrew syntax, albeit, theoretically, would come to an end, as in the next unit, what we will do mostly is going to be practical.
In the previous unit, we have studied about the infinitives, both as an absolute and as a construct.
In this unit, we are going to study about the participles and their syntactical functions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define a participle • Exaplain the qualities of a participle • Disucss the functions of a participle as a verb • Discuss the functions of a participle as a noun • Differentiate between a participle and an imperfect 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Participle The participle is a form of verb that is used to form complex tenses.
Because of their nature, they could also be used as adjectives.
The particle is usually used when the speaker or writer wishes to lay stress on the continuation of an action that has been described.
This is because the 130 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax descriptive power of the participle is great.
As a noun, the participle does not have any idea of time and as a verb, its idea of time has to be discerned from the context of the passage.
Let us examine the robustness of this idea from the scriptures.
The participle lp'nO can mean (cid:8216)falling(cid:8217) as in Numbers 24:4; it can mean (cid:8216)fallen(cid:8217) as in Judges 4:22 and can also mean (cid:8216)will be falling(cid:8217) as in Jeremiah 37:14.
At this point, it is important to differentiate between the imperfect and the participles.
In the imperfect, the action is multiplied (that is, carries a sense of repeatedness) while in the participle, the action is prolonged (that is, elongated).
In other words, the imperfect is continual and the participle is continuous.
A good example can be found in Isaiah 6:2 where the two forms are used withing the same passage: #O#O' MyIpanfk@; #O#O' wOl l(am@ami MydIm;(o MypirF#o; wynFpf hsekay: MyIt@a#O;b@i dxf)el; MyIpanfk@; which would be translated (cid:8220)Seraphim were standing above Him, each having six wings: with two he repeatedly covered his face(cid:8221).
In this example, the participle MydIm;( would represented the continual standing of the seraphim above the throne of God while the imperfect hsekay: denotes the repeated act of covering of the face.
3.2 The Participle as a Verb As you have learnt earlier, by virtue of their character, participles partake together of the qualities of a verb and as well as of a noun.
In the use of the participle, you need to note however that, one quality may be emphasized over the other, but neither would be used exclusively.
In this sub-unit, we are going to examine the functions of a participle when the verbal quality is the prominent one.
Firstly, the participle in its verbal use may be used to describe actions or to emphasize the duration of a given action in the past.
The use of the participle is actually expected to take us back to the event and help us to see the figures moving in the background.
A good example would be found in Jonah 1:11: r('sow: K7l'wOh My@Fha yki@ which would be translated (cid:8220)for the sea was going and stormy(cid:8221).
The use of the particple here is meant to picture the increasing momentum of the storm that has come upon the sea.
This is why the New American Standard Bible has translated the phrase as follows: (cid:8220)for the sea was becoming increasingly stormy(cid:8221).
Secondly, the participle may be used in the sense of pulling aside a screen to allow the readers to see what is going on at the present moment.
This is the usage that was used in Genesis 4:10: yli)' Myqi(jco K1yxi)f ym'd:@ lwOq which would be translated (cid:8220)the voice of your brother(cid:8217)s blood is crying out 131CTH316 Hebrew Syntax to me(cid:8221).
The participle here Myqi(jco is used to picture the past deed of Cain as coming up in the present to make God to act.
3.3 The Participle as a Noun In the sub-unit above, we have looked at the functions of the particple when the verbal quality receives prominence.
In the sub-unit, we will look at the participle when the noun quality is emphasized.
Firstly, in this case, the participle may be used either as the subject or the object of the sentence.
For example, the Hebrew hzexo would literally be translated (cid:8216)one seeing(cid:8217), hence would be the noun (cid:8216)seer(cid:8217).
Secondly, the participle can be used in apposition with a noun and thus become an adjective.
A good example of this would be found in Exodus 24:17: tlekv)o #O)'k@; which would be translated (cid:8220)like a devouring fire(cid:8221).
The participle, devouring is used as an adjective to qualify the other noun, fire.
Thirdly, it is possible that the participle in its noun emphasis, to carry an article.
When this happens, the participle takes on a new emphasis, and it is thus rendered as a relative clause.
A good example would be found in Genesis 12:7: wylf)' h)er:n@iha hwFhyla which would be translated (cid:8220)to Yahweh, who had appeared unto him.
(cid:8221) The participle that had been rendered (cid:8216)who had appeared(cid:8217) would literally be translated (cid:8216)the one appearing(cid:8217).
4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt the participle is a form of verb that is used to form complex tenses.
Thye can also be used as adjectives.
It is used mostly when the speaker wants to lay stress on the continuation of an action that has just been described.
It also has the capability to act as a noun as well as a verb.
As a verb, it is used to describe actions or emphasize the duration of a given action in the past.
As a noun, it can be used either as a subject or the object of a sentence.
It can also be used in apposition with a noun thus becoming an adjective and can also be used emphatically to make it to be rendered as a relative clause.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The participle is a form of verb that is used to form complex tenses.
132 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax • Participles can also be used as adjectives.
• Participles are used mostly when the speaker wants to lay stress on the continuation of an action that has just been described.
• Participles have the capability to act as a noun as well as a verb.
• As a verb, it is used to describe actions or emphasize the duration of a given action in the past.
• As a noun, it can be used either as a subject or the object of a sentence.
• It can also be used in apposition with a noun thus becoming an adjective and can also be used emphatically to make it to be rendered as a relative clause.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the use of the participle as a verb and also as a noun.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies.
Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and the Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
133CTH316 Hebrew Syntax UNIT 6: PRACTICAL EXAMPLES OF SYNTACTIC RELATIONS Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Practice Passage 1 3.2 Practice Passage 2 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You are welcomed to the last unit of this course on Hebrew Syntax where attempts would be made to put into practice all the theoretical bits that have been studied across these pages.
This would give you an insight into how to undertake syntactical analysis of the passages of the Hebrew Bible on your own.
Let me however let you know that mastering syntactical analsis has to do more with your resilience and constant practice.
If after this course, you fail to at least once in week, lay on your hands on some passages for practice, in a matter of months, you would have forgotten all that you have been taught.
Now, let us move on to the practice passages.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Explain the syntactical relations as picked up in the passages • Undertake syntactical analysis on your own • Derive exegetical interpretation from the passages 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Practice Passage 1 (2) (1) Cre)fhfw: .Cre)fhf t)'w: MyIma#O@fha t)' Myhilo)v )rfbf@ ty#iO)r'b@i tpexeram; Myhilo)v xaw@rw: MwOht; yn'p@;-l(a K7#eOxw: w@hbowF w@hto htfy:hf .rwO)-yhiy:wA rwO) yhiy: Myhilo)v rme)Oy@wA (3) .MyIm@fha yn'p;@-l(a 134 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax rwO)hf Nyb@' Myhilo)v ld@'b;y@AwA bwO+-yk@i rwO)hf-t)e Myhilo)v )r;y@AwA (4) )rfqf K7#eOxlaw: MwOy rwO)lf Myhilo)v )rfq;y@IwA (5) .
K7#eOxha Nyb'w@ Myhilo)v rme)y@wA (6) .dxf)e MwOy rqebo-yhiy:wA bre(e-yhiy:wA hlfy:lf .MyImflf MyImf Nyb@' lyd@Ib;ma yhiywI MyIm@fha K7wOtb@; (ayqirf yhiy: In the first verse, the first word needs close examination.
It is a compound word, made up of preposition beth and feminine noun ty#iO)r' which means (cid:8216)beginning(cid:8217).
Thus, it is clear that there is no definite article here and unlike what most English Bible translation reads, it would actually mean (cid:8216)in beginning(cid:8217).
This is theologically important because it stresses the fact that no one knows when the beginning actually took place, and so cannot be particularized as the most English translation implies.
The second word that calls for attention is MyIma#O@fha.
This word is also a combination of the definite article and the noun and thus would translate (cid:8216)the heavens(cid:8217).
It is important to note here that unlike the English language the Hebrew word for heavens is a plural word.
This is also theologically important because in the Hebrew worldview, there are seven heavens.
The first verse would then read: In beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
It is also important to note that as far as the Hebrew worldview is concerned, the cosmos did not just come to be by accident, they were called into being by God.
It also includes the fact that the existence of God in Hebrew theology is taken for granted.
In the second verse, two nouns are standing side by side (though not joined together by a makkeph).
When this happens in the Hebrew language, the two nouns are said to be in construct relations and would be translated as in the possessive case.
Hence, Myhilo)v xaw@rw: would be translated (cid:8216)the spirit of God(cid:8217).
There is also the word MyIm@fha which is a combination of the definite article and the noun (cid:8216)waters(cid:8217).
It is important to note here also that like heavens, (cid:8216)waters(cid:8217) is also written in the permanent plural.
Verse two would be translated ...
The third verse has the word rme)yO@wA, which is the combination of the waw consecutive and the qal imperfect third person masculine singular from the root word rma)f meaning he said, hence the word would be translated (cid:8216)and he began to say(cid:8217).
In translating this however, because the subject has been supplied, the subject would overrule the third person pronoun.
Thus, Myhilo)v rme)Oy@wA would be translated (cid:8216)And God began to say(cid:8217).
The next important word is yhiy: which is the qal imperfect, third person masculine singular jussive.
The root word for the verb is hyFhf , which means (cid:8216)to 135CTH316 Hebrew Syntax be(cid:8217)hence, the word would be translated (cid:8216)let there begin to be(cid:8217).
The word came up again in the third verse, but this time prefixed to the waw consecutive.
The presence of the waw consecutive would then change the meaning to the perfect form as indicated in the translation: (cid:8216)And God said let there begin to be light, and there began to be light(cid:8217).
In this second use of yhiy:wA, there comes a theological point.
The light that God created then is still the same light that we have to date.
Self-Assessment Exercise 1 Follow the examples above and try your hands on verses 4 to 6.
3.2 Practice Exercise 2 )#eOd@e twO)n:b@i (2) .rsfx;)e )lo y(iro hwhy dwIdfl; rwOmz:mi (1) (3) ynix'n:yA bb'wO#Oy: y#iOp;nA .ynil'hjnay: twOxnum; ym'-l(a ynic'yb@ir;yA (4) twemfl;ca )yg'b@; K7l')'-yk@i Mg@a .wOm#;O N(amal; qdece-yl'g@;(;mab@; .ynimuxjnay: hm@fh' K1t@en;(a#;Omiw@ K1+;b;#Oi ydim@f(i ht@f)a-yk@i (rf )rfy)i-)lo The first two words in the first verse are very important in this passage because, they actually form the title of the psalm under consideration though they are written as part of the psalm.
It has to be noted that though the word rwOmz:mi is a feminine noun meaning (cid:8216)song(cid:8217) or (cid:8216)psalm(cid:8217) the second word dwIdfl; is a combination of the preposition lamedh (which can be translated as (cid:8216)to(cid:8217), (cid:8216)for(cid:8217) or (cid:8216)at(cid:8217)) and the noun (cid:8216)David(cid:8217) and the words can be translated (cid:8216)a psalm to David(cid:8217) or (cid:8216)a psalm of David(cid:8217).
Traditionally, this title has always been used to signify the idea of possession; hence it has been translated to mean (cid:8216)a psalm of David(cid:8217) thus carrying the idea that the psalm has been written by David.
This traditional position has been buttressed as a result of the construct relationship that is expected to arise by the coming together of two nouns.
The next word is very important and this is the word hwhy.
This is the personal name of God that was revealed to Moses.
The name is usually considered too sacred for pronpunciation and thus usually written without vowel pointings.
This name however should not be pronounced Jehovah; it is much more probably Yahweh.
The word following it is the qal active participle of the verb h(frf.
It is important to note that it is the addition of the suffix y i that caused the dropping of the final h. When used along with the noun, it would be translated (cid:8216)Yahweh is my shepherd(cid:8217).
The last two words in the first verse give the typial example of the use of the negative 136 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax particle.
When all these words are put together, the first verse would be translated (cid:8216)A psalm of David.
Yahweh is my shepherd, no want(cid:8217).
Self-Assessment Exercise 2 Following the example above, undertake an analysis of the remaining verses.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have taken two familiar passages namely, Genesis 1:1-6 and Pslam 23:1-4 for hands on exercise in syntactical and exegetical analysis.
As you would have noticed above, the meanings and subsequently theological significances and brought to the fore as the words are analyzed based on their usage in the passage.
Also important, is the way the literal ranslations are compared with the existing English translations.
For example, we have discovered that the article inserted into the first phrase in English versions of the Bible is not in the Hebrew Bible and thus point out its theological significance.
5.0 SUMMARY The following are the major points you have learnt in this unit: • The article (cid:8216)the(cid:8217) is not part of the first phrase of Genesis 1:1.
• Some Hebrew words are permanently written in the plural such as heavens and waters to reflect Hebraic thought on these words.
• When two nouns are standing together, they are said to be in construct relations and thus would be translated in the genitive case.
• The word YHWH is the personal name of God that was revealed to Moses and was considered too sacred to be pronounced; hence it is usually written without vowels.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Take another passage of the Hebrew Bible and try to do an analysis of the first two verses.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alt, A., Eibfeldt, O. Kahle P. and Kittel, R. (1977).
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia.
Germany: World Bible Societies.
137CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Goodrick, Edward W. (1980).
Do It Yourself Hebrew and Greek.
Grand Rapids: Academie Books.
Hebrew and English Bible (1997).
Jerusalem: Israel Association for the Dissemination of Biblical Writings and the Bible Society in Israel.
Murphey, Cecil B.
(1989).
The Dictionary of Biblical Literacy.
Nashville: Oliver-Nelson Books.
Yates, Kyle M. (1954).
The Essentials of Biblical Hebrew.
Revised Edition.
New York: Harper and Row.
138 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax GLOSSARY Hebrew English Hebrew English ) (cid:8216)Aleph #OwOn)v man, mankind father we b)f w@nx;na)j vb.
perish (Hi) vb.
gather (Ni) dba)f Psa)f destory assemble vb.
be willing vb.
bind, imprison hbf)f rsa)f needy, wretched ark, chest NwOyb;)e NwOr)f Abinadab cedar bdfnfybi)j zre)e vb.
mourn way, path lba)f xra)o (f) stone vb.
curse Nbe)e rra)f Abram (f) fire Mrfb;)a #O)' lord, commander, master (f) woman, wife, Nwd)f h#@Of)i female man, mankind Beth Mdf)f b (f) ground, earth in, on, among hmfdf)j b@; Lord (f) well ynfdo)f r)'b@; vb.
love odious grapes bha)f My#Oi)ub@; tent, hut, habitation vb.
deal treacherously lhe)o dgab@f light vb.
be light, shine garment rwO) dgeb@e then vb.
(Hi) separate, select z)f ldab@f sister pit, grave twOx)f rwOb@ rxa)a after, behind #OwOb@ vb.
be ashamed where?
vb.
plunder, spoil y)a zzab@f enemy vb.
choose, prove by')o rxab@f how?
how!
vb.
trust K7y)' x+ab@f #Oy)i man, husband N+eb@e (f) womb God vb.
perceive, (Hi) explain l)' Nyb@i unto house, tent l)e tyIb@a worthless (pl) idols vb.
weep lyli)e hkfb@f (f) widow first-born, eldest hnfmfl;)a rwOkb@; ox, thousand nothingness, not Ple)' ylib@; (f) mother vb.
mingle, confuse M)' llabf@ if, whether vb.
build M)i hnfb@f (f) truth, firmness master, ba(cid:8217)al tme)e l(ab@a length vb.
consume (hi) kindle K7re)o r(ab@f 139CTH316 Hebrew Syntax vb.
seize suddenly vb.
steal t(ab@f bnag@f vb.
cleave, spilt Daleth (qab@f d@ herd, cattle bear rqab@f bd@o morning vb.
cleave, cling rqeb@o qbad@f #Oqab@f vb.
(pi) seek, ask rbad@f vb.
speak (pi) iron plague, pestilence lzer;b@a rbed@e xrab@f vb.
flee, (hi) drive away #Obad@; honey vb.
kneel down, bless fish K7rab@f gd@f (f) knee vb.
rule, judge (ni) K7reb@e Nyd@i contend at law (f) blessing vb.
(pi) crush, trample hkfrfb@; hkfd@f flesh (f) gate, door r#ofb@f tled@e (f) daughter, girl, vb.
be like (pi) compare tb@a hmfd@f grand-daughter (f) desolation (f) likeness, image htfb@f tw@md;@ in the midst of (f) knowledge K7wOtb@; t(ad@a Gimmel thorny plant, thistles g rd@ar;d@a NwO)g@f pride, swelling #Orad@f vb.
tread, seek vb.
redeem, deliver vb.
shoot, sprout l)ag@f )#fOd@f vb.
be high, be proud grass h@bag@f )#eOd@e mighty one, man vb.
(pi) anoint rbege@ N#Oad@f (f) bank He hdfg@f h great, elder vapour, breath, Abel lwOdg@f lbehe valley glory, splendour )yg@' dwOh joy, exultation temple lyg@i lkfyh' vb.
uncover, reveal (ni) multitude, tumult hlfg@f NwOmhf uncover one(cid:8217)s self vb.
roll behold!
llag@f Nh' also vb.
turn, overturn (ni) Mg@a K7pahf be chnaged vb.
deal with, do vb.
kill lmag@f grahf (good or evil) (f) vine vb.
conceive Npeg@e hrfhf sojourner, stranger vb.
go, walk rg@' K7lahf #Orag@f vb.
drive out w Waw rain and M#ego@e w: 140 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Zayin strength, power z lyixa vb.
sacrifice wise, skillful xbazf Mkfxf sacrifice (f) wisdom xbaze hmfk;xf gold bulwark, wall, rampart bhfzf lx' vb.
(ni) be enlightened; fat, marrow rhazf blexe (hi) teach, warn vb.
be a stranger vb.
pollute, pierce rw@z llaxf (ni) be estranged (hi) begin vb.
remember dream rkazf MwOlxj male sickness rkfzf ylix/ vb.
prune (pi) sing vb.
divide, plunder rmazf qlaxf vb.
commit fornication vb.
be sick hnfzf hlfxf vb.
cry out (f) heat, sun q(azf hm@fx' old man, elder favour, grace Nq'zf Nx' arm, strength mercy, kindness (aroz; dsexe (razf vb.
sow (hi) produce #Oraxf vb.
plow, engrave seed (hi) be silent seed vb.
lack (raze rsaxf Heth vb.
delight in x Cpaxf vb.
hide (ni) hide vb.
be dismayed )bfxf ttaxf one(cid:8217)s self (hi) terrify line, cord arrow, handle lbexe Cx' vb.
keep a feast (f) dry land ggaxf hbfrfxf vb.
cease vb.
be angry, burn ldaxf hrfxf #Odaxf vb.
(pi) renew hp@fr;xe (f) reproach, shame #Odfxf fresh, new b#aOxf vb.
think, impute #Odexo new moon, month br'xo Horeb vb.
be in pain, writhe, vb.
tremble lw@x draxf bring forth (hi) terrify (f) wall Teth hmfwOx + outside, abroad clean, pure Cw@x rwOh+f vb.
see, gaze vb.
be clean (pi) purify hzfxf rha+f vb.
be strong, (hi) seize dew qzaxf l+a vb.
miss, sin before, not yet )+fxf Mre+e (f) sin vb.
be good t)+@fxa bwO+ (adj) living, fresh vb.
be unclean yxa )m'+f (subs) life (pi) defile 141CTH316 Hebrew Syntax y Yodh #obek@e lamb rwO)y: river, Nile #Obak@f subdue one beloved vessel dydiyf dk@a vb.
know, understand thus, here (dayf hk@o Judah star hdfw@hy: bkfwOk@ Joshua (f) cup (a#OuwOhy: swOk@ daily, by day dog MmfwOy blek@e (f) dove harp, lyre hnfwOy rwOn@k@i vb.
be united (f) wing dxayf Pnfk@f vb.
be good (hi) do well throne, seat b+ayf )s@'k@i wine silver, money NyIya Psek@e vb.
(hi) decide, prove bribe, ransom xkayf rpek@o vb.
bring forth, (ni) be vb.
(pi) cover dlayf rpak@f born, (hi) beget (pu) be atoned for vb.
wail, lament cherub llayf bw@rk@; (f) right hand vineyard Nymiyf Mrek@e vb.
suck vb.
cut off qnayf trak@f vb.
add, repeat vb.
stumble Psayf l#aOk@f vb.
chastise, admonish vb.
write rsayf btak@f wine-press (f) shoulder bqeye Pt'k@f vb.
be dislocated Lamedh (qayf l vb.
awake to, for, at Cqayf l; Jerusalem alone MyIla#Ofw@ry: dbal; xar'yf moon #Obalf vb.
be clothed, put on greenness, foliage vb.
lodge, pass the night qreye Nw@l #Orayf vb.
possess, inherit Mxalf vb.
fight, do battle Israel night l)'rf#o;yi hlfy:la straight, upright vb.
capture r#Ofyf dkalf remnant therefore rteye Nk'lf Kaph vb.
learn, (pi) teach k@ dmalf as, like, according to why?
k@; hmflf vb.
be heavy, be honoured vb.
take db'k@f xqalf honour, glory tongue dwObk@f NwO#Olf vb.
wash, trample heart sbak@f bl' as, like, as soon as bread wOmk@f Mxele 142 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Mem vb.
(hi) declare, tell m dganf very, exceedingly before, in the presence of d)om; dgene (f) hundred vb.
banish, expel h)fm' xdanf anything vb.
vow hmfw@)m; rdanf luminary vow rwO)mf rdene vb.
(pi) refuse vb.
(pi) guide, lead N)amf lhanf vb.
reject, refuse river s)amf rhfnf tower vb.
rest ld@fg;mi xw@n shield vb.
inherit, take Ng'mf lxanf ddamf vb.
measure #Oxfnf serpent (f) measure (f) bronze, copper hd@fmi t#Oexn; vb.
die libation tw@m K7sene death vb.
remove twemf (sanf psalm lad, servant rwOmz:mi r(ana east, sunrise vb.
fall xrfz:mi lpanf rxfmf tomorrow #Opene soul rain vb.
lift, carry r+fmf )#ofnf species, kind chief, prince Nymi )y#oinf vb.
sell vb.
kiss rkamf q#Oanf angel, messenger vb.
give, establish K7)fl;ma Ntanf work, business Samekh hkf)lfm; s lodging-place vb.
turn, surround NwOlmf bbasf salt circuit, around xlame bybisf (f) queen horse hk@fl;ma sw@s (f) offering, present mare hxfn;mi hsfw@s collection, gathering rock, crag hweq;mi (lase dwelling, place, abode (f) fine flour MwOqmf tleso Moses vb.
lean, support h#Oem K7masf vb.
anoint vb.
lament, mourn x#aOmf dpasf anointed one book xay#iOmf rpes' proverb (cid:8216)Ayin l#Ofmf ( weight dark, cloud lqf#;Omi b(f Nun vb.
serve n dba(f oracle, utterance servant, labourer M)un; dbe(e south country vb.
pass over bgene rba(f 143CTH316 Hebrew Syntax witness (f) righteousness d(' hqfdfc; (f) testimony vb.
(pi) command tw@d(' hwfcf Eden rock Nde(' rwc vb.
hoe vb.
laugh rda(f qxacf vb.
bear witness, testify Zidon dw@( NwOdyci (f) burnt-offering prosper hlfwO( xlacf age, eternity, world image MlfwO( Mlece bird, fowl deep darkness PwO( twemfl;ca vb.
fly vb.
be thirsty Pw@( )m'cf vb.
awake sprout, growth rw@( xmace strength vb.
cry out z(o q(acf vb.
abandon, forsake vb.
keep watch bza(f hpfcf vb.
go up cruse hlf(f txap@aca dust adversary rpf(f rca tree (f) adversity C(' hrfcf Pe Zarephath p tpar;cf (f) side, corner vb.
show hostility h)fp@' rracf toward, vex here Qoph hp@o q fruit vb.
(pi) receive, take yrip@; lbaqf bit, morsel vb.
collect, gather tpa@ Cbaqf door vb.
bury xtap@e rbaqf vb.
open before, east xtap@f Mdeqe vb.
be open, be simple collect, wait for htfp@f hwfqf rebellion, transgression height (#Oap@e hmfwOq bit, morsel small, younger tp@a N+oqf vb.
be open, be vb.
be little, small htfp@f N+oqf simple (pi) deceive, entice door (f) incense xtap@e tre+oq; Tsade Cain c NyIqa (f) flock wall N)Oc ryqi host meal )bfcf xmaqe vb.
be right (pi, hi) justify vb.
acquire qd'cf hnfqf qdece righteousness #O#aOqf collect 144 CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Resh vb.
laugh r qxa#of vb.
see vb.
be gray, aged h)frf by#oi first, former vb.
put, place NwO#O)ri My#oi (f) beginning vb.
be prudent, wise ty#Oi)r' lka#of fourth vb.
rejoice, be glad y(iybir; xma#of vb.
lie down (f) rejoicing, joy, festivity Cbarf hxfm;#oi vb.
tremble, be agitated vb.
hate zgarf )n'#of (f) foot hairy, goat lgere ry(i#of vb.
rule, have dominion prince, head, chief hdfrf r#oa vb.
pursue vb.
burn Pdarf Pra#of vb.
be enlarged, refreshed choicest vine xwarf qr'#o xayri vb.
(hi) inhale, smell #O Shin vb.
be exalted, rise Saul Mw@r lw@)#O vb.
run (f) Sheol, underworld Cw@r lwO)#@O breadth vb.
ask bxaro l)a#fO vb.
hover, brood rod, tribe, staff Pxarf +be#Oe vb.
wash, bathe rest, Sabbath Cxarf tb@f#Oa vb.
be distant, (hi) remove vb.
ruin, devastate qxarf dda#Of vb.
strive, contend emptiness, iniquity byri )w:#Of strife vb.
turn back, return byri bw@#O vb.
ride trumpet bkarf rpfwO#O chariot ox, bull bkere rwO#O vb.
tread, tramble vb.
bow down smarf hxf#Of #omarf vb.
creep +xa#Of vb.
slaughter famine vb.
flow, overwhelm b(frf P+a#Of shepherd vb.
put, rest h(ero ty#Oi vb.
break, be evil vb.
lie down ((arf bka#Of vb.
heal, cure vb.
forget )pfrf xka#Of vb.
delight in, be peace offering hcfrf Mle#Oe gracious to vb.
slay, murder falsehood, deception xcarf rqe#Oe evil, wicked vb.
swarm (#Ofrf Cra#Of #o Sin Cre#Oe creeping things (coll) vb.
be satisfied, sated vb.
(pi) serve, minister (ba#of tra#Of field, plain vb.
drink hde#of htf#Of 145CTH316 Hebrew Syntax Taw Taw t t form, figure sea monster r)at@o Nyn@it@a waste, formlessness (f) glory, splendour w@ht@o hrf)fp;t@i (f) deep, abyss (f) prayer MwOht@; hl@fpit;@ under, beneath, instead of vb.
seize, catch txat@a #opat@f continuity vb.
thrust, strike dymit@f (pat@f vb.
finish, complete (f) heave-offering Mmat@f hmfw@rt@; 146
