 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: FRE 301 COURSE TITLE: TRANSLATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT FRE : 301 TRANSLATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developers: Dr. Ozidi Bariki Department of French University of Ilorin Ilorin – Nigeria and J.
A. Fagboun Nigeria French Language Village Ajara, Badagri Nigeria Unit Writers: Dr. Ozidi Bariki Department of French University of Ilorin Ilorin – Nigeria and J.
A. Fagboun Nigeria French Language Village Ajara, Badagri Nigeria Programme Leader: Dr. Christine Ofulue National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Ms Lucy Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS Introduction What you will learn in this course Course Objectives Working through this course Course Materials Study Units Set textbooks Assignment file Assessment Tutor-marked Assignment (TMAS) Final examinations and grading Course marking scheme Course overview How To Get The Most From This Course Tutors and tutorials Summary FRE 301: TRANSLATION This course is one semester course in the third year of B.A.
(Hons) Degree in French Studies.
It is a two (2) credit course of twenty units.
It intends to introduce students to translation of texts from English to French and vice versa.
This course is important for students because it enables them to put into practice the vocabulary and grammar they acquire in the course of this programme.
Besides, students will have course to translate one text or the other even after their graduation.
Translation is a fast growing academic field.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about and the materials you will use.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course.
There is also a separate Assignment File.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of FRE 301: is to introduce you to the translation of simple, but interesting passages from English to French and French to English.
It also aims to teach you the basic techniques of translation.
This will be achieved by aiming to: • introduce you to the basic techniques or procedures of translation • increase your vocabulary • increase your knowledge of grammar • introduce you to different language registers COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set above, the course has clearly defined objectives.
Each unit has its specific objectives.
The unit objectives are spelt out at the beginning of each unit.
You will have to read them before you go into the main work.
Always read the unit objectives very carefully and make sure that you do what is required of you.
The objectives of the course are as follows: On the successful completion of the course, you should be able to: 1. identify, define and use the seven main techniques of translation 2. translate simple passages from English to French and French to English 3. have a rich store of vocabulary in a variety of areas.
4. acquire different idiomatic expressions 5. have a broadened horizon 6. improve on your grammar.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course you should read the study unit carefully, read the set books and other materials related to translation.
Each unit has self- contained exercises.
You will have to submit your Tutor-Marked Assignments to your tutors.
The course will take you 20 weeks to complete.
You will see in this course guide the components of the course and what you have to do.
You will also see how to allocate your time to each unit in order to successfully complete the course in due time.
COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File.
STUDY UNITS There are twenty study units in this course.
They are: Unit 1: Definition of translation Unit 2: Techniques of translation Unit 3: L’emprunt (borrowing) Unit 4: Le calque Unit 5: La transposition Unit 6: La modulation Unit 7: L’équivalence Unit 8: L’adaptation Unit 9: En as an adverbial pronoun Unit 10: Y as an adverb Unit 11: Un merveilleux anniversaire Unit 12: Le Nigeria Unit 13: Les Jeux Olympiques I Unit 14: Les Jeux Olympiques II Unit 15: Telephone Conversation Unit 16: A Road Accident Unit 17: My Uncle’s Flat Unit 18: A Visit to a Shop Unit 19: My first Visit to Lagos Unit 20: Seasons in France The first eight units deal with the techniques you need to know in order to translate properly.
The remaining twelve units have to do with practical translation from French to English and English to French.
The passages are graded from simple to the most complex.
Passages in Units 9 – 14 will require translating from French to English, while Units 15 – 20 are passages to be translated into French.
Try and study each unit in a week or at most two.
Each unit has specific objectives, reading materials and explanations.
You start translation proper in Unit 9.
Each unit also contains self-assessment exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments.
All this will assist you to achieve the overall objectives of the course.
SET TEXTBOOKS Ajiboye, T. (2003): Companion to French Grammar, A graded workbook for Anglophone Students.
Ilorin: Info-links.
Bescherelle (1990): La Conjugaison 12,000 verbes, Paris: Coffman, M.E.
(1973) : French Grammar, New York : McGraw-Hill.
Nida, E. (1964): Towards a Science of Translating, Leiden, J. Breiden.
Nida, E.A & Taber, C. R. (1969) : Theory and Practice of Translation.
London: United Bible Societies; Leiden: E.J.
Brill.
Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. Van Hoof, H. (1989): Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris: Editions Ducolot.
Vinay, J. P et Darbelnet, J.
(1958) : Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Didier Erudition.
DICTIONARIES: Harrap English/French Paperback Dictionary, (2001): Edinburgh EH7 4AY: Chambers Harrap Publishers Ltd. Collins Robert French Dictionary Concise Edition (2006): Westerhill Road, Bishopbrigs, Glasgow: Great Britain.
ASSIGNMENT FILE There is an Assignment File where there are twenty assignments in the isle.
The assignments carry 40% of the total mark for the course.
The mark you obtain in the assignment will count towards the final mark you obtain in the course.
ASSESSMENT The assessment of this course is divided into two main parts.
The first parts are the tutor-marked assignments and the second part is a written examination.
You must submit the assignment to your tutor for assessment.
Always respect the deadline the tutor gives you.
The work submitted to your tutor for assessment will count for 40% of your total course mark.
You will sit for a final examination of three hours duration at the end of the course.
The examination will also count for 60% of your total course mark.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAS) There are twenty tutor-marked assignments in the course.
You need to submit only five of the twenty assignments of which the highest four marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% toward your total course mark.
When you have completed your assignment, send it together with a TMA (Tutor-marked assignment) form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination to FRN 3 will be of three hours’ duration and carry a total of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will reflect the types of self-testing, and tutor-marked assignments.
You need to revise before you sit for the examination.
You may also need to revise the self-assessment tests and tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The examination covers information from all parts of the course.
The final examination will be in three parts.
Part I will be on the theoretical part that covers Unit 1 – 8.
Parts II and III will involve practical translations of passages from French to English and English to French respectively.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME The table that follows will show you the breakdown of the course marking.
Assessment Marks Assessment 1 – 6 five assignments, best four marks of five count at 10% each = 40% of course marks Final Examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks COURSE OVERVIEW There are twenty units in the course.
You are to spend one week on each unit.
Assignment 1 will come at the end of Unit 3.
Assignment 2 at the end of Unit 9.
Assignment 3 at the end of Unit 12, Assignment 4 at the end of Unit 16 Assignment 5 the end of Units 19.
HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THE COURSE A major advantage in distance learning is that you have the opportunity of studying at your own pace.
The course materials replace the teacher.
That explains why you must read and study the units with all the seriousness they demand.
The first eight units are theoretical.
They teach you the techniques of translation.
The remaining twenty units have a common format: an introduction, defined objectives, the text to translate, explanations, a model translation, conclusion, summary, tutor-marked assignments.
Assignments are spread over the course.
Take the assignments seriously as they are crucial to your success in the overall examinations.
Know the various units so well that when you come across similar practical situations in life you can easily recall the expressions and words to be used.
For instance, the moment you enter any house, try and remember the French equivalent of the objects in the house.
SUMMARY FRE 301: Introduces to you the translation of passages from English to French and vice versa.
On successful completion of this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of translation techniques.
You must have also enriched your vocabulary on different aspects of life.
You will be able to: • translate simple but useful texts • identify and explain translation techniques • identify and explain some grammatical elements in French • know the equivalent of many English words and expressions in French.
• Broaden your horizon.
FRE: 301 TRANSLATION COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developers: Dr. Ozidi Bariki Department of French University of Ilorin Ilorin – Nigeria and J.
A. Fagboun Nigeria French Language Village Ajara, Badagri Nigeria Unit Writers: Dr. Ozidi Bariki Department of French University of Ilorin Ilorin – Nigeria and J.
A. Fagboun Nigeria French Language Village Ajara, Badagri Nigeria Programme Leader: Dr. Christine Ofulue National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Ms Lucy Jibrin National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.UNIT 1 DEFINITION OF TRANSLATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Definition of Translation 3.1 Definition of Terms in translation 3.1.1 Thème and Version 3.2 Steps in translating 3.2.2 Re-expression 3.3 Faux amis 3.4 Self exercise 3.5 The need for good dictionaries 3.6 Computers and the internet 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answers 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to translation.
You will read general notions or ideas on translation.
You will learn the definition of translation and some basic terms in translation.
Thus, you will learn some words that are related to translation.
2.0 Objectives On the successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • define and explain what translation is • define and explain what langue cible is • define and explain what langue source is • define and explain what thème and version are • explain what literal translation is • identify and explain what faux amis are • give some examples of translations that are not word for word.
You will now appreciate the meaning of translation from a clearer perspective.
3.0 What is Translation ?
Translation deals with the transfer of a message from one language into another.
In this course, the two languages involved are English and French.
Catford, an English linguist and author of A Linguistic Theory of Translation (1965) defines translation as the “the replacement of textual material in one language (source language) by equivalent textual material in another language (target language)”.
Two other well-known translators, Eugene Nida and Charles Taber, provide the following definition: Translating consists of reproducing, in the target language the nearest equivalent to the message in the source language, in the first place in the semantic aspect and in the second place, in the stylistic aspect.
J. P. Vinay and J. Darbelnet give a rather simple definition: “le passage d’une langue A à une langue B pour exprimer une même réalité’.
(“the passage of language A into language B to express an identical reality”).
Note that you translate a message or a text and NOT a language.
Language is however the tool for translation.
You go further to learn other basic terms in translation.
3.1 Definition of Translation Terms Langue source and Langue cible The source language (SL) or langue source is the language of the original text.
The target language (TL) or langue cible is the language into which you translate the message.
For instance, if the text is from French to English, French becomes la langue source (LS) and English la langue cible (LC).
You may also use langue de départ (LD) to mean langue source.
Langue d’arrivée (LA) has the same meaning with langue cible.
In order to be able to translate, you will need a good grasp of the two languages in question.
That is one major reason you should take this course very seriously.
If you master English and French, translation will not be a problem to you.
The definition provided by Nida and Taber shows that there are two major aspect of translation: the semantic aspect and the stylistic aspect.
The semantic aspect simply refers to the meaning while the stylistic aspect points to the style.
Style means the manner in which the author has written the text.
In translation, there are some very basic terms that you have to know.
You should know the terms in English and their French equivalents.
Note that as a student translator, you should be proficient in the two languages.
When you write and speak two languages fairly well, you are called a bilingual person (un bilingue) Happily, bilinguals who are translators are in high demand and are highly paid.
3.1.1 Thème and Version In some countries where teachers teach in their mother tongue, students translate from their mother tongue into the foreign language and vice versa.
When you translate a text from your mother tongue into a foreign language, the translation exercise is known as le thème.
But it is called la version, if you translate into your mother tongue from a foreign language.
To be able to translate properly you will need to know some steps that could guide you.
3.2 Steps in Translation 3.2.1 Reading and Comprehension Translation involves some basic steps.
The first step is your ability to read the text very well.
You can only translate a text successfully if you can read it well.
Of course, mere reading well is not enough.
Good translation presupposes good comprehension.
In other words, you can only translate what you understand.
Understanding the text is very crucial to a good translation.
3.2.2 Re-expression The final stage is re-expression or encoding.
That is the stage of the actual translation.
This implies that you can read and understand the text very well.
Verify difficult words and tenses and cultural implications.
Thereafter, you start the actual translation.
That is to say you re-express or encode the message in another language.
Note that translation is an act of communication where you convey a message from one language into another.
If you translate wrongly, two things are likely to happen: 1. you may communicate a wrong message 2. you may not be communicating at all.
Here are a few examples of wrong translations.
You will study them under faux amis.
3.3 Faux amis Read the following sentence “I am going to the library to read” The correct translation is “Je vais à la bibliothèque pour lire» The tendency is for some students to translate « library » as librairie.
Thus, some students may say “Je vais à la libraire pour lire ».
That will be an erroneous translation.
Librairie means bookshop in English.
The temptation to use librairie is due to the visual similarity in the two words – librairie (in French) and library (in English).
They do not, however, mean the same thing.
There are many such words, or expressions in English and French.
They may have a similar form, but they mean entirely different things.
Such words are called “faux amis” or “false friends”.
Below is another example of faux amis.
May God bless you The right translation is Que Dieu vous bénisse or Que Dieu te bénisse Here again, there is tendency to translate “bless” by using the French word “blesser”.
Blesser in French means “to hurt”.
So if you translate “May God bless you” as “Que Dieu vous blesse”, you will be saying an entirely different thing.
You will be asking God to hurt the person you are praying for.
So your prayer becomes a curse!
Read two more faux amis below Le magasin means shop and NOT magazine Eventuellement means possibly, should the occasion arise It does not mean eventually.
These two examples should make you to realize the need to ensure good translation.
3.4 Self-exercise Translate the following sentences into French.
1.
God has blessed this man 2.
It is a store 3.5 The need for good dictionaries In order to understand a text fully, you may have to consult good dictionaries from time to time.
You look up for difficult words or expressions in the dictionaries.
You may also verify the meaning of words that are not entirely new.
When you are in doubt as regards spelling or gender, you have recourse to a dictionary.
You need not only monolingual dictionaries, but also bilingual ones.
A monolingual dictionary is a dictionary where the author or authors define the words in the same language.
A bilingual dictionary involves two different languages e.g.
French and English.
It is a advisable for you to have at least three good dictionaries: (1) an entirely English dictionary (un dictionnaire unilingue anglais) (2) a bilingual English-French Dictionary.
(3) A unilingual French Dictionary (un dictionnaire unilingue français) There is need, however, for you to be careful in the use of dictionaries.
Good dictionaries give several options for the same word.
You have to choose the right option in the light of the context.
3.6 Computers and the Internet Computers and the Internet too can be very useful.
Make good use of your computer, if you are computer-literate.
Use computer and internet translations with caution.
They often produce very bad translations but they offer relevant equivalent terms in isolation.
You may also need other documents such as encyclopedias and glossaries.
As you make good use of these materials, your knowledge of French will improve rapidly.
4.0 Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt what translation is.
You can define translation in English and French.
You have also learnt some important terms in translation.
You know the steps in translation and the importance of dictionaries and other documents.
You also know what faux amis are.
4.1 Answers to Self-exercise 1.
Dieu a béni cet home 2.
Il est dans un magasin or Il se trouve dans un magasin 5.0 Summary This unit has equipped you with the basic steps in translation.
You can readily identify some reasons why you need to translate correctly.
The knowledge you have acquired in this unit will be very helpful for the remaining units of the course.
Read this unit over and over again and get all the facts at your finger tips.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 1.
Define translation 2.
What are langue source and langue cible?
3.
What are the steps towards a good translation?
4. a) Define faux amis b) Give two examples of faux amis in English and French 5.
Why do we need dictionaries while translating?
7.0 References Nida, E. (1964) : Towards a Science of Translating.
J. Breiden, Leiden.
Van, Hoof, H. (1989): Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris : Editions Ducolot.
Vinay, J. P et Darbelnet, J.
(1958) : Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Didier Erudition.
UNIT 2 TECHNIQUES OF TRANSLATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Techniques of Translation 3.1 La Traduction Directe 3.2 La Traduction Indirecte 3.3 La Traduction Littérale (Literal Translation) 3.4 Self exercise 4.1 Answers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 Introduction This unit will introduce you to a particular technique of translation called la traduction littérale (literal translation).
It is one of the seven methods J.P. Vinay and J. Darbelnet have recommended.
It is an easy way of translating.
2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to : • know globally the different techniques of translation • embark on literal translation (la traduction littérale) • know when you are advised against literal translation.
• Know some expressions in French: porter de l’eau à la rivière, porter de l’eau à la mer, se vanter.
3.0 Techniques of Translation You need to know the techniques involved in the translation of texts.
There are seven techniques – la traduction littérale, l’emprunt (borrowing), le calque (calque), la transposition (transposition), la modulation (modulation), l’équivalence(equivalence) and l’adaptation (adaptation).
These seven techniques or procédés de traduction are in two broad areas : traduction directe (direct translation) and traduction indirecte (indirect translation).
La traduction indirecte is also called la traduction oblique.
There are two broad techniques of translation – direct translation (la traduction directe) and indirect translation (la traduction indirecte or la traduction oblique) 3.1 La traduction directe La traduction directe covers the first three techniques – la traduction littérale, l’emprunt and le calque.
3.2 La traduction indirecte (la traduction oblique) La traduction indirecte or la traduction oblique deals with the remaining four techniques – transposition, modulation, équivalence and adaptation.
These techniques are very crucial to your ability to translate properly.
You will now learn the first technique in detail.
3.3 La Traduction Littérale La traduction littérale simply means literal translation or word for word translation (la traduction mot à mot).
An example of literal translation is as follows.
Je parle français - I speak French La traduction littérale is good as long as it successfully translates the message in a way that is acceptable in the target language.
The translation must be accepted as idiomatic in the target language.
You reject la traduction littérale if it fails to convey the desired meaning, e.g.
1) chien méchant – beware of dog.
Its literal translation which is “wicked” or “naughty dog” must be rejected because it is not idiomatic in English.
2) Porter de l’eau à la rivière or carry coal to Newcastle.
Porter de l’eau à la mer You must have realized that the translation is a far cry from the literal meaning of the original.
Porter de l’eau à la rivière literally means “carry water to the river” while “porter de l’eau à la mer” means “carry water to the sea.” The correct English equivalent is “carry coal to Newcastle”.
The two expressions in the two languages are stock expressions (expressions figées) and must be maintained.
You have to learn them as they are.
In the course of your study you will learn many of such expressions.
As you have learnt, literal translations may be incorrect sometimes.
You should reject them if you observe the following reasons: 1) when the translation gives a meaningless equivalent e.g.
The man talks big – “L’homme parle grand.” The French translation is literal but meaningless.
A Frenchman will rather say “L’homme se vante” (The man is boastful).
2) when the structure in the target language disallows it: The Chinese have priced us out of that market.
Les bas prix pratiqués par les Chinois nous ont exclus du marché English has particles such as out, up, down, etc which are used with verbs.
French is different.
It lacks particles.
The result is that French finds another way of expressing the same idea.
3.4 Self-exercise What is the difference between 1) la traduction indirecte and la traduction oblique ?
2) porter de l’eau à la mer and porter de l’eau à la rivière ?
4.0 Conclusion You have learnt that there are two broad ways of translating – la traduction directe and la traduction indirecte.
You have learnt specifically when to use la traduction littérale.
4.1 Answers 1) La traduction indirecte and la traduction oblique mean the same thing 2) Porter de l’eau à la mer and porter de l’eau à la rivière have the same meaning, that carry coal to Newcastle.
However, they have slightly different literal meanings porter de l’eau à la mer literally means carry water to the sea while porter de l’eau à la rivière means carry water to the river.
5.0 Summary This unit has equipped you with the translation technique known as la traduction littérale.
This chapter prepares you for more exciting techniques in UNIT 3.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Under what conditions will you avoid literal translation?
Give two examples.
7.0 References and Other Resources Van Hoaf, H. (1989): Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris: Edition Ducolot.
Vinay, J. P et Darbelnet, J.
(1958) : Stylistique comparée de l’anglais, Paris : Edition Didier UNIT 3 L’EMPRUNT (BORROWING) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Difference between Literal Translation and Literary Translation 3.1 L’Emprunt (Borrowing) 3.2 Self-exercise 3.3 Correct use of emprunter 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to another technique of translation called l’emprunt (borrowing).
It will also teach you the difference between literal translation and literary translation.
You will learn new words and expressions.
2.0 Objectives This unit will help you to • know the difference between literal translation (traduction littérale) and literary translation (traduction littéraire) • know the translation technique called l’emprunt (borrowing) • increase your vocabulary: le congélateur, faire son shopping, prendre un drink • know the correct use of emprunter 3.0 Difference between Literal Translation and Literary Translation In unit 2, you learnt la traduction littérale which means literal translation or word for word translation.
You should know that literal translation is different from literary translation (la traduction littéraire).
Literary translation has to do with the translation of a literary text like a novel, a play or a poem.
You should always remember the difference.
3.1 L’Emprunt (Borrowing) L’emprunt or borrowing is a technique that is used all over the world.
You resort to it (l’emprunt) when an equivalent word is non existent in that language.
For instance you are not likely to have the following Nigerian food items in French – garri, eba, fufu, gbegiri, osun etc.
So what you do is to use the same words in French.
You may put them in inverted comas or you write them in italics.
The French have borrowed many words from English and vice versa.
You can hardly identify some of these words as borrowed ones.
For instance redingote and paquebot in French.
They came from “riding coat” and “packet boat” respectively.
You observe that the examples just cited look like original French words.
That is because in borrowing, you take note of the phonology and orthography of the langue cible or target language.
There are however some borrowed words which are written exactly the same way as they are written in English.
You can see such examples in the following expressions.
faire son shopping - to go shopping prendre un drink - to take a drink  The French has perfect ways of expressing these same ideas if it wants to avoid l’emprunt faire ses courses to go shopping faire ses emplettes prendre un verre - to take a drink As you have seen, French has borrowed some words in English even though the former (French) has its own words for them.
Here are some other examples.
le freezer - In French you can also say congélateur le know-how - In French you may also say savoir-faire Sometimes, the French borrow from English because they find that the English equivalent is easier to use.
You can see that from the following examples.
le cash-flow - la marge brute d’autofinancement le stress - le syndrome d’alarme You see how long the original French equivalents are.
You are perfectly right to use the borrowed English equivalents in French.
3.2 Self exercise 1.
Give one good reason why French opts to borrow English words 2.
What are the equivalents of cash-flow in French?
3.3 Correct Use of Emprunter You have known the technique called l’emprunt (borrowing).
At this point it is important that you use the verb emprunter (to borrow) correctly.
Students often use it wrongly in relation to the preposition.
You must be among those who will always use it correctly.
You will know it through the following translations.
i) French borrowed the word football from English Le français a emprunté le mot football à l’anglais Note that you say emprunter à to mean “borrow from” Read a second example: i) L’anglais a emprunté le mot coup d’état au français ii) English borrowed the word coup d’état from French + le” Remember always to say “emprunter a ” and NEVER “emprunter de” 4.0 Conclusion L’emprunt (borrowing) is an essential technique.
This is because no language has words for all things and all cultural situations.
You have learnt to always use “emprunter” correctly.
Your vocabulary too has increased tremendously.
4.1 Answer 1.
One good reason why French opts to borrow English words is that some French equivalents of English words are rather long.
An example is cash-flow which is easier to say than la marge brute d’autofinanement.
2.
The equivalents of cash-flow in French are le cash-flow and la marge d’autofinancement 5.0 Summary You have learnt the difference between la traduction littéraire and la traduction littérale .
You now know the technique called l’emprunt.
You can also use its verb form – emprunter – correctly.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 1.
Form two sentences involving the use of emprunter a 2.
Give three examples of l’emprunt in French.
7.0 References Van Hoof, H. (1989): Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris : Edition Ducolot.
Vinay, J.P et Darbelnet, J.
(1958) : Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Didier Erudition.
UNIT 4 LE CALQUE Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Le Calque 3.1 Types of Calque 3.1.1 Calque d’expression 3.1.2 Calque de structure 3.2 Self exercise 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answer 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 Introduction This unit treats one of the direct translation procedures known as le calque.
You will learn to define and use it.
In addition, you will learn new words and expressions.
2.0 Objectives As you successfully complete this unit, you should be able to: • define and explain what le calque is • identify and use it (le calque) • know the different types of calque • improve on your vocabulary: donner du feu vert, mener une vie de chien, le gratte-ciel, la surprise partie.
3.0 What is Calque ?
You may define le calque in two ways : a) A particular type of emprunt (or borrowing) or b) A literal translation of an expression or a structure that is foreign to the target language.
Both definitions have an element of borrowing.
The difference between emprunt proper and calque is this: calque involves the use of the target language.
You borrow the idea, word, expression or structure.
You maintain the language into which you are translating.
3.1 Types of Calque There are two types of le calque.
They are le calque d’expression and le calque de structure.
3.1.1 Calque d’expression In calque d’expression, you respect the syntax of the target language.
However the idea you are introducing is new to it.
For instance, in Canadian French, you often hear or read Compliments de la saison.
This is a literal translation of “Compliments of the Season”.
The expression is a calque to the extent that it is not original to French.
The normal French expression for “season’s greetings” or compliments of the season is “voeux de fin d’année.
Other examples of calque d’expresion are: 1. to give a green light – donner du feu vert 2. the man in the street – l’homme de la vue.
3. mener une vie de chien – to lead a dog’s life  3.1.2 Calque de structure Calque de structure is a construction that is new in the target language.
For instance “Science fiction” is a normal English structure.
The French borrowed it and writes Science – fiction.
This structure is certainly alien to French.
It is however perfectly accepted now.
A few examples are as follows: 1. scryscraper - le gratte-ciel 2. surprise party - la surprise-partie 3.2 Self exercise What is the difference between calque and borrowing?
4.0 Conclusion Calque is the third of the Direct Methods in translation.
It means translating literally an expression or a structure.
You have learnt new words and expressions.
4.1 Answers The difference between the two is that, in calque, it is the idea or structure and not the word that is borrowed.
On the other hand, borrowing means using the original word in its pure or deformed way.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you have learnt the two types of calque: calque d’expression and calque de structure.
Both imply an element of borrowing (l’emprunt).
You have also improved on your vocabulary.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1) What do you understand by le calque ?
2) What is the difference between calque d’expression and calque de structure?
3) Give three examples each of calque d’expression and calque de structure 7.0 References Van Hoof, H. (1989): Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris: Editions Ducolot.
Vinay, J.P. et Darbelnet, J.
(1958) : Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Didier Erudition.
UNIT 5 LA TRANSPOSITION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 La Transposition 3.1 Transposition Obligatoire 3.2 La Transposition faculative 3.3 Types of Transposition 3.4 Self exercise 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answer 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to a very important and commonly used technique of translation called la transposition.
La transposition is one of the four indirect techniques of translation.
You will recall that you have learned the direct techniques.
They are la traduction littérale, l’emprunt and le calque.
As you learn la transposition you will be able to translate better.
Moreover, you will have a richer store of vocabulary and expressions.
2.0 Objectives On the successful completion of this unit, you should be able to: • understand the meaning of la transposition • give some examples of la transposition • identify cases of la transposition wherever you see them.
• enrich your vocabulary and expressions: menottes aux mains, défense de fumer, à vendre, sans cheveux, une fille-mère 3.0 La Transposition La transposition (transposition) simply means this: you replace a part of speech (or grammatical category) with another part of speech (or grammatical category).
Examples of parts of speech are nouns, adjectives, verbs, prepositions and adverbs.
You use transposition and other indirect techniques of translation to avoid meaningless sentences.
You will now read a few examples of transposition: for sale - à vendre hairless - sans cheveux handcuffed - menottes aux màins You should be able to explain why these examples are transpositions.
In the first example, sale is a noun in English while vendre is a verb in French.
“Hairless” is an adjective but cheveux is a noun (and sans is a preposition).
There is something common to all the examples you have just read: none of them retains their part of speech in the target language.
It is either a noun becomes a verb or an adjective becomes a noun.
Or in the case of “handcuffed” and “menottes aux mains”, you see handcuffed which is a past participle (participe passé) being transformed into a noun.
Any time translation involves a change of grammatical category or part of speech, you simply recognize that transposition is at work.
3.1 La Transposition Obligatoire (Obligatory use of transposition) The use of transposition is at times obligatory.
That means, you just have to use it, you have no choice.
Read the following examples: Tunde se lave la tête – Tunde is washing his hair (head) Il s’est coupé les doigts – He cut his hands.
In the examples just given, the definite articles la and les change to his, a possessive adjective.
This is because, French uses the definite article in the place of a possessive adjective when the adjective has to do with the human body.
Since English does not have the same rule, you can only translate les by the corresponding possessive adjective.
In such cases you talk of la transposition obligatoire.
Remember that obligatoire means obligatory; you have no choice.
3.2 La Transposition Facultative (optional transposition) There are times when transposition comes in simply as a choice.
In that case you talk of la transposition facultative.
You use it only if you want to.
Here is an example: Qui l’oblitère mérite la mort Whoever destroys him deserves to die The transposition here is “la mort” a noun which becomes “to die” (verb).
The translator could, if he or she so desires, translate “to die” as “death”.
This means that la transposition is replaced by la traduction littérale (literal translation) 3.3 Types of Transposition noun verb no smoking - défense de fumer for sale - à vendre  past participle noun handcuffed - menottes aux mains unwed mother - une fille – mère adverb noun He speaks well of his brother - Il dit du bien de son frère He came early this academic year - Il est venu au début de l’année scolaire.
adverb adjective Il sécoua spasmodiquement - He made a spasmodic shake In this example, “sécoua” (verb) becomes a noun in English; and spasmodiquement (an adverb) becomes an adjective.
3.4 Self exercise Categorize the following transpositions according to their parts of speech: (a) être sans appui - to be friendless, unprotected (b) avoir un argent fou - to have tons of money 4.0 Conclusion A knowledge of transposition is crucial to your ability to translate.
Transposition entails a change in grammatical categories.
For instance a verb may be transformed into a noun and vice versa.
You have also acquired more vocabulary and expressions.
4.1.
Answers a) Etre sans appuis is noun, but to be friendless is adjective.
b) Avoir un argent fou is adjective, but to have tons of money is noun  5.0 Summary As you have learned, transposition is very important.
It is one of the indirect techniques.
Its use in translation is indispensable.
You recognize it very easily because it simply involves a change in parts of speech during translation.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment What do you understand by la transposition?
When do you consider transposition to be optional or compulsory?
Give five examples of transposition under different parts of speech.
7.0 References Van Hoof, H. (1989): Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris: Editions Ducolot.
Vinay, J. P. and Darbelnet, J.
(1958): Stylistique comparé du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Marcel Didier.
UNIT 6 LA MODULATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 La modulation 3.1 La modulation obligatoire 3.2 La modulation facultative 3.3 Examples of Modulation 3.4 Types of Modulation 3.5 Self exercise 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answers 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 Introduction This unit will introduce you to the translational technique known as la modulation.
Some experts believe that la modulation is the most important technique involved in translation.
You can therefore appreciate why you must master it at all cost.
La modulation is modulation in English.
You will observe instances of transposition built into modulation as you go on.
You will find, from time to time, a change of parts of speech.
2.0 Objectives This unit will help you to: • define and understand modulation • distinguish compulsory modulation from optional ones • give many interesting examples of modulation.
• enrich your vocabulary and expressions: nom de guerre, pompier, sapeurs-pompiers, sel blanc, encre de Chine, pisciculture, filer à l’anglaise.
3.0 Modulation La modulation is a variety of la transposition, but it operates at the level of the message.
When two languages express the same idea from different perspectives, you recognize it as la modulation.
You have earlier seen (in Unit 1) chien méchant and “beware of dogs.” While the French seems to be making a simple observation chien méchant (ie savage or wicked dog), the English is in fact warning you (beware of dog).
3.1 Modulation obligatoire La modulation obligatoire implies that there is a stock expression in use as the only correct form of translation.
This happens when the distinctive character of the language insists on it.
The following example is bound to interest you: Filer à l’anglaise – to take a French leave.
You will observe that the literal translation of l’anglaise is English, yet you translate it as French in this context because that is the way the Englishman uses his language.
3.2 Modulation Facultative In the case of la modulation facultative (optional modulation) you have a choice among other possibilities.
3.3 Examples of Modulation le nom de guerre - pen name quinze jours quinze - fortnight, 14 days huit jours - one week lit de la chambre d’ami - spare bed terrain sans herbes - clean land sans barbe ni moustache - clean-shaven le pompier - fireman le sapeur-pompier - fireman les sapeurs-pompiers - the fire-brigade l’anglais usuel - everyday English connaissances usuelles - knowledge of everyday things le rouge lui monta au visage - blood rushed to his face sel blanc - table salt 3.4 Types of Modulation You can group modulation into various types e.g.
geographical modulation, popular /scholarly modulation and part/whole modulation.
There are modulations also where a part represents another part in the translation.
You will see some examples right away: Geographical modulation Indian ink - encre de Chine to take French leave - filer à l’anglaise Popular/Scholarly modulation Fish-breeding - la pisciculture Leaf green - la chlorophylle  Part/whole modulation Breastfeeding - Allaitement maternel All hands on deck - Tout le monde sur le point Maternel means “motherly”.
You observe that breast is just a part of the mother.
In the same vein “hands” are parts of the body.
Hence part/whole modulation.
You will see another set of examples.
They are the ones where a part represents another part in the translation: He is wet to the skin - Il est trempé jusqu’aux os He clears his throat - Il s’éclaircit la voix The literal meaning of skin in French is la peau; and throat means la gorge.
Os in English is bone and la voix is voice.
You see that a part represents another part.
3.5 Self exercise Explain why the following words and their English equivalents are considered to be modulations: breastfeeding - allaitement maternel to take a French leave - filer à l’anglaise 4.0 Conclusion Modulation operates at the level of the message.
Transposition, on the other hand stops at the level of parts of speech.
Languages say and view the same things in different ways.
Modulation is very important in translation.
4.1 Answers They are considered as modulations because the two languages present different points of view.
The two languages view the same idea from different perspectives.
5.0 Summary Modulation is an unavoidable technique of translation.
It shows how languages view the same ideas from different perspectives.
You have learnt many words and expressions too.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment • Define modulation • Give two examples of modulation.
• Mention three types of modulation • Explain why huit jours which means one week is an example of modulation.
7.0 References Van Hoof, H. (1989): Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris: Editions Ducolot.
Vinay, J.P et Darbelnet, J.
(1958) : Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Marcel Didier.
UNIT 7 L’EQUIVALENCE Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 L’Equivalence 3.1 Types of Equivalence 3.2 Self exercise 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answers 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to the concept of l’equivalence.
It is an interesting technique of translation.
As you learn it, you will also enrich your vocabulary tremendously.
That will in turn make you better prepared for translation.
2.0 Objectives This unit will help you in: • understanding equivalence • discovering many examples of equivalence • enriching your vocabulary 3.0 Equivalence L’Equivalence is closely linked to modulation.
Its meaning is similar to that of modulation.
The two concepts – equivalence and modulation – are similar in the sense that they both express a change of point of view.
However, you use equivalence when you are translating idiomatic expressions, clichés, proverbs and other stock expressions.
The examples you see hereafter are either idioms, proverbs, clichés or other types of stock expressions.
3.1.1 Proverbs Qui se ressemble s’assemble - Birds of the same feather flock together Il est parti sans qu’on ait le temps de faire ouf He was off before you or could say Jack Il est parti sans qu’on ait le temps de dire ouf Ventre affamé n’a pas d’oreilles - A hungry man is an angry man On aurait entendu trotter une souris - You could have heard a pin drop Qui paye a bien le droit de choisir - He who pays the piper calls the tune Chat échaudé craint l’eau froide - Once beaten twice shy 3.1.2 Idiomatic expressions to be at someone’s beck and call - obéir à quelqu’un au doigt et à l’œil Il pleut des hallebardes - It is raining cats and dogs Les bras m’en tombent - I am dumbfounded Je le vois tous les trente-six du mois - I see him once in a blue moon Cherchez midi à quatorze heures - to look for difficulties where there are none; to miss the obvious.
J’ai faim de loup - I am very hungry Crier sur le toit - to proclaim something from the housetops Vous l’avez échappé belle - You have had a narrow escape l’échapper belle, échapper comme par miracle - to have a hairbreath escape  3.1.3 Military Expressions Fixe - eyes front !
tête (à) droite - eyes right !
3.2 Self exercise Why do we say that modulation and equivalence are similar in meaning ?
4.0 Conclusion Equivalence is similar to modulation.
You have recourse to it when you are translating stock expressions like proverbs and idiomatic expressions (idiotisme) 4.1 Answers They are similar in meaning because both of them express a change of point of view.
5.0 Summary A grasp of the concept of equivalence is a good way of enriching your vocabulary.
Equivalence implies change of point of view.
You use the technique however, when you are dealing with stock expressions.
Learn to use the new words and expressions you have acquired.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1) What is equivalence?
2) Give five examples of l’équivalence 3) What is the difference between modulation and equivalence?
7.0 References Van Hoof, H. (1989): Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris: Editions Ducolot.
Vinay, J.P and Darbelnet, J.
(1958) Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Marcel Didier UNIT 8 L’ADAPTATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 L’adaptation 3.1 Self exercise 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answers 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to the last of the four techniques of indirect translation.
Indeed, it is the seventh and last of the techniques of translation.
You will recall that Vinay and Darbelnet were the authors of the seven techniques of translation.
2.0 Objectives As you successfully conclude this unit, you will have a complete idea of all the techniques of translation.
This unit specifically prepares you to: • identify the technique of l’adaptation • use adaptation in translation • have a broader view of translation • acquire new vocabulary  3.0 L’adaptation You use adaptation in instances where you do not have an equivalent expression or word to express the message.
In the absence of an equivalent word in the target language, the translator may use adaptation.
For instance you may find it difficult to translate Nigerian dishes into French.
You may take the following examples: gari, amala, tuwo, akpo(cid:127) To translate these words you may have recourse to emprunt (borrowing).
But you will find it difficult to convey the message.
You can therefore turn to adaptation by using French meals that are popular.
Rice is a common meal in France just as gari, eba or tuwo are in Nigeria.
So you may translate amala or eba with “du riz”.
In the same way food like “bœuf sale” and “chou” may be translated as amala, akpo, agidi or tuwo.
The translation will depend on the Nigerian language or culture you are translating into adaptation.
You cannot use this technique indiscriminately.
In the class you use it sparingly; use it only when it is absolutely necessary.
There are other instances where adaptation will be necessary.
The following joke will require a minor adaptation if it is to be properly translated: Abou: Voilà une animal qui arrive Alabi : Non, c’est un animal.
(Alabi essaie de corriger son ami) Abou : Oh, comme tu as de bons yeux de pouvoir voir ça !
Proposed Translation Abou : There comes a animal Alabi: No, it’s an animal (Alabi tries to correct his friend) Abou: How good your eyes must be to have seen that!
The idea here is that it is wrong to say une animal, since animal in the sense used here is masculine.
Alabi therefore tries to correct his friend.
Abou replies by implying that Alabi’s eyes must be so good as to see the masculine indefinite article an in the animal.
It is a joke because there is no way you can see the “an” in the animal.
You see that there is no way this joke can be translated literally.
You therefore use “a animal” and “an animal” in order to retain the joke.
You may also use adaptation for a whole book.
e.g.
a difficult literary text can be adapted entirely for children.
3.1 Self exercise Using the technique of adaptation translate the following French words into your language: la saucisse (sausage); le hamburger (hamburger) 4.0 Conclusion You have recourse to adaptation to avoid a complete loss of socio- cultural elements of language.
You use it to preserve the cultural flavour of the original.
Its use may go beyond a word or sentence.
You can even use it for a whole book.
4.1 Answers In both examples simply give snack items involving meat in your language.
For instance, in the case of le hamburger, you may use “suya” 5.0 Summary You have learnt the meaning of l’adaptation.
Adaptation is the last of the translation techniques.
You use it in the absence of equivalents in the target language.
Its use will create a similar socio-cultural environment in the target language.
6.0 Teacher-Marked Assignment 1.
Why is adaptation necessary in translation?
2.
Give some examples of adaptation 3.
Give three food items in your language and try to replace them by having recourse to adaptation.
7.0 References Van Hoof, H. (1989): Traduire de l’anglais, théorie et pratique, Paris: Editions Ducolot.
Vinay, J. P. and Darbelnet, J.
(1958) Stylistique comparée du français et de l’anglais, Paris : Marcel Didier.
UNIT 9 EN AS AN ADVERBIAL PRONOUN Table of Contents 1.
0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 En as an adverbial pronoun 3.1 Translation of sentences 3.2 Self exercise 3.3 En as a preposition 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answers 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to translation proper.
You will for the meantime just translate sentences involving en.
The use of en in French is very important.
You must master it immediately because you are bound to see it in texts frequently.
You will also need to use it often.
2.0 Objectives This unit will teach you the important use of en • as an adverbial pronoun • to mean of it, about it, from there etc.
• through translation 3.0 En as an adverbial pronoun You are going to study en as an adverb which functions as a pronoun ; hence the name adverbial pronoun.
It is a pronoun in the sense that it refers to a place (noun) that has been referred to earlier.
You will observe that to use en as a pronoun, you normally have de (i.e from or of) embedded in the meaning, e.g.
I am coming from London – Je viens de Londres.
You now replace de Londres with en.
Thus you write or say J’en viens (I am coming from there).
To be able to know the correct use, you should first understand how you will replace the place or noun.
Read the following examples: Ma femme sort de la mosquée= My mother is coming out of the mosque (My mother is leaving the mosque) De la You replace de la mosquée with en: Ma femme en sort.
You can also use en to mean out of it, of it, of her, of him, of her of them, with it, with them, about it, about them.
Read the following sentences and replace the italized words with en Je doute de son intelligence – I doubt his/her intelligence J’en douté – I doubt it Il est certain de cette historie – He is sure of the story.
Il en est certain – He is sure of it 3.1 Translation of sentences.
You will now read five sentences involving the use of en Selon les rumeurs, toute la ville parlait de cette affaire.
Mais, moi, je n’en savais rien.
Je ne sors guere.
D’ailleurs, j’ai voyagé en Europe.
J’en suis revenu il y a 8 jours.
The translation is as follows : According to the rumours, the whole town was talking about this affair.
But, as for me, I knew nothing about it.
I hardly go out.
Moreover, I travalled to Europe.
I just returned from there a week ago.
The italizing of the crucial areas of the short passage just read should be useful to you.
Examine carefully the way they have been translated.
Remember the use of modulation.
Huit jours (which literally means eight days) is a week in French.
You know, in English a week is seven days.
You can also use en to mean some or any, or express quantity.
Remember that en can also be used as a partitive article.
Read the following sentences: Je veux du pain.
Oui, j’en veux.
J’en ai vraiment besoin I want some bread.
Yes, I want some.
I really need some.
3.2 Self exercise Translate into French 1.
I want some water.
Yes I want some 2.
Give me some salt.
I need it.
3.3 En as a preposition En can also function as a preposition.
It means to note the two examples: 1.
J’ai voyagé en Europe – I travelled to Europe 2.
Je vais en France – I am going to France Know that you use it before feminine nouns only.
For a masculine country, you will use au, e.g.
Je vais au Ghana 4.0 Conclusion You have learnt the important use of en as an adverbial pronoun.
You have also learnt en as a preposition.
Your knowledge of en will be a great asset in your translation.
4.1 Answers 1.
Je veux de l’eau.
Oui, j’en veux 2.
Donnez-moi du sel.
J’en ai besoin or Donne-moi du sel 5.0 Summary Your mastery of en is to some extent an evidence of how good you are in French.
Having known its various uses, use it practically as often as you can.
You will translate it well when you meet it in a context.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment Translate into English Ma sœur veut se marier bientôt, mais mon père n’en est pas content.
Il dit qu’elle est trop jeune.
Mais ma sœur sait ce qu’il faut faire.
Mon père est friand de louange.
C’est vrai, il en est friand.
Ma sœur va le louer, et il va changer d’attitude !
7.0 Reference Ojo, S.A. (2002) : A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan : Signal Educational Services Ltd. UNIT 10 THE USE OF Y Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Un dialogue 3.1 The use of Y 3.2 Y as an adverb 3.3 Self exercise 3.4 Model translation 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answers 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction You will translate a dialogue in this unit.
In the process of translating you will learn the use of y.
The use of y is crucial in French.
Like en, it must be mastered once and for all.
Y is an adverbial pronoun.
You will see it in translation passages from time to time.
2.0 Objectives The main objective of this unit is to teach you to translate sentences involving the use of y.
In the process you will also learn the following words and expressions: le sort, redevable, uncle par alliance, le sort, à l’étranger.
Now, read the passage that follows:  Try and translate the passage.
Make use of the notes to help you in your translation.
Of course, you should remember the use of your dictionaries.
3.0 Un dialogue Caro: Bonjour, mon cher ami Baba : Bonjour, comment va la famille ?
Caro : Elle va très bien, et la tienne ?
Baba : Elle va bien aussi Caro : J’ai appris que tu était parti en Russie Baba : C’est bien vrai, j’y étais pour un mois.
C’était une occasion pour me reposer un peu.
Je compte y aller encore l’an prochain.
Caro : Encore ?
Tu n’aime plus notre cher pays ?
Baba : Si, j’y pense toujours lors de mes séjours à l’étranger.
Mon oncle par alliance est l’ambassadeur du Nigeria en Russie.
Mais as-tu vu tes cadeaux ?
Je les ai mis sur ta table.
Caro : Comme tu es gentil !
Je les y ai trouvé ce matin.
J’en suis très, très redevable.
Que le bon Dieu te bénisse !
Baba : Il n’a y a pas de quoi.
Tu étais à l’église hier ?
Caro : Non, je n’y étais pas.
Baba et Caro (en même temps) : A la prochaine.
3.1 The use of Y in French You use y to replace à, au, aux.
You also use it to replace prepositions like dans, sur, derrière, devant + noun.
You use it to replace inanimate nouns.
NOT persons or living things.
You use it to replace the indirect object of a verb.
Read the following examples: 1.
Je pense à cette histoire – J’y pense I am thinking of the story – I am thinking of it 2.
J’ai participé activement aux activités - I participated actively in the activities J’y ai participé activement - I participated actively in them.
3.
Je m’intéresse à ton sort - Je m’y intéresse I am interested in your fate - I am interested in it 4.
Je pense au travail - J’y pense I am thinking of the work - I am thinking about it.
You observe that in the examples you have just read, the verbs are followed by the prepositions à, au and aux.
3.2 Y as an adverb You will now see some examples where y replaces ici (here), là (there).
Remember its use extends to prepositions such as sur, dans, devant, derrière etc.
Read the example that follows.
Je les ai mis sur la table – I put them on the table Je les y ai mis – I put them on it.
Y in this context means on it.
Je vais régulièrement à l’église – I attend church regularly J’y vais régulièrement – I go there regularly 3.3 Self exercise Translate into English Je participe aux activités; j’y participe 3.4 Model Translation : A dialogue Caro : Good morning, my dear friend Baba: Good morning, how is the family?
Caro: It’s very fine, and yours?
Baba: It’s fine also.
Caro: I learnt that you went to Russia Baba: That’s very true, I was there for a month.
It was an opportunity for me to rest a bit.
I intend to go there again next year.
Caro: Again?
You don’t like our dear country any more?
Baba: Yes, I think of it always during my stay abroad.
My uncle by marriage is Nigeria’s ambassador to Russia.
But, have you seen your gifts?
I put them on the table.
Caro: How kind you are.
I saw them there this morning.
I am very, very grateful.
Baba: Don’t mention.
You were in the church yesterday?
Caro: No, I wasn’t there.
Baba et Caro (at the same time).
Be seeing you!
4.0 Conclusion You have learnt the use of y. Translating the text will further help you to master it.
You use y to replace, ici, là.
4.1 Answers I am participating in the activities; I am participating in them 5.0 Summary Y is very important.
You will have cause to use it very frequently.
Hence its importance.
Read the examples patiently.
It is easy to understand.
You use it to replace, à, au or aux.
You also use it in the place of ici and là.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment Translate the following sentences into English 1.
Je l’y ai mis 2.
J’y suis 3.
J’y vais 4.
Vous y êtres ?
5.
Je n’y pense plus 7.0 Reference Coffman, M.E.
(1973): French Grammar.
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
Ojo, S.A. (2002) : A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan : Signal Educational Services Ltd. UNIT 11 UN MERVEILLEUX ANNIVERSAIRE Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Un merveilleux anniversaire 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Self exercise 3.3 Venir de 3.4 The use of on 3.5 Tantôt…Tantôt 3.6 Bien que 3.7 Model Translation : A Wonderful Birthday 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answers 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References and other resource materials 1.0 Introduction This unit deals with a wonderful birthday celebration.
Read the text carefully, assimilate and enjoy it.
2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to • know more new words e.g.
une vingtaine, retardataire, le décor, le gâteau d’anniversaire • know more new expressions such as tantôt…tantôt • know the use of bien que.
• Know the use of on.
Read the following text entitled Un merveilleux anniversaire.
Consult your dictionary and grammar books if the need arises.
3.0 Un merveilleux anniversaire Aujourd’hui, c’est l’anniversaire de Mademoiselle Ebiere Ogbowei, architecte de nationalité nigériane, qui vient de terminer ses études en Angletérre.
Elle a vingt deux ans et elle invite une vingtaine d’amis intimes.
Son petit salon est déjà plein de visiteurs bien que la plupart des invités ne soient pas encore là.
Le retard des amis s’explique facilement : le mariage de deux autres copains est aussi prévu pour aujourd’hui.
Mais on ne va pas attendre les retardataires.
On commence alors le programme.
On commence par rendre grâce à Dieu et puis on écoute la musique : tantôt un disque de Fela, ce fameux chanteur nigérian, qui n’est plus, tantôt une chanson d’amour.
L’anniversaire est merveilleux.
Le gâteau d’anniversaire, entouré de belles fleurs, est mis sur la table.
Le décor est formidable 3.1 Vocabulary You will now see some of the difficult words and expressions.
Learn and keep them at the tip of your fingers.
une vingtaine – about twenty, twenty or so.
Similarly, trentaine, quarantaine, centaine etc.
mean about thirty, about forty, about hundred respectively.
Le retardataire – late-comer rendre grace à – to give thanks to (before or after a meal)  tantôt…tantôt – sometimes …sometimes entouré de belles fleurs – surrounded by beautiful flowers.
If there are still words that are strange to you, look them up in your dictionary.
3.2 Self exercise Translate the following sentences into French.
1.
There are about fifty students in the class 2.
The woman is surrounded by good friends 3.3 Venir de You should know the use of venir de.
You use it to express the past recent (le passé recent), that is, an action that has jus taken place.
Read the following sentences as examples: Je viens d’arriver – I have just arrived Je viens de manger – I have just eaten Elle vient de finir son travail – She hast just finished her work 3.4 Bien que Bien que is …You always use le subjonctif (subjunctive mood) with it.
Any time you use bien que you must put the verb in the subjonctif.
Take a cue from the sentence in the passage: …bien que la plupart des invités ne soient pas encore là …even though most of the invited guests are not yet there You must have learnt le subjonctif in your grammar courses.
You conjugate the present tense of être in le subjonctif as follows: bien que je sois là – even though I am there bien que tu sois là – even though you are there bien qu’il soit là – even though he is there bien qu’elle soit là – even though she is there bien que nous soyons là – even though we are there bien que vous soyez là – even though you are there bien qu’ils soient là – even though they are there bien qu’elles soient là – even though they are there There are other words or expressions that take le subjonctif.
Examples are quoique (although) afin que (in order that), avant que (before) 3.5 The use of on On is an important word.
Master its use.
It is an indefinite pronoun (pronom indéfini).
It means one of the following: someone, you, one, we, they.
The context will determine the meaning.
In the context of the passage you have read, you can translate on as we.
Read the following examples.
1) Chez nous, on mange beaucoup de riz - We eat a lot of rice in our family 2) En France, on mange beaucoup de pain - In France, they eat a lot of bread.
3.6 Tantôt…tantôt As you have seen earlier tantôt…tantôt means “sometimes…sometimes”.
Read the following examples: Tantôt il est gai tantôt il est triste - He is sometimes happy and sometimes sad.
Read the example in the passage to be translated: Tantôt un disque de Fela…tantôt une chanson d’amour.
Now translate the text  Translate the text.
Make use of your dictionary.
Consult also your grammar books if the need arises.
3.7 Model Translation: A Wonderful Birthday Today is the birthday of Miss Ebiere Ogbowei, an architect of Nigerian nationality who has just finished her studies in England.
She is twenty two years old and she invites about twenty intimate friends.
Her little sitting is already full of visitors, even though most of the guests are not there yet.
The lateness of friends can easily be explained: the marriage of two other friends is also scheduled for today.
But we are not going to wait for late-comers.
Therefore the programme starts.
We start by thanking God, and then listen to music: sometimes a disk of Fela, the famous Nigerian singer who is no more, sometimes a love song.
The birthday is marvellous.
The birthday cake, surrounded by beautiful flowers, is placed on the table.
The décor is fantastic.
4.0 Conclusion You have been able to translate a passage on a birthday celebration.
In the process you have acquired new words.
Your knowledge of grammar has improved also.
4.1 Answers 1 Il y a une cinquantaine d’étudiants dans la classe 2.
La femme est entourée de bons amis.
or La femme est entourée de bonnes amies.
5.0 Summary You have known more words like le retardataire and une vingtaine.
Your knowledge of French grammar too has improved.
You must be enjoying your translation more and more.
6.0 Tutor-marked assignment A.
Translate the following sentences into French 1.
My friend is sometimes very talkative and sometimes very taciturn.
2.
What a wonderful birthday.
3.
We are going to wait for our friends 4.
The birthday cake is surrounded by friends 5.
Her little parlour is full of friends.
B.
Translate the following sentences into English 1.
Amoo vient de terminer ses études en Amérique 2.
Le gàteau d’anniversaire est beau 3.
On chante tantôt une chanson de Sonny Okosun, tantôt une chanson de James Brown 4.
J’attends les retardataires 5.
J’ai une cinquantaine d’amies !
7.0 Reference Berchie, Y et al (2000): Cours de la Sorbonne, langue et civilisation française, Paris : CLE.
UNIT 12 LE NIGERIA Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Le Nigeria 3.1 Le Passé Simple (Past Historic) 3.2 Self exercise 3.3 Le Passif (Passive Voice) 3.3 Vocabulary 3.4 Faux Amis 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answers 5.0 Summary 6.0 Teacher-Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 Introduction This unit will introduce you to a passage on Nigeria.
It is very informative.
You will learn some vocabulary related to the history and geography of Nigeria.
This unit will teach you the conjugation of the passé simple (past historic tense).
You will also learn le passif (passive voice).
You will recall the use of on and en 2.0 Objectives When you successfully complete this unit, you should be able to: • read and translate the passage • identify some grammatical elements in the passage • acquire new vocabulary: la superficie, l’embouteillage, déplacer, monoexportateur • recall faux amis • recall the use of on and en • identify and use le passé simple and le passif.
• use comma and full stop properly in French in relation to figures.
3.0 Le Nigeria Le Nigeria a une superficie de 942.000 kilomètres carrés.
Au moment de l’indépendance, le Nigeria n’avait que trois régions.
En 1963, une nouvelle région fut créée.
Mais aujourd’hui, on ne parle plus de régions.
On parle plutôt des Etats.
En 1967, le pays fut découpé en 12 états.
Aujourd’hui, on en compte 36.
Lagos est l’ancienne capitale du Nigeria.
Le gouvernement fédéral décida de déplacer la capitale fédérale à Abuja.
Abuja est donc la capitale actuelle de notre pays… Abuja est une belle ville, bien planifiée.
L’embouteillage que connaissait Lagos ne se pose pas à Abuja.
Le Nigeria produit le pétrole qui joue un rôle déterminant dans l’économie.
Mais le Nigeria ne veut pas être un pays monoexportateur, dépendant entièrement du produit pétrolier.
Le gouvernement fait tout pour assurer la diversification, car un jour les champs pétrolifères seront vides.
3.1 Le Passé Simple (Past Historic) You must have observed the use of the past historic (passé simple).
You use the passé simple to take the place of the passe composé in a historic situation.
In this story the passé simple is used in two ways – as the main verb or as an auxiliary.
eut - had décida - decided fut créée - was created fut découpé - was divided Eut is the third person singular of avoir in the passé simple.
You conjugate the passé simple of avoir this way.
Note that the complete sentence is to help you.
J’eus du pain Nous eussions du pain Tu eus du pain Vous eussiez du pain Il eut du pain Ils eurent du pain You conjugate décider in the passé simple as follows: The complete sentence provided here is a way of helping you to make good sentences on your own.
Je décidai de venir - I decided to come Tu décidas de venir - You decided to come Il/Elle décida de venir - He/She decided to come Nous décidâmes de venir - We decided to come Vous décidâtes de venir - You decided to come Ils décidèrent de venir - They decided to come 3.2 Self exercise Translate the following sentences.
Use the past historic 1.
I decided to eat 2.
He decided to run 3.3 Le Passif (Passive Voice) The second set of examples involving le passé simple are in the form of le passif (passive voix).
In the passive voice you use only the auxiliary être, but the verb that follows is in the participe passé.
You can see the examples in the text: fut créée, fut découpé, fut lancée.
You need to ensure agreement with the subject because of the use of “être”.
Remember fut means was and it is a form of être (to be).
Read the example from the passage.
Une nouvelle region fut créée.
Note, however, that the following sentence has no problem of agreement.
En 1967, le pays fut découpé en 12 Etats.
In the sentence just cited, le pays is the subject and is masculine.
There is therefore an agreement already.
You must know why the subject agrees with the participe passé.
It is because the sentence is in the passive voice.
So the following sentences will be rejected: Elle a mangée Nous avons mangés They are not in the passive voice.
Rather they are in the active voice.
You should therefore write Elle a mangé Nous avons mangé 3.4 Vocabulary With this exercise, you now see the need for a good French grammar book.
You also need a book that treats the conjugation of verbs.
You should refer to these books from time to time when the need arises.
You will now have the meanings of some of the words or expressions that may appear difficult.
la superficie - surface kilomètres carrés - square kilometers déplacer - to change the place of someone or something l’embouteillage - traffic jam, congestion (of traffic) le pétrole - petroleum, (mineral ) oil pétrolier - of (mineral) oil le produit pétrolier - petroleum product monoexportateur - having only one major crop or valuable thing for exportation pétrolifères - oil-bearing champs pétrolifères - oil fields Pétrolier and pétrolifères are adjectival forms of pétrole (petroleum oil).
Learn also the following expressions or sentences Ne… que - only Il n’a que deux enfants - He has only two children Nous ne sommes que trois - We are only three dépendre de - to depend on Cela dépend de toi - That depends on you You write dépendre de and NOT dépendre sur You should also take note of the figure 942.000 when dealing with the numbers.
The French uses a full stop where the English would use a comma.
The English figure will be 942,000 3.5 Model Translation: Nigeria Nigeria covers an area of 942,000 square kilometers.
At independence, Nigeria had only three regions.
In 1963, a new region was created.
But today, we do not talk of regions anymore.
We rather talk of states.
In 1967, the country was split into 12 states.
Today, we can count 36.
Lagos is the former capital of Nigeria.
The Federal Government decided to transfer the Federal Capital to Abuja.
Abuja is thus the capital of our country.
Abuja is a well-planned beautiful town.
The traffic hold-up experienced in Lagos does not exist in Abuja.
Nigeria produces petroleum oil which plays a vital role in the economy.
But Nigeria does not want to be a country that exports only one major item, that depends entirely on petroleum product.
The Government is doing all it can to ensure diversification, for, one day the oil fields will be empty.
3.6 Faux Amis Did you observe some faux amis in the text?
There are at least two of them.
They are le pétrole which means “petroleum oil” and NOT petrol.
The French equivalent of petrol is l’essence (feminine) Actuelle is the second example.
“Capitale actuelle” means the present or current capital and NOT the actual capital.
Remember that actuelle is the feminine form of actuel.
Refresh your mind with the meaning of faux amis (false friends).
They are words that have similar spellings but different meanings.
Examples: une phrase - a sentence sympathique - nice, friendly 4.0 Conclusion The text helps you to know more words and expressions.
You realize the need to master your conjugation.
You now have an idea of le passé simple and le passif.
You have known more facts on Nigeria through translation.
4.1 Answers 1.
Je décidai de manger 2.
Il décida de courir 5.0 Summary The passage has treated interesting words like le pétrole, l’embouteillage and others.
As you learn and use them, your knowledge of translation will improve.
You will also discover improvement in the other French courses.
6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment Translate the following passage: Le Ghana Le Ghana est un pays africain.
Il n’est pas aussi grand que le Nigeria.
Il eut son indépendance en 1957.
La capitale du Ghana est Accra.
Accra est extrêmement belle.
Le gouvernement ghanéen fait tout pour assurer la beauté de cette ville.
Le Ghana n’a pas de pétrole en quantité commerciale.
Le Ghana dépend de l’or.
7.0 References and Other Resources Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd. Coffman, M.E.
(1973): French Grammar, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
UNIT 13 LES JEUX OLYMPIQUES I Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Les Jeux Olympiques (I) 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Use of Dictionaries 3.3 Self exercise 3.4 Model Translation 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answers 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction This unit introduces you to more practical translation.
You will translate a text.
The text treats the Olympic games.
It is just an introduction.
2.0 Objectives As you complete the text successfully, you will know • many common words in sports e.g.
course, saut à la perche, saut en hauteur and lutteur • some expressions like avoir lieu, se préparer avec acharnement • new words of great interest e.g.
Athènes, l’argent, hymne national and lauréat.
You will enjoy the text as you understand the words and expressions.
Read the text below.
Try to translate it on your own.
3.0 Les jeux olympiques I Les jeux olympiques ont pour origine Athènes, la capitale de Grèce.
Aujourd’hui les jeux olympiques constituent une véritable rencontre internationale.
Ils ont lieu dans tous les quatre ans.
Les athlètes se préparent avec acharnement.
Tout athlète a une ambition : celle de remporter un prix.
De temps à temps, les participants établissent des records.
Les trois meilleurs athlètes obtiennent des médailles.
Le meilleur athlète mérite le prix d’or.
L’argent et le bronze sont réservés à la deuxième et troisièmes places respectivement.
Les gagnants sont des sources de fierté pour leurs pays.
Après chaque victoire, l’hymne national du pays gagnant est chanté.
Les activités sportives sont nombreuses : course, saut à la perche, saut en hauteur et saut en longueur.
Il y a aussi des boxeurs et lutteurs entre autres.
3.1 Vocabulary Below are some of the words which may seem difficult.
You can see their meanings written out.
Do study them.
Understanding them will assist you greatly in translating the text.
Athènes - Athens (capital of Greece) une véritable rencontre - a real gathering or meeting tout athlète - every athlete une médaille - a medal l’argent (feminine) - silver  L’argent in this context means silver and not money.
Remember that some words have different meanings (polysemy).
It is the context that will determine the appropriate meaning.
Les gagnants (masc) - the winners l'hyme national - national anthem la course - running le saut à la perche - pole vaulting le saut en hauteur - high jump le saut en longueur - long jump le lutteur - wrestler You also need to know the following expressions avoir lieu - to take place se préparent avec acharnement - prepare relentlessly ; prepare with determination The dictionary is also useful for cross-checking spellings and genders of nouns.
3.2 Use of Dictionaries You should know all the words and expressions listed above.
If there are other words you do not know, you should hasten to look them up in the dictionary and know them.
You realize the need for good dictionaries.
Try and buy them immediately if you have not bought yet.
Remember, you need three dictionaries.
Two monolingual dictionaries.
That is, an entirely French dictionary and an entirely English dictionary.
You will also need a bilingual dictionary (French/English).
Practise the use of the new words through writing sentences and short essays.
A rich acquisition of vocabulary is an asset in translation.
You need to know one interesting word.
It is tout.
In the passage tout means every and NOT all.
Tout in this context is an adjective.
Remember to use the words according to the context in which you find them.
Some words are polysemic i.e they have different meanings in different contexts.
L’argent which you have known is a typical example.
3.3 Self exercise How many types of dictionaries do you need?
3.4 Model Translation: The Olympic Games (I) The Olympic Games have their origin in Athens, the capital of Greece.
Today the Olympic Games constitute a real international gathering.
They take place every four years.
Athletes prepare relentlessly.
Every athlete has an ambition: that of winning a prize.
From time to time, participants make records.
The three best athletes obtain medals.
The best athlete merits the prize of gold.
Silver and bronze are reserved for the second and third places respectively The winners are sources of pride to their countries.
After each victory, the national anthem of the country that wins is sung.
The sporting activities are many: running, pole vaulting, high jump and long jump.
There are also boxers and wrestlers among others.
You can also translate the first sentence this way: The Olympic Games originated from Athens.
Here, you see an example of transposition.
In “les jeux olympiques ont pour origine Athènes…”, origine is a noun; originated is a verb; hence the transposition.
Try and translate the passage.
Where you have difficulties, make use of your dictionaries and grammar books.
4.0 Conclusion You have learned many expressions and words like les jeux olympiques, course, se préparer acharnement and many others.
Make use of them often – at the slightest opportunity.
4.1 Answers I need three types of dictionaries: a French monolingual dictionary, an English monolingual dictionary and an English/French bilingual dictionary.
5.0 Summary The words and expressions you have learned are very important.
Use them often in sentences as you write and speak French.
Translation becomes exciting when you have a good command of vocabulary.
6.0 Teacher-marked assignment Translate the following sentences into English or French as the case may be 1) Les sportives se préparent avec acharnement pour obtenir des médailles 2) De temps en temps les sportifs battent leurs propres records.
J’en connais certains cas.
3) The national anthem of Nigeria is sung.
4) The sporting activities are very interesting.
5) Gold is reserved for the best athlete.
7.0 References and other materials Adam, Yvon (1979): Le sport dans la vie des soviétiques, Moscou : Edition du Progrès.
UNIT 14 LES JEUX OLYMPIQUES II Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Les Jeux Olympiques (II) 3.1 Vocabulary 3.2 Grammar 3.3 Use of Dictionary 3.4 Self exercise 3.5 Model translation 4.0 Conclusion 4.1 Answer 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References and other resources 1.0 Introduction This unit is a follow-up of the translation on the Olympic Games.
This unit will further help to enlarge your horizon on the Olympic Games.
Naturally you will enrich your vocabulary through the text you will be translating.
2.0 Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you should know among others.
• words and expressions relating to sports e.g.
entraînement, supporter, remporter une victoire, les sportifs, les perdants, les gagnants • the following expressions : jouir de, lors de, être en proie à Read the following text.
Try to understand it.
It is on the Olympic Games.
3.0 Les jeux olympiques (II) Remporter une victoire dans les jeux olympiques n’est pas facile, car il s’agit des sports de haute compétition.
Pour atteindre les sommets de victoire, il faut des efforts assidus des entraîneurs et des sportifs bien expérimentés.
Les jeux olympiques jouissent d’une popularité internationale.
Lors des jeux, tout le monde – surtout les supporters – semble être en proie aux tourments.
Le suspense ne manque pas.
Ce qui est sûr c’est qu’il y a toujours des gagnants et des perdants.
Mais à la fin des jeux, on n’a pas une véritable impression de perdant.
C’est le monde entier qui est le vrai gagnant.
Tout le monde est ému par la beauté et la gloire représentées par le défilé des sportifs et autres activités de clôture.
3.1 Vocabulary You will need to know the apparently difficult vocabulary.
Below are some of them and their meanings.
remporter une victoire - to win a victory l’entraîneur (masc) - trainer l’entraînement (masc) - training les supporters (masc) - supporters les sportifs (masc) - sportsmen and women les gagnants et perdants - winners and losers.
les défilés des sportifs - marching of sportsmen and women.
activités de clôture - closing activities Retain all these words in your memory with great enthusiasm.
Anytime you have sporting activities, quickly recall these words and other relevant ones to memory.
Where you forgot, hasten to recall them by revising the notes or by having recourse to a dictionary.
Remember that you can enjoy translation only when you know the meanings of words and expressions.
That is why you must know the following expressions in the passage: jouir de - to enjoy Ils jouissent d’une - They enjoy international popularité internationale popularity.
Être en proie à - to be prey to Tout le monde semble - Everyone seems to être en proie aux tourments be a prey to torments Torments prey on everyone 3.2 Grammar There is an important point of grammar that you need to know.
You can see one in the use of beauté et gloire représentées par… (beauty and glory represented by…) Note that the participe passé (représentées) which is playing the role of an adjective is in the plural.
The reason is that it qualifies two nouns – beauté and gloire.
Both are feminine nouns.
The agreement must reflect this.
3.3 Use of Dictionary Read the text again.
Use your dictionary if you still have problems understanding some words.
Remember the importance of contextual meaning and polysemic words.
Polysemy means multiple meaning; but the context determines the desired meaning.
As you use the dictionary, take note also of the genders of words if they are nouns.
Now make an attempt to translate the passage fully.
You will certainly enjoy it if you have followed all the steps systematically.
Compare with the model translation that follows.
3.4 Self exercise When do you say a word is polysemic?
3.5 Model Translation: The Olympic Games (II) Obtaining victory at the Olympic Games is not easy, for it has to do with sports that are keenly contested.
To attain the heights of victory, there is need for painstaking efforts on the part of trainers and sportsmen.
For the trainings, you need highly experienced sportsmen.
The Olympic games enjoy international popularity.
During the games, everyone – especially the supporters – seems to be prey to torments (During the games, torments seem to prey on everyone – especially the supporters).
Suspense is not lacking (There is much suspense).
What is certain is that there are always winners and losers.
But at the end of the games, you do not have a real feeling of losers.
It is the whole world that is the real winner.
Everyone is moved by the beauty and glory represented by the marching of sportsmen and women and other closing activities.
Alternative translations are put in bracket.
This goes to remind you again that a text or passage may have many versions.
If you translate le suspense ne manque pas as “suspense is not lacking” you have a literal translation.
But if you opt for have a modulation “there is much suspense”, you have a modulation.
4.0 Conclusion You are certainly getting into the exciting work of translation.
Your vocabulary is increasing with such important words and expressions as les sportifs, remporter une victoire, jouir de etc.
4.1 Answer A word is polysemic when it has more than one meaning.
5.0 Summary Through the translation of the passage, your French must have improved tremendously.
Do all you can to retain the new words and expressions in your memory.
Use them often.
6.0 Teacher-marked assignment Make two short sentences each with the following expressions jouir de and être en proie à Translate the following sentence: Tout le monde est ému par l’honneur, la gloire, la joie et la beauté représentées dans les jeux.
7.0 References and other resources Adam, Yvon (1979): Le sport dans la vie des soviétiques, Moscou, Edition du Progrès.
UNIT 15 A TELEPHONE CONVERSATION Table of Contents 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
A Telephone Conversation 3.1.
Vocabulary 3.2.1 Formation of Adverbs 3.2.1.
Le Conditionnel Présent 3.3.
Model translation 3.4.
Self assessment exercise 4.0.
Conclusion 4.1.
Answers 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0.
References 1.0.
Introduction This unit introduces you to a telephone conversation involving the use of simple health terms.
It also introduces you to the translation of passages from English into French.
In this unit, you will translate the first passage from English to French 2.0.
Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you should know.
• simple terms involving medicine e.g.
le gynécologue, le pédiatre, le centre hospitalier universitaire, en couches, accoucher d’un bébé, trois enfants de la même couche.
• simple terms used in telephone conversation: Allô, ne quittez pas.
• more general vocabulary: homonyme, portable, douleur, s’inquiéter, risquer, s’énerver, puis-je.
• the formation of the adverbs: urgemment, éminemment, doucement.
• the use of le conditionnel présent • the use of à peine Read the following text in English.
Understand it.
Then attempt to translate it.
You will see some explanations later.
Try to translate the text before referring to the explanations.
When you are satisfied that you have done your best, you can refer to the model translation.
3.0.
A Telephone Conversation It is 10.a.m.
Mrs Olotu, who is pregnant, is in labour.
A doctor, a gynecologist is needed urgently.
Mr. Olotu: Hello, is that the Teaching Hospital?
Is the gynecologist there?
No?
Bye.
Hello, Yankari Hospital?
The gynecology section?
Good morning, madam.
Is Dr Mantou there?
Secretary: Yes, he is there, hold the line Mr Olotu: Thank you, sir.
Good morning, it’s Olotu, I am sorry, are you busy?
Dr Mantu: No, not really.
In what way can I help you?
Mr Olotu: My wife is in labour, and we have to see you.
Dr Mantu: I am not a gynecologist.
I am a paediatrician.
You could see my namesake.
He is eminently qualified in the field.
Mr Olotu: Doctor, can I have handset number?
Dr Mantu: No, because you don’t need it.
Mr Olotu: Of course, yes, I need it urgently.
My wife is in pain.
She feels pains all over the body.
Dr Mantu: Sir, I understand you quite well, but you are worried for nothing.
You stand the chance of creating other problems.
I advise you to simply bring your wife here.
Drive gently and don’t get all worked up!
Hardly had he arrived at the hospital that his wife gave birth to three babies.
Triplets.
What good news!
3.1.
Vocabulary Teaching Hospital – Le centre hospitalier universitaire Hold the line or hold on the moment – ne quittez pas triplets - Trois enfants de la même couche handset – le portable to risk - risquer pain – le douleur hardly - à peine to feel pains all over the body - se sentir des douleurs par tout le corps to worry - s’inquiéter to give birth to a child - accoucher d’un bébé to get excited – s’enerver Don’t get worked up – Ne vous énervez pas !
Ne t’énerve pas !
The word for twins is les jumeaux i.e.
two boys or a boy and a girl.
If both are girls, they are les jumelles.
3.2.1 Grammar Formation of adverbs – urgemment, éminemment, doucement urgently – urgemment eminently – éminemment In French, adverbs are formed in a very simple way.
Take the feminine form of an adjective.
Then add the suffix – ment to it.
This way, the following adjectives are transformed into adverbs.
e.g.
lent – slow lente (fem) – slow lentement – slowly parfait – perfect parfaite (fem) – perfect perfectly – parfaitement doux – smooth, slow dance (fem) – smooth, slow doucement - gently But there are exceptions.
Urgent and éminent are among the exceptions.
The adverbial form of urgent is urgemment.
The adverbial form of éminent is éminemment Note the use of à peine.
If requires an inversion just like its English equivalent.
3.2.
Le conditionnel présent Le conditionnel présent takes an infinitive verb.
You use it to express politeness.
Read the example that follows: You could see my namesake – Vous pourriez voir mon homonyme.
Remember that pourriez comes from the verb ‘‘pouvoir’’ (can, to be able to).
Take your conjugation book and see how it is conjugated in the conditionnel présent.
Read this example: A peine étions – nous sortis qu’il se mit à pleuvoir – Hardly had we left than it started to rain.
Try and translate the passage.
Make use of the dictionary and grammar books where necessary.
Now, compare your work with the model translation.
3.3.
Une Conversation Téléphonique Il est 10 heures du matin.
Mme Olotu, qui est enceinte, est en couches.
Il faut urgemment un médecin, un gynécologue.
M Olotu – Allô, le centre hospitalier universitaire ?
est-ce que le gynécologue est là ?
Non ?
Au revoir.
Allô, l’hôpital Yankari ?
Le service de gynécologie ?
Bonjour madame !
Est-ce que le Dr Mantou est là?
La Secrétaire : Oui, il est là, ne quittez pas… M Olotu : Merci, monsieur !
Bonjour, c’est Olotu, désolé, vous étés occupé?
Le Dr Mantu : Non, pas tellement.
En quoi puis-je vous aider?
M Olotu : Ma femme est en labeur, et nous devons vous voir.
Le Dr Mantu : Je ne suis pas gynécologue.
Je suis pédiatre.
Vous pourriez voir mon homonyme.
Lui, il est éminemment qualifié dans ce domaine.
M. Olotu : Docteur, puis-je avoir le numéro de son portable?
Le Dr Mantu : Non, parce que vous n’en avez pas besoin.
M Olotu : Mais si, j’en ai urgemment besoin.
Vous le savez.
Ma femme est en douleurs.
Elle se sent les douleurs par tout le corps Le Dr Mantu : Monsieur, je vous comprends bien, mais vous vous inquiétez pour rien.
Vous risquez de vous créer d’autres problèmes.
Je vous conseille tout simplement d’amener votre femme ici.
Conduisez doucement, et ne vous énervez pas !
A peine était-il arrivé à l’hôpital que sa femme a accouché de trois bébés.
Trois enfants de la même couche !
Quelle bonne nouvelle !
Femme en couches = femme en travail Salle de travail = salle d’accouchement = labour room.
Compare the model translation with your own translation.
Try and work harder if your mistakes are many.
Meanwhile remember that there could be many ways of translating the same text.
You have no cause to worry even if your translation has many mistakes.
The important thing is: keep on working hard!
You will make it!
3.4.
Self assessment exercise Donnez le sens des mots suivants: a handset, gynecology, namesake.
4.0.
Conclusion You have attempted the translation texts into French.
In the process you have learnt many common medical vocabulary and other grammatical points.
4.1.
Answers The meanings of the words are un portable, la gynécologie, l’homonyme.
5.0.
Summary You have made further progress in your translation through the acquisition of new vocabulary and expressions such as pédiatre, gynécologue and homonyme.
It is interesting as you translate into French.
6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into French.
1.
I am a gynecologist in the Teaching Hospital 2.
You could call the paediatrician 3.
In what way can I be of help to you?
4.
My friend is eminently qualified to be a paediatrician 5.
He works in the paediatric department.
7.0.
References Ojo, S.A. (2002): A Comprehension Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services Ltd.  UNIT 16 A ROAD ACCIDENT Table of Contents 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
A Road Accident 3.1.
Vocabulary 3.2.
Model translation 3.3.
Self assessment exercise 4.0.
Conclusion 4.1.
Answers 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-marked assignment 7.0.
References 1.0.
Introduction This unit introduces you to a text that deals with a road accident.
Take this unit very seriously as you are bound to use the expressions very often in real life.
2.0.
Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to • translate the text on road accident • know more new words e.g.
s’enrichir, les dégâts, abîmé, le témoin, accident mortel, la circulation routière, un heureux mortel, voiture accidentée • know more expressions:, rouler à une vive allure, faire un tonneau.
• know the use of se produire.
• recall the use of en Read the text on a road accident.
Look up for the difficult words in your dictionary.
Translate the text.
3.0.
A Road Accident Towards the end of every year, the road traffic is very heavy.
People travel a lot, and vehicular accidents occur a lot.
Commercial drivers want to enrich themselves quickly.
So they drive at very high speed.
This causes fatal accidents.
Last year, there was an unfortunate accident.
For the first time I witnessed one.
The vehicle somersaulted, leading to damages and the death of ten persons.
The accident was preceded by the deafening burst of a tyre.
The car was smashed to smithereens, it was badly damaged.
There was, however, a lucky person.
3.1.
Vocabulary road traffic – la circulation routière to enrich oneself – s’enrichir to drive at a high speed – rouler à une vive allure a witness – un témoin somersaulted (of a car) – faire un tonneau smashed to smithereens or bits – réduite en miettes.
damaged – abîmé Know that a fatal accident implies the loss of life, not just ghastly.
You can express the idea of “An accident takes place” in two ways, using se produire 1.
Il se produit un accident 2.
Un accident se produit Read the text again.
Translate it.
Then compare your translation with the model one.
3.2.
Model Translation - Un accident de la route Vers la fin de chaque année, la circulation routière est très dense.
Les gens voyagent beaucoup, et il se produit bien des accidents de voiture.
Les chauffeurs commerciaux veulent vite s’enrichir.
Ils roulent donc dans une vive allure.
Cela provoque des accidents mortels.
L’année passée, il y a eu un malheureux accident.
Pour la première fois, j’en étais témoin.
Le véhicule a fait plusieurs tonneaux, entraînant des dégâts et la mort de dix personnes.
L’accident était précédé de l’éclatement assourdissant d’un pneu.
La voiture accidentée était réduite en miettes, elle était abîmée.
Néanmoins, il y avait un heureux mortel.
Note : you could also say ‘‘une heureuse personne’’ or ‘‘un heureux mortel’’.
Similarly, you may say bien des accidents or beaucoup d’accidents.
Recall the use of en in j’en étais témoin.
I was a witness to it or I was a witness to it 3.3.
Self assessment exercise What is the difference in the two sets of sentences ?
(i) Un accident se produit Il se produit un accident (ii) Il y a bien des accidents Il y a beaucoup d’accidents?
4.0.
Conclusion You have learnt many new words and expressions such as abîmée and rouler à une vive allure.
You have also been able to translate a whole text.
4.1.
Answers 1.
The two sentences in question one mean the same thing.
2.
The two sentences in question two also have the same meaning.
5.0.
Summary You have translated a text on “A Road Accident”.
You have known many more vocabulary and expressions.
Use these words and expressions in natural life.
Even when there is no one to speak to, try and recall the expressions in your mind when you see an accident.
6.0.
Tutor – Marked Assignment Translate the following sentences.
1.
An accident occurs everyday 2.
The driver drives at top speed.
3.
The car somersaulted many times 4.
The car was damaged 5.
Road accidents are common in December 7.0.
References and other resources Collins Robert French Dictionary, Concise Edition, Westerhill Road, Bishopbriggs, Glasgow: HarperCollins Publishers.
Unit 17 Table of Contents 1.0.
Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0.
My Uncle’s Flat 3.1.
Vocabulary 3.2.
Grammar Agreement of Subject and Verb 3.3.
Self assessment exercise 3.4.
Model Translation 4.0.
Conclusion 4.1.
Answers 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0.
References 1.0.
Introduction This unit further introduces you to more vocabulary that are related to the home.
Work hard on the translation.
You will come across the vocabulary very often.
Make sure you retain them fully in your memory.
2.0.
Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you should know the French equivalents of the following words: • sink, freezer, gas cooker, micro-waves oven, washing machine, first cousin, to give sunlight to, candle, wall- cupboard, lumber-room You will also be able to ensure agreement between subject and verb in the present tense and use venait d’être appropriately.
You will also recall the use of y.
You should read the following passage many times.
Look up for the difficult words in a French/English dictionary.
You will see explanations later in the unit.
Try to translate the text before you refer to the model translation.
3.0.
My Uncle’s Flat The street where my maternal uncle lives is always lively except in the night.
The flat had just been renovated.
Beautiful trees flourish in the compound.
I particularly like the kitchen.
It is beautiful and has all the comfort.
I find there a sink, a fridge, a freezer, a gas cooker, a micro-waves oven and two wall-cupboards.
These are three bedrooms and two bathrooms.
In the first bathroom, I saw a bathtub and a shower.
The second one has a washing machine.
Beside the second bathroom, there is a small lumber-room.
Being a villager, I admire the flat so much.
But the rooms are not well lit by sun.
That always poses problems when there is no electricity.
My first cousins and I who share a room are obliged to use a candle when there is no electricity.
3.1.
Vocabulary You now have an opportunity of knowing some of the words that may pose problem in the course of your translation: freezer – un congélateur or un freezer a micro-waves oven – un four à micro-ondes a lumber-room – une chambre de débarras The rooms are not well lit by the sun – Les chambres ne sont pas bien ensoleillées when there is no light – quand il n’y a pas d’électricité or - quand il y a coupure du courant In the two translations given to ‘‘when there is no light’’, the second one is a case of modulation.
That implies a change of point of view.
You may realise that ‘‘quand il y a coupure du courant’’ is an example of modulation by translating it literally : ‘‘when there is a cut of current’’ (i.e.
electricity).
3.2.
Grammar You will now see elements of grammar that are relevant to the text Agreement of subject and verb Note that you should translate “my first cousins and I who share a room are as “mes cousins germains et moi qui partageons une chambre sommes…” You should take special note of the verbs – partageons and sommes – which are in the first person plural.
The idea is that My cousins and I are equal to we My cousins and I = we Ils + moi = nous You understand it better when you simplify the sentence to read: Mes cousins et moi, nous partageons une chambre et nous sommes…  3.3.
Self assessment exercise Which of the following sentences is correct?
1.
Mon ami et moi sont là 2.
Mon ami et moi sommes là.
3.4.
Model Translation – L’appartement de mon oncle La rue où habite mon oncle maternel est toujours animée, sauf la nuit.
L’appartement venait d’être rénovée.
De beaux arbres fleurissent dans la cour.
J’aime particulièrement la cuisine.
Elle est très belle, et a tout le confort.
J’y trouve un évier, un frigidaire, un congélateur, une cuisine à gaz, un four à micro-ondes et deux placards.
Il y a trois chambres à coucher et deux salles de bain.
Dans la première salle de bain, j’ai vu une baignoire et une douche.
La seconde a une machine à laver le linge.
A côté de la deuxième salle de bain, il y a une petite chambre de débarras.
Etant villageois, j’admire bien l’appartement.
Mais les chambres ne sont pas bien ensoleillées.
Cela pose toujours des problèmes quand il y a coupure du courant.
Mes cousins germains et moi qui partageons une chambre sommes donc obligés de nous servir d’une bougie quand il n’y a pas d’électricité.
Venait d’être is used in a passive sense.
You should translate the flat had just been renovated as l‘appartement venait d’être rénovée.
“Venait” is in the imparfait to signify “had”.
If it were “it has just been renovated”, the translation would be “Il vient d’être rénové”.
Remember that if the subject were feminine, there would be an agreement of the subject and the participe passé, e.g.
Elle venait d’être rénovée”.
Instead of writing “l’appartement venait d’être rénovée”, you can also write: “On venait de rénover l’appartement”.
Note also: de beaux arbres.
A plural noun is preceded by a plural adjective.
But you use de and not des.
Ensoleiller – to give sunlight to Fleurissent – flourish Fleurir – to flourish 4.0.
Conclusion In this unit, you have learnt many new words relating to the home.
Keep them at your fingers tips.
You have also learned a few more French constructions.
And of course, you have been able to translate the passage.
4.1.
Answer The second answer is the right one 5.0.
Summary This unit has given you the opportunity of an enriched vocabulary pertaining to the home.
You have also learnt agreement of subjects and verb.
You will be doing yourself a lot of good as you try to recall them each time you see the objects mentioned in the passage.
6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment Using venait d’être or vient d’être translate the following sentences into French.
1.
The house had just been renovated.
2.
The book has just been sold.
The following will not require the use venait d’être or vient d’être 3.
In our house there are three rooms and a kitchen.
4.
Very big trees are in our compound.
5.
We use candle when there is no light.
7.0.
References Berchie, Y. et al (2000).
Cours de la Sorbonne, langue et civilisation française, Paris, CLE.
Ojo.
S.A. (2002).
A Comprehensive Revision Handbook of French Grammar, Ibadan: Signal Educational Services.
UNIT 18 A VISIT TO A SHOP Table of Contents 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0.
A Visit to A Shop 3.1.
Vocabulary 3.2.
Expressions 3.2.1 Madame désire?
3.2.2.
Flirter 3.2.3.
Se profiter de 3.2.4 Aller bien avec 3.3.
Self assessment exercise 3.4.
Model translation 4.0.
Conclusion 4.1.
Answers 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-marked assignment 7.0.
References and Other Resources 1.0.
Introduction This unit deals with the translation of a passage on “A Visit To A Shop”.
You will learn vocabulary and expressions pertaining to a shop as you translate the text.
2.0.
Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you will be able to • translate the passage on “A visit to a shop” • increase your vocabulary: le centre-ville, la pantoufle, flirter, les horaires, le caissier, l’addition • increase your expressions : se profiter de, promotion des ventes, madame désire?, pas forcément, aller bien avec  Read the passage “A Visit to a Shop”.
Try to translate it.
Remember as usual the use of your dictionary and grammar books where necessary.
3.0.
A Visit to a Shop I went to Elanta, a shop in the city centre.
I wanted to take advantage of the sales promotion.
I learnt that there were special offers: clothes, slippers, perfumes among others.
The shop was full of people who were going and coming.
Luck smiled on me already: one of the salesmen welcomed me in a special way.
A dialogue followed: Salesman: Can I help you madam?
I hesitated a bit, and then said - Yes, you can Salesman: What do you need?
- Trousers, perhaps.
Salesman: O.K.
There are many here.
Come!
You are young and beautiful.
You should buy fashionable clothes.
- Not necessarily, I replied.
You know a poet says that “fashion flirts with time” Salesman: You are right, madam.
Take your time and make your choice.
The shop schedule is convenient for you.
This month, we open all through.
An hour later, I made my choice – a beautiful pair of trousers.
But I still needed a beautiful shirt that would match the trousers.
Meanwhile, I went to see the cashier.
He gave me the bill and I paid.
3.1.
Vocabulary Look at some of the difficult vocabulary: city centre – le centre-ville sales promotion – la promotion des ventes slippers – les pantoufles (feminine) perfumes – les parfumeries (feminine) Can I help you, madam?
– Madame désire?
fashionable clothes – les vêtements à la mode shop schedule – les horaires de la boutique We open all through – On ouvre sans interruption bill – l’addition (feminine) 3.2.
Expressions 3.2.1 Madame désire?
In commercial language, “Madame désire?” means “Can I help you, madam”.
You use this expression when the woman enters the shop.
The translation of “madame désire” is an example of modulation.
Remember what you learnt about modulation in Unit 6.
Modulation is saying the same thing in another language from a different point of view.
3.2.2.
Flirter “Filrter” is an “emprunt” (borrowed word) from English.
It means “to flirt”, just like the English word.
Fashion flirts with time – La mode flirte avec le temps.
3.2.3 Se profiter de It means to take advantage of.
“Je me profite de son absence” means “I am taking advantage of his absence”.
Note that it is a reflexive verb.
Thus “I wanted to take advantage of…” will read “Je voulais me profiter de…”.
The “me” will change to “te”, “se”, “nous” or “vous” depending on the subject e.g.
“Elle voulait se profiter de son absence”.
‘‘Nous voulons nous profiter de son absence’’ ‘‘Profiter’’ here is the infinitive because of the verb (voulais) that precedes it.
3.2.4.
Aller bien avec This expression means literally “to go well with”.
Its real meaning is “to match or fit”.
It belongs to the translation technique known as equivalence.
Read the following sentences involving the use of aller bien avec (i) La cravate va bien avec la chemise - The tie matches the shirt (ii) La cravate ne va pas avec la chemise - The tie does not match the shirt.
You can also say or write (i) La cravate n’est pas assortie à la chemise - The tie does not match the shirt.
Make use of your knowledge to translate the text now.
Then, read the model version.
3.3.
Self assessment exercise Why is flirter considered as un emprunt?
3.4.
Model Translation – Une visite à la boutique Je suis allée à Elanta, une boutique au centre-ville.
Je voulais me profiter de la promotion des ventes.
J’ai appris qu’il y avait des offres exceptionnelles: des vêtements, des pantoufles, des parfumeries entre autres.
La boutique était pleine des gens qui allaient et venaient.
La fortune me souriait déjà : l’un des vendeurs m’a accueillie de façon spéciale.
Un dialogue s’est ensuivi : Le vendeur – Madame désire?
J’ai hésité un peu, et puis, j’ai dit : - Des pantalons, peut-être.
Le vendeur : D’accord.
Il y en a beaucoup ici.
Vous étés jeune et belle.
Vous devriez acheter des vêtements à la mode.
- Pas forcément, répliquai-je.
Vous savez, selon un poète ‘‘la mode flirte avec le temps’’.
- Vous avez raison, madame.
Prenez le temps, et faites votre choix.
Les horaires de la boutique vous conviennent.
Ce mois-ci, on ouvre sans interruption.
Une heure après, j’ai fait mon choix – un beau pantalon.
Mais il fallait encore une belle chemise qui irait avec le pantalon.
Entre -temps, je suis allée voir le caissier.
Il m’a donné l’addition, et j’ai payé.
Did you notice that the author or speaker in the text is female?
you recognize that through the use of Je suis allée.
A male person would write Je suis allé  4.0.
Conclusion You have known many new words and expressions.
A few of them are la pantoufle, se profiter de, aller bien avec, la promotion des ventes.
4.1.
Answer It is considered as un emprunt because it is borrowed from English.
It is not an originally French word.
5.0.
Summary You have translated a passage on ‘‘A Visit to a Shop’’.
In the process your knowledge of French has improved.
6.0.
Tutor – Marked Assignment Translate the following sentences in French.
1.
We wanted to take advantage of his absence.
2.
His trousers match his shirt.
3.
I went to the city centre.
4.
In December, we have sales promotion.
5.
The cashier has given me the bill.
6.
A dialogue ensued.
7.
The offers are exceptional.
8.
You ought to buy good clothes.
9.
I went to the boutique.
10.
We made our choice.
7.0.
References and other resources Berchie, Y. et al (2000).
Cours de la Sorbonne, Langue et Civilization Française, Paris: CLE.
Unit 19 MY FIRST VISIT TO LAGOS Table of Contents 1.0.
Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0.
My First Visit to Lagos 3.1.
Vocabulary 3.2.
Grammar 3.3.
Self assessment exercise 3.4.
Model translation 4.0.
Conclusion 4.1.
Answers 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0.
References 1.0.
Introduction This unit is about a visit to Lagos and it introduces you to a few common in vocabulary.
2.0.
Objectives On successful completion of this unit, you should be able to translate the passage on “My First Visit To Lagos”.
You should also in the process know the French equivalents of the following: • noisy street, to horn, swear or foul words, to hesitate, to appreciate • pedestrian, traffic congestion, motorist, well-furnished, computer, block of offices, block of flats.
You will also know the expression être à touche – touche 3.0.
My First Visit To Lagos Read the passage titled: My first visit to Lagos.
Look up for the difficult words.
Attempt to translate it.
My First Visit To Lagos My first visit to Lagos was wonderful, but tiring at the same time.
On the very day of my arrival, I accompanied my brother to the office.
My brother used to work in a noisy street, a street that is well known for traffic congestion.
The cars are nose to tail.
In fact, the cars and pedestrians mix there..
The motorists were very nervous and horned without stopping.
They used swear words on each other; they insulted one another often.
But my brother’s office presented a great contrast.
It was calm, beautifully decorated and well-furnished.
You could see computers almost everywhere.
My brother asked me to sit down, but I hesitated a little.
He appreciated my problem since I was coming from the village.
In Lagos I saw many buildings: blocks of offices and blocks of flats.
I could not even count the skyscrapers.
3.1.
Vocabulary tiring – fatigante.
It is put in the feminine to be in accord or agreement with ma première visite le jour même – the very day swear or foul words – des gros mots Des gros mots literally mean big words.
Of course a literal meaning here is incorrect: se dire – to say to one another s’insulter – to insult one another.
hésiter – to hesitate apprécier – to appreciate  klaxonner – to horn Les hommes se disent des gros mots – They are saying swear words against one another un immeuble de bureaux – an office block un immeuble d’habitation – a block of flats Ils s’insultent – They insult one another.
To be nose to tail – être touche-touche (of cars, trains) 3.2.
Grammar - Des gros mots You had seen earlier that the plural adjective that precedes a noun is also preceded by de and not des e.g.
de grands hommes.
But des gros mots is an exception just as des jeunes filles et des petits pois are exceptions too.
Used To In expressing the expression “used to”, the French uses the imparfait of the verb in question e.g.
I used to like rice a lot – J’aimais beaucoup le riz.
I used to see him everyday – Je le voyais tous les jours.
Note that “used to” implies an action or a state that was constant in the past, but the situation has changed.
In other words “I used to like rice” means that I do not like it anymore.
Always remember to use this expression correctly.
It is a common mistake made by students.
Remember that your English must be very good too.
This is because you also translate into English.
In fact, if your English is bad you are bound to translate wrongly too.
A sure way of having a good command of English is the constant reading of novels.
Le gratte-ciel: The plural form is either les gratte-ciel or les gratte-ciels.
3.3.
Self assessment exercise Explain the following, sentence in English: I used to sleep soundly when I was small 3.2.
Model Translation – Ma première visite à Lagos Ma première visite à Lagos était merveilleuse, mais fatigante à la fois.
Le jour même de mon arrivée, j’ai accompagné mon frère au bureau.
Mon frère travaillait dans une rue bruyante, une rue bien connue pour l’embouteillage.
En effet, les voitures étaient à touche – touche.
Les véhicules et les piétons s’y mélangeant.
Les automobilistes étaient très nerveux et klaxonnaient sans cesse.
Ils se disaient des gros mots, ils s’insultaient souvent.
Mais le bureau de mon frère présentait un grand contraste.
Il était calme, joliment décoré et bien meublé.
On voyait des ordinateurs un peu partout.
Mon frère m’a invité à m’asseoir, mais j’ai hésité un peu.
Il appréciait mon problème, comme je venais du village.
A Lagos, j’ai vu beaucoup d’immeubles : immeubles de bureaux et immeubles d’habitation.
Je ne suis pas même arrivé à compter les gratte-ciel.
4.0.
Conclusion The text you have translated has been useful in increasing your knowledge of French and English.
You now know how to use the expression “used to”.
You also know many words or expressions such as être touche-touche, des gros mots and others.
4.1.
Answer What the sentence means is that I do not sleep soundly again.
It is when I was small that I was sleeping soundly.
5.0.
Summary You have known many new words.
You have also been able to translate a passage.
6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment Translate the following sentences into French 1.
I used to drink a lot.
2.
The women insulted one another.
3.
The women were very nervous.
4.
The man invites me to sit down.
5.
I did not appreciate her problem.
6.
My second visit was tiresome.
7.
There are many skyscrapers in Lagos.
8.
My brother works in a big office block.
9.
He also lives in a block of flats.
10.
There is a big contrast between Lagos and my village.
7.0.
References  Unit 20 SEASONS IN FRANCE Table of Contents 1.0.
Introduction 2.0 objectives 3.0.
Seasons in France 3.1.
Vocabulary 3.2.
Grammar 3.2.1 Suivre 3.2.2 Succéder à 3.3.
Self assessment exercise 3.4.
Model Translation 4.0.
Conclusion 4.1.
Answers 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-marked assignment 7.0.
References and other resources 1.0.
Introduction In this unit, you are going to deal with a passage on Seasons in France (les Saisons en France).
You will learn different words relating to the weather in the course of your translation.
You will also broaden your general knowledge.
2.0.
Objectives The primary objectives of this unit are to help you • translate a text on climatic seasons • increase your vocabulary - l’automne, l’été, le printemps l’hiver, le déclin des jours, la chute des feuilles, le froid hivernal, la tenue, s’adoucir, le vieillard, précéder de, caractériser, suivre, la végétation, se protéger, symboliser, succéder à, l’automne de la vie.
Read and attempt to translate the text on your own.
You will read some of the difficult words and expressions later.
But start by looking up for the difficult words in the dictionary.
You may confirm the correctness or otherwise of your result later.
3.0.
Seasons in France Africa has two main seasons: the rainy season and the dry season.
On the contrary, France just like other European countries has four seasons: winter, spring, summer and autumn.
Winter is the coldest of the four seasons.
It is preceded by autumn.
In other words, winter follows autumn.
In winter, France experiences long nights.
The African who visits France has to protect himself against the winter cold.
Spring is the first of the four seasons.
It follows winter.
The temperature is not too cold; it gets milder.
Spring is characterized by a vegetation that gets “reborn”.
Summer is the hottest season of the year.
It follows spring.
It is very hot; the clothes worn are always light.
It is mostly in summer that French people go on holidays.
Autumn follows summer.
In autumn, France experiences declining days and the fall of leaves.
Autumn symbolises maturity and decline.
It is said that a very old man has attained the “autumn of life”.
3.1.
Vocabulary (1) La saisons des pluies or la saison pluvieuse – rainy season (2) La saison sèche – dry season (3) It follows autumn – Il suit l’automne or Il succède à l’automne.
(4) Wintry cold – le froid hivernal Hivernal is the adjectival form of l’hiver (winter) (5) It gets milder – Elle s’adoucit (6) léger (masculine) – light  légère (feminine) – light (7) se protéger – to protect one’s self (8) characterized by a vegetation – caraterisée par une végétation that get “reborn” qui renaît.
(9) The clothes worn are always light – La tenue est toujours légère.
The fifth example is a transposition.
Clothes is plural in English; but in this context, the equivalent word used, la tenue, is singulier.
The verbs have to be in natural agreement with the nouns.
Hence, you read: the clothes are… la tenue est… (10) le déclin des jours – the declining of days (11) la chute des feuilles – the fall of leaves (from the trees).
(12) le vieillard – old man (13) suivre – to follow suivi(e) de – followed by (14) la vegetation - vegetation (15) atteindre – to reach (16) précédé de – followed by In American English, you will talk of fall instead of autumn.
3.2.
Grammar 3.2.1 Suivre The verbe suivre (to follow) is conjugated as follows Je suis Nous suivons Tu suis Vous suivez Il/Elle suit Ils suivent In expressing the passive voice some verbs are followed entirely by par to mean by.
Others are followed by par and de.
You see either, par or de.
Suivre and précéder are fall into this category.
Other words that take de to mean by are connaître (to know) hair (to hate), aimer (to love).
Thus you will write (1) Mon ami est aimé de tous My friend is loved by all (2) Mon frère est connu de tous My brother is known by all (3) Ma femme est aimée de tous My wife is loved (or liked) by all Note the agreement in the last example.
3.2.2.
Succéder à Succéder à means to follow or succeed.
Take not of the preposition à L’été succède au printemps means Summer follows or succeeds spring.
You use au because of the preposition à. À becomes au because printemps is masculine.
Le printemps.
Remember à + le = au.
To translate summer follows spring, you may decide to use the verb suivre.
You will thus have the following result: L’été suit le printemps.
3.3.
Self assessment exercise Give two translations of the following sentence using succéder à and suivre.
i.
Autumn follows winter Translate the following sentence (into English) which does not require succéder à or suivre.
ii.
Le printemps symbolise la jeneusse.
Now translate the text on your own and compare with the model translation.
3.4.
Model Translation – Les saisons en France L’Afrique connaît deux saisons principales : la saison des pluies et la saison sèche.
Au contraire, la France, tout comme d’autres pays européens, connaît quatre saisons : l’hiver, le printemps, l’été et l’automne.
L’hiver est le plus froid des quatre saisons.
Il est précédé de l’automne.
Autrement dit, l’hiver succède à l’automne.
Pendant l’hiver, la France connaît de longues nuits.
L’Africain qui visite la France doit se protéger contre le froid hivernal.
Le printemps est la première des quatre saisons.
Il suit l’été.
Il ne fait pas trop froid ; la température s’adoucit.
Le printemps est aussi caractérisé par une végétation qui renaît.
L’été est la saison la plus chaude de l’année.
Il succède au printemps.
Il fait très chaud ; la tenue est toujours légère.
C’est surtout en été que les Français vont en vacances.
L’automne suit l’été.
En automne, la France connaît le déclin des jours et la chute des feuilles.
L’automne symbolise la maturité et le déclin.
On dit qu’un vieillard a atteint «l’automne de la vie » Note : de longues nuits.
You will recall the grammatical rule, which says that you should put de in the singular when it precedes a plural adjective, which, in turn, precedes a plural noun.
Thus you will write:  Je vois de beaux garçons Je connais de grands intellectuels 4.0.
Conclusion You have learnt a lot of words and expressions that will facilitate your translation of the passage.
4.1.
Answers (i) L’automne suit l’hiver l’automne succède à l’hiver (ii) Spring symbolises youth 5.0.
Summary Learn the new words and expressions.
They will aid you in translating the passage 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment Translate the following passage 1.
It is very hot in Africa.
2.
But it is cold during harmattan 3.
Africa has two main seasons 4.
It has no winter 5.
It has no spring.
6.
It does not have autumn 7.
It has no summer also 8.
But some parts of Africa too are very cold.
7.0.
References and Other Resources Le Retit Robert (1972), Paris: SNL.
