 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: ISL 322 COURSETITLE: HADITH COLLECTORS AND COMMENTATORS 1  COURSE GUIDE COURSE CODE/TITLE: ISL 322: Hadīth Collectors and Commentators COURSE TEAM Prof. Sulaymān A. Musa (Author) - UDUS COURSE EDITOR Prof. Asif Folarin Ahmed (, Editor) NOUN COURSE COORDINATOR: Dr. Adejoro R. Mustapha 2 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16, Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Abuja Annex 245, Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street, Central Business District, Opposite Arewa Suites, Abuja.
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2013 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….
For National Open University of Nigeria 3 Table of Contents Page Title Page Publishers’ Address Table of Contents Introduction……………………………………….
The Focus of the Course/Instructional Objectives...
Course Objectives………………………………… Working through this Course……………………...
Course Materials………………………………….
Study Units……………………………………….. References………………………………………..
Assignment File………………………………….. Assessment……………………………………….
Tutor – Marked Assignments……………………..
Final Examination and Grading…………………..
Course Marking Scheme………………………….
Presentation Schedule…………………………….
Course Overview/Presentation Schedule….……… How to Get the Most from this Course………….. Tutor and Tutorials ……………………………… Conclusion……………………………………….. Summary ………………………………………… 4 INTRODUCTION ISL 322: Hadīth Collectors and Commentators – is a two credit units, compulsory course for the third year degree students of Islamic Studies at the National Open University of Nigeria.
This course gives the reader a clear picture of lives and works of the collectors of the six most popular and more reliable Hadīth collections (aṣ-Ṣihāhu `s-Sittah)known as Ṣahīh Bukhārī, Ṣahīh Muslim, Sunan Abu Daud, Jāmi‘u Tirmidhī, Sunan a`n-Nasāī and Sunan Ibn Mājah.
Readers will also be acquainted with the life and contribution of six other important scholars of Hadīth in person of Imam Mālik, Imam Hanbalī, Imam Yahya an-Nawawī, al-Suyutī, al- Asqalānī and al-Albānī.
The Aim of this Course The main aim of this course is to facilitate knowledge of the Hadīth, its place as the second primary source of Islamic law, major collectors and commentators of Hadīth.
To achieve this, you will be reminded of topics you have come across earlier on such: (i) The meaning of Hadīth (ii) Hadīth collection during and after the life time of the Prophet Muhammad (Ş).
(iii) The lives and contribution of Muhaddithūn like Imams Bukhārī, Muslim, Abu Dawud, a`t-Tirmidhī, a`n-Nasāī and Ibn Mājah to the Hadīth literature.
as Hadīth collectors.
(iv) The lives and contribution of Commentators on Hadith like Imam Yahya al-Nawawī, Jalāluddīn al-Suyūtī, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī to Hadīth literature.
Course Objectives The course has thirteen units each of which has its instructional objectives.
You are expected to read the objectives of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
Nevertheless, the following are overall objectives of the course.
After readers have gone through the whole course he/she should be able to:  Define Hadīth and identifies its difference with Sunnah.
 Explain the collection of Hadīth during and after the life of the Prophet.
 Explain the place of as the second primary source of Islamic law 5  Discuss the life and Hadīth collections of the six most prominent Muhaddithūn; viz.
Bukhārī, Muslim, Abu Dawud, Tirmidhī, and a`n-Nasāī and Ibn Mājah.
 Give vivid account of the biography and Hadīth works of Imams Mālik, Hanbalī, a`n- Nawawī, al- Asqalānī, a`Suyūtī and al-Albānī.
Working through This Course There are thirteen units in the course which you are expected to work through without leaving one untouched.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
A Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignments File 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Units There are thirteen units (of two modules) in this course.
These are listed thus: MODULE 1: Imams Bukhārī, Muslim, Abu Dawud, and Tirmidhī: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
Unit 1: Introductory Unit.
Unit 2: A Biography and Hadīth Collection of Imam Bukhārī and its Commentary.
Unit 3: A Biography and Hadīth Collection of Imam Muslim and its Commentary.
Unit 4: The Life and Hadīth Collection of Imam Abu Daud and its Commentary.
Unit 5: The Profile and Hadīth Collection of Imam Tirmidhī and its Commentary Module 2: Imams A`n-Nasāī, Mālik and Ibn Hanbal: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
Unit 6: The Profile and Hadīth Collection of Imam Nasşāī and its Commentary.
6 Unit 7: The life and Hadīth Collection of Imam Ibn Mājah and its Commentary Unit 8: The Biography and Contribution of Imam Mālik to the Science of Hadīth.
Unit 9: The Biography and Contribution of Imam Ibn Hanbalī to the Science of Hadīth.
Module 3 Imams Nawawī, Suyūtī, Asqalānī and Albānī: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
Unit 10: Imam Yahya a`n-Nawawī and his contribution to Hadīth literature Unit 11: Jalalu Dīn a`s-Suyūtī and his contribution to the development of Hadīth literature Unit 12: Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī and his works on Hadīth literature Unit 13: The contribution of Imam al-Albanī to the Hadīth literature.
References and Other Resources Every unit has a list of references and further reading designed to enhance and deepen learner’s knowledge on the course.
These are some of them, try as much as possible to lay your hands on the materials.
Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The selected traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Al-Dhahabi: Tabaqātu `l-Ħuffāz.
Cairo.
Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalānī: Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb.
Ali Muhammad M. (1976).
A Manual of Hadīth, Lahore.
Pakistan.
Al-Subai, M.H (1949).
A`s-Sunnah wa Makānatuhā fi `t–Tashrī ‘l-Islāmī.
Azami, M.M (1977).
Studies in Hadīth Methodology and Literature.
(USA).
Doi R. I.
(1980).
Basis of Sharī‘ah, Zaria.
H.A.R Gibs and J.H Kramne (1960).
Shorter encyclopaedia of Islam; London.
Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
It should be noted that there are also many relevant soft copy materials on the website.
7 Assessments Your assessment will be based on Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs), Tutor-marked Assignments (TMAs) and a Final Written Examination at the end of the course.
The Self Assessment Exercises Though your answers to these Self Assessment Exercises questions do not add a credit to your overall grade in the course, it is advisable that you attempt all of them yourself as it serves as a demonstration of the level of understanding you are achieving as you go through the content.
Tutor Marked Assignment You will be provided with 4 online TMAs each of which will consist of twenty Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ).
At least, three of the four TMAs must be answered before arrangements are concluded for the written examinations.
The three in which you perform best shall be selected to constitute 30% of your final grade.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of this course, you will write a final examination, which shall constitute 70% of your grade.
In the examination, you will be required to answer three out of at least five questions.
Assessment Marks Four Assignments Best three marks of the four assignments count as 30% Final Examination 70% of overall marks Total 100% of course marks Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are 8 required to submit all your assignment by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Course Overview and Presentation Schedule Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity MODULE 1: Imams Bukhārī, Muslim, Abu Dawud, and Tirmidhī: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
Unit 1 Introductory Unit Week 1 Unit 2 A Biography and Hadīth Collection of Imam Week 2 Bukhārī and its Commentary Unit 3 A Biography and Hadīth Collection of Imam Week 3 Assignment 1 Muslim and its Commentary.
Unit 4 The Life and Hadīth Collection of Imam Abu Week 4 Daud and its Commentary Unit 5 The Profile and Hadīth Collection of Imam Week 5 Assignment 2 Tirmidhī and its Commentary Module 2: Imams a`n-Nasāī, Ibn Majah, Mālik and Hambalī: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
RUesneiatr 6c h The Profile and Hadīth Collection of Imam Week 6 a`n-Nasāī and its Commentary Unit 7 The Profile and Hadīth Collection of Imam Week 7 Assignment 3 Ibn Mājah and its Commentary Unit 8 The Biography and Contribution of Imam Week 8 Malik to the Science of Hadīth Unit 9 The Biography and Contribution of Imam Week 9 Assignment 4 Ibn Hanbal to the Science of Hadīth.
Module 3 Imams Nawawi, Suyuti, Asqalani and Albani: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
9 Unit 10 Imam Yahya al-Nawawi and his Week 10 contribution to Hadīth literature Unit 11 Jalal al-din al-Suyuti and his contribution to Week 11 the development of Hadīth literature Unit 12 Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani and his works on Week 12 Hadīth literature Unit 13 The contribution of Imam al-Albanī to the Hadīth literature.
Revision Examination Total How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of its great advantages.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
'You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the 10 course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor's job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dales and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you arc studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your Study Centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before the dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
11 10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit's objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the Tutor-Marked Assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and address of your tutor.
Your tutor will mark each assignment.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important; therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties encountered on your reading.
Conclusion Much as I cannot promise you a too-easy ride on this course, I equally do not envisage much difficulty as long as you play the roles assigned to you in the whole exercise.
Summary In this Course Guide, we have provided you a general overview of ISL322: Hadīth Collectors and Commentators in which students pursuing Degree in Arabic and Islamic Studies programme must earn two credit Units.
The Course Aims and Objectives and what learners will gain working through the Course Material and its Study Units are stated clearly at the 12 onset.
We have also provided you a list of textbooks and references for your further reading.
As an inference in the Guide, to develop an active interest in the Course is a prerequisite for its successful completion.
Assess yourself through the Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs).
You will equally be assessed for grading purposes through the Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs).
Thus to do well- in the course, you must get yourself organized and try to conform to the presentation schedule.
We wish you best of luck and success in the course.
13  Table of content: MODULE 1: Imams Bukhārī, Muslim, Abu Dawud, and A`t-Tirmidhī: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
Unit 1: Introductory Unit.
Unit 2: A Biography and Hadīth Collection of Imam Bukhārī and its Commentary.
Unit 3: A Biography and Hadīth Collection of Imam Muslim and its Commentary.
Unit 4: The Life and Hadīth Collection of Imam Abu Daud and its Commentary.
Unit 5: The Profile and Hadīth Collection of Imam Tirmidhī and its Commentary Module 2: Imams A`n-Nasāī, Ibn Mājah, Mālik and Ibn Hanbal: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
Unit 6: The Profile and Hadīth Collection of Imam Nasşāī and its Commentary.
Unit 7: The life and Hadīth Collection of Imam Ibn Mājah and its Commentary Unit 8: The Biography and Contribution of Imam Malik to the Science of Hadīth.
Unit 9: The Biography and Contribution of Imam Ibn Hanbal to the Science of Hadīth.
Module 3 Imams Nawawī, Suyūtī, Asqalānī and Albānī: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
Unit 10: Imam Yahya al-Nawawī and his contribution to Hadīth literature Unit 11: Jalālu `d-Dīn al-Suyūtī and his contribution to the development of Hadīth literature Unit 12: Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī and his works on Hadīth literature Unit 13: The contribution of Imam al-Albānī to the Hadīth literature.
14 MODULE 1: Imams Bukhārī, Muslim, Abu Dawud, and Tirmidhī: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
Unit 1: Introductory Unit.
Unit 2: A Biography and Hadīth Collection of Imam Bukhārī and its Commentary.
Unit 3: A Biography and Hadīth Collection of Imam Muslim and its Commentary.
Unit 4: The Life and Hadīth Collection of Imam Abu Daud and its Commentary.
Unit 5: The Profile and Hadīth Collection of Imam Tirmidhī and its Commentary UNIT 1: INTRODUCTORY UNIT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Origin of Hadīth 3.2 Role of the Şahābah in the preservation of Hadīth.
3.3 Issue of Prohibition of Hadīth Recording During the Prophet Era 3.4 The Collection of Hadīth after the Death of the Prophet 3.5 The Collection of Hadīth during the Umayyad Era 3.6 The Golden Era of Hadīth Collection 200-300 A.H. 3.7 Emergence of the Six Sound Collections of Hadīth 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit reviews the meaning of Hadīth, its dissemination, collection during and after the demise of the Prophet Muhammad, the position of Hadīth in Islam and the golden era of Hadīth collection.
15 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Trace the origin of the Hadīth.
 Describe the role played by the Şaħābah in the Hadīth transmission and preservation.
 Discuss the collection of Hadīth after the demise of the Prophet (Ş) and the Şaħābah.
 Expatiate on the activities relating to Hadīth collection during the Umayyad period.
 Relate the events in the Golden Age of Hadith collection.
3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 The Origin of Hadīth Hadīth is an Arabic word which means a report, story, narration, or discourse.
Its plural form is Aħādīth.
Scholars succinctly define Hadīth as: “A word spoken, an act done or a confirmation (approval) given by the Holy Prophet Muhammad (Ş)”.
Prophet Muhammad (Ş), like other prophets was sent not only to deliver but also to interprete, expound or practicalize divine message from Allah (Qur’ān).
This is confirmed in the Holy Qur’an: “There is surely a good example for you in the Messenger of Allah, for Him who hopes (to meet) Allah and the hereafter and remembers Allah abundantly” (33:21).
It can then be inferred that whatever the Prophet (Ş) said or did was based on the revelation to him.
Thus, his acts and sayings were inspired by Allah.
This is the reason why some scholars refer to Hadīth as Wahy Ghair Matluww (the un-recited revelation).
Hadīth covers all aspects of human life such as spiritual, economic, political, social, matrimonial and even judicial matters.
The area of Hadīth is very wide that it even touches the issue of conjugation, inheritance, divorce and more.
Another word that is often used interchangeably with Hadīth is Sunnah.
Briefly, Sunnah means complete way of life of the Prophet (Ş), both private and public.
That is, Prophet’s practice, habits, deeds and actions.
So, one of the major differences is that while Hadīth is an oral communication by the Prophet, Sunnah is his practical way of life.
Whatever be the case, it has to be understood that the Hadīth and the Sunnah 16  represents the second primary source of Islamic law.
Self-Assessment Exercise Give the origin of Hadith and the scope of its subject matter.
3.2 Role of the Şahābah in the preservation of Hadīth Naturally, the Şahābah sought after the knowledge of what the Prophet did or said because they understood them as law they should follow faithfully as they could.
Mention could be made of Abu Hurairah who kept constant company with the Prophet for three years at the expense of many worldly pursuits in order to hear and see the virtuous words and acts of the Prophet.
It was also been reported that Umar Ibn Khattāb who was not living very close to Madinah made arrangement with an Ansar to report to him whatever he saw or heard from the Prophet every other day.
Thus, it was a common practise among the Sahabahs (companions) to inquire from themselves new acts and words of the Prophet whenever they met themselves.
Historically, the earliest collection and preservation of Hadīth is credited to the Şahābah of the Prophet.
The collections and preservation of Prophet’s sayings which later became Hadīth was the wonderful work of the companions and those who followed them.
Mention could also be made of one known companion of the Prophet named Urwah bn Zubair who was said to have started the compilation of the sayings of the Prophet.
His writings was said to have become documents for many companions through his son known as Hisham.
Research has shown that some Ahādīth were written in the days of the Prophet and the four orthodox caliphs with personal efforts.
The companions understood that the Holy Prophet did not only come to reveal the message of the Qur’ān to the world but also to teach it and train people to run their lives in accordance with its requirement.
This is acknowledge in the Holy Qur’an when Almighty says: “He (Allah) is the one who raised up, among the unlettered, a Messenger from among themselves who recites the verses of Allah, and make them pure, and teaches them the book and the 17  wisdom” (62:2).
The Prophet himself also encouraged the companions to spread his sayings.
He says: “May Allah bestow vigour to a person who learns my saying and learns it by heart, then conveys it to other exactly as he hears it” During this time, The Sahabah used different means to collect and preserve the Hadīth of Prophet Muhammad.
Some of the ways are: 1.
Discussion: The Sahabahs used to tell each other what they had learnt form the Prophet (Ş).
Also, one person used to listen to other versions of the same Hadīth.
The result of this tadārrus (discussion) was to learn ahādīth, correct mistakes and preserve the correct versions of ahādīth.
All these efforts of the Sahabahs were to comply with the directions given by the Prophet thus: “Those present should convey (the Hadīth) on my behalf, even though it be a single verse.
Thus, the Prophet motivated the Sahabah to study ahādīth.
2.
Practise: Another way through which ahādīth were collected by the Companions was through practice.
Messages in the ahādīth are intimately connected to human life.
The Prophet himself, did not only give lessons and sermons, he also trained and encouraged them to practicalize what they heard or saw.
The acts and words of the Prophet were not taken as academic knowledge but as living traditions that manifested itself in all facets of society.
3.
Writing: Many of the Sahabahs could read and write.
These Companions wrote down what they heard from the Prophet.
Writing of Hadith, however, was not common that time.
The reason being that Prophet Muhammad discouraged it for fear that it could be mixed up with the Holy Qur’ān.
4.
Memorization: The Şahābah also preserved the traditions of the Prophet through memorization.
They used to learn the ahādīth by heart.
It should be remembered that the Arabs were proud of their power of memorization that they placed more confidence in it than in writing.
Abu Hurairah was quoted saying: “I have divided my night into three parts.
In one third of the night, I perform Şalāh, in one third I sleep and in one third I memorize the ahādīth of the Prophet.
Self-Assessment Exercise.
18  Discuss the role of the Sahabah in the preservation of Hadith 3.3 Issue of Prohibition of Hadīth Recording during the Prophet Era In the beginning, the Prophet forbade some Şahābah from writing down the Hadīths.
At that time, Prophet only allowed the writing of the Holy Qur’ān.
It should be noted that the earlier prohibition was not because the ahādīth had no authoritative value, as he himself, ordered oral transition of what he said or did.
He was quoted to have said: “Do not write (what you hear) from me, and whoever has written something (he heard) should erase it.
Narrate to others (what you hear) from me and whoever deliberately attributes a lie to me, he should prepare his seat in the fire”.
The fact is that, the Qur’an was revealed in piece-meal and when the revelation first started, many Şahābah wrote the ahādīth along with the Qur’ān.
Thus, the Prophet forbade the writing of the ahādīth for the fear that the two might get mixed up as the Şahābah were, then, not fully aware or familiar with the Qur’ān style.
However, it should be noted that Prophet Muhammad later removed the transitory measure when the Şahābah became fully conversant with the style of the Holy Qur’ān and more writing materials were available.
At this time, the danger of mixing the AHadīth with the Qur’an no longer existed.
Many ahādīth that were later reported from the Prophet were evidences that the writing of ahādīth was not only permitted but also ordered by the Prophet.
Some of the ahādīth are: “I swear by the one in whose hands is the soul of Muhammad, nothing comes of these two (lips) except truth.
So do write”.
Another Hadīth which was reported by Rafi’ Ibn Khadij says: “I said to the Prophet (Ş) ‘We hear from you many things, should we write them down’?
He (Ş) replied: ‘You may write”.
Self - Assessment Exercise Examine the view that the Prophet Muhammad banned some Sahabah from writing down of Hadith.
3.4 The Collection of Hadīth after the Death of the Prophet 19  Really, the importance of Hadīth recording, collection and even compilation were realized after the death of the Prophet.
Particularly when the Islamic community was growing out of Arabia and time span of Prophet’s death was increasing, there was greater need of Hadīths not only by many Şahābah who misses some Hadīths of the Prophet during his life time but also those who did not meet or know the Prophet at all.
The Prophet’s ahādīth and or Sunnah were highly needed to explain different parts of the Qur’ān, give practical example of how to carry out some Islamic injunctions and the likes.
Another major reason that necessitated the collection of Hadīth was that the Companions who knew the Hadīth at first hand were gradually passing away.
Thus, many people showed great eagerness in learning and preserving the precious Hadīth literature.
This started during the age of the rightly guided caliphs.
At this time, Companions of the Prophet settled in different countries which had been conquered by the Muslims.
So, a number of centres for learning and collection of Hadīths came into existence.
Companions like Abu Hurairah, Abdullah Ibn Abbas, Abdullah Ibn Umar and Anas bn Malik became centers to whom people came from different parts of the Islamic territory to learn and collect Hadīths.
Prophet’s wives like Aishah and Hafsah, as expected were also costodians of Hadīth and Sunnah of the Prophet and they were approached for its collection.
When a disciple had collected and learned all the Hadīths he could from one Companion, he would go to the next Companion and so on, collecting as many traditions as possible.
Some even travelled long distance to collect traditions from various Companions.
Self – Assessment Exercise How did the collection of Hadith started after the demise of the Prophet.
3.5 Collection of Hadīth during the Umayyad Era This era which immediately followed the era of the four orthodox Caliphs, though, witnessed different challenges, also contributed to the growth of Hadīth collection.
There 20 was no single official compilation of collections of Hadīth prior this time.
Hadiths were in the custody of individuals and unlike the periods of the Prophet and the successors that directly followed it; they were not entirely free from lies and fabrications to support different sects that emerged and to back up the activities of some rulers.
This brought about the situation whereby the collectors of Hadīth started asking about the chain of narrators.
So, Hadīth collectors were given much respect and honour not only by the individual Muslims but also, especially by the rulers.
Special reference could be made to the period of the celebrated Umayyad Caliph, Umar Ibn Abdul Azeez (682-720).
He was said to have really encouraged the collection of Hadīth.
He even asked Muhammad ibn Shihab al-Zuhri and Abu Bakr bn al-Hazm to prepare a collection of all available Traditions.
The caliph was said to have written to Abu Bakr bn al- Hazm thus: “Whatever sayings of the Prophet can be found, write them down, for I fear the loss of knowledge and disappearance of learned men, and do not accept anything but the Hadīth of the Holy Prophet (Ş) and people should make knowledge public”.
The determined efforts of the scholars of this time led to the unique and excellent epoch in the history of Hadīth collection as few important works of Hadīth emerged.
The works of Shihab al-Zuhri and that of Abu Bakr al-Hazm are well known.
Another collections of Hadīth of the time was Musnad of Sulaiman bn Fahd al-Jerīdī and Abu Dawud al-Tayālisī (133-204).
Self- assessment exercise Expatiate upon growth of Hadith collection during the Umayyad period.
3.6 The Golden Era of Hadīth Collection (200-300 A.H.) This is one of the greatest periods in the collection Hadīth.
Actually, it is the time when the Sahhābī who learned Islam directly from the Prophet (Ş) had gone.
Some sects had emerged and the possibility of misquoting the Prophet by some people with greedy interest was quite apparent.
So, it was essential to authenticate true Hadīth without sponsorship of any ruling authority.
Therefore, it is the very stage in which the science of Hadīth was formally founded.
Many scholars emerged at this time and took up the great task of searching, collecting and refining Hadīth.
They classify them into relevant categories such as authentic, good or 21 false.
Elaborate rules and canons were put in place to distinguish the true traditions from false ones.
In this age, the Prophet’s traditions were separated from the reports of the Companions and their Successors.
The authentic traditions were carefully and painstakingly collected and compiled in book form.
The life history of many scholars of Hadīth show different difficulties they went through in the course of collecting Hadīth.
They travelled far and wide to many land and for many years in search of people who were in custody of one or two Hadīths or Sunnah of the Prophet.
At times, to hear a single Hadīth, or to confirm the presence of one word in a Hadīth, the scholars used to travel great distances east and west to reach the living person who was part of the chain of transmission whose authority the Hadīth was being narrated.
Meanwhile, the Golden Periond witnessed the emergence of the six authentic collections of Hadīth.
These are considered standard works on Hadīth and are known as a`ş-Şihāħu `s-Sittah.
The authors’ names and book titles which will be elaborately dealt with in the next six Units are: 1) Şaħiħ Bukhārī written by Muhammad Ibn Ismail al-Bukhārī (194-256 A.H.).
2) Şaħiħ Muslim written by Imam Muslim Ibn Qushayrī (204-261 A.H.).
3) Sunan Ibn Mājah written by Imam Ibn Mājah (202-275 A.H.) 4) Jāmiu Tirmidhī written by Abu Musa al-Tirmidhi (209-279 A.H.) 5) Sunan a``n-Nasāi written by Abu Abdu `r- Rahmān an-Nasāī 6) Sunan Abu Dawud written by Abu Dawud (202-275 A.H.) Self - Assessment Exercise What are the major characteristics of the Golden Era of Hadith Collection?
4.0 CONCLUSION Hadīth is: “a word spoken, an act done, confirmation or approval given by the Holy Prophet Muhammad (Ş)”.
It is different from Sunnah which is the private and public way of life of the Prophet but the two words are sometimes used interchangably.
The preservation of Hadīth started right from the time of the prophet Muhammad through transmission, memorization or practicalization while literate Companions of the Prophet wrote 22 them down.
The collection of Hadīth started as private affairs until the Umayyad era when it was given official backing by caliph Umar bn ‘Abdu `l- ‘Azīz.
The Traditionalists sojourned and endured difficulties in the course of Hadīth collection.
They developed technical methods to sift spurious Hadiths from authentic ones.
This led to the declaration of six works as the most authoritative and Sound Collections a`ş-Şiħāħu `ş-Şittah during the Golden Era of Ħadīth Collection.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit traces the origin of Hadīth and its preservation as a private interest during the lifetime of the Prophet Muhammad (Ş) till the time of the orthodox caliphs.
It establishes that hadith collection was given official recognition during the Umayyad period and that the years between 200 – 300 A.H. were the Golden Age of the efforts of the Traditionalists which was crowned by the emrgence of the six Sound Collections of Hadīth.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Proof the extent of the truthfulness of the report that the prophet banned the writing of Hadīth.
2.
Trace the developments in the Hadīth collection from the Umayyad period to its Golden Era.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The selected traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Ali Muhammad M. (1976).
A Manual of Hadīth, Lahore.
Pakistan.
Azami, M.M (1977).
Studies in Hadīth Methodology and Literature.
(USA).
Doi R. I.
(1980).
Basis of Sharī‘ah, Zaria.
H.A.R Gibs and J.H Kramne (1960).
Shorter encyclopaedia of Islam; London.
Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
23 UNIT 2: A BIOGRAPHY AND HADĪTH COLLECTION OF IMAM BUKHĀRĪ AND IT’S COMMENTARY.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Full Name, Birth, Family and Parentage 3.2 His Knowledge and Travelling 3.4 His Teachers and Pupils 3.5 His Works 3.6 Al-Jāmi ‘u ş-Şaħīħ (The authentic narrations) 3.7 His death 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Imam Bukhārī is an icon in the field of science of Hadīth.
He contributed immensely to Hadīth collection and compilation.
He is one of the six major collectors of Hadīth.
In this unit, we shall survey his life history and examine his contribution to the science of Hadīth.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit, you should be able to :  Give the full name of Imam al-Bukhārī  Give his family background and birth  Discuss his academic status in the science of Hadīth  Assess the content and significance of the book: al-Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ.
24 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Full Name, Birth and Parentage.
Imam Bukhārī’s full name was Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Isma’il bn Ibrahim bn al- Mughirah ibn Bardazibah al-Ja’afi al-Bukhārī.
He was born on Friday 13th Shawwāl 194 A. H. in the city of Bukhāra, one of the ancient wide and grand cities in the southern Uzbekistan, the Amur Darya valley, west of Samarkand.It is pertinent to note that there are different opinions concerning when the city of Bukhāra was conqured or occupied by the Muslims.
Nevertheless, before the Islamic victories, Bukhāra was the capital city of the kingdom of Samania.
Imam Bukhārī’s forefathers were Zoroastrians.
They were said to have accepted Islam on the hand of a one time ruler of the city of Bukhāra known as Yaman Ja`afi.
That is the reason why the family came to be known as Ja`afa.
Imam Bukhārī is also called Ja`afi.
His father was a pious and rich man.
He was a great personality in the field of the sayings and traditions of Prophet Muhammad (Ş).
But this religious father died when his son was in his early childhood.
So, the responsibility of his upbringing solely fell on Bukhāri`s mother.The mother was also a pious and great worshiper; it was reported that Imam Bukhārī became blind while he was still young and Almighty Allah returned the Imam’s sight because of her pious mother’s fervent supplications.
Self –Assessment Exercise Give the full name of Imam Bukhārī and discuss his birth and parentage 3.2 His Knowledge and Travelling Starting from his youthful age, Imam Bukhārī showed signs of intelligence that surprised everyone around him.
He had a sharp mind, an attentive heart, an amazing memory, and an incredible ability to memorize.
He started his education in his home town.
Before he was ten, he had memorized the whole Quran, mastered the Arabic language, covered much of the Fiqh, and memorized many Prophetic Hadiths.
His pious mother always encouraged him and prepared a suitable atmosphere for him to acquire knowledge.With special interest in Hadīth literature and its recitation; he achieved a great deal of knowledge, under the guidance of well known scholars of Hadīth such as Ibn Mubarak.
25 He travelled to Makkah when he was sixteen years old accompanied by his mother and elder brother; Ahmed ibn Ismail.
After the pilgrimage, his mother and brother returned home but Bukhārī remained in Makkah for two years seeking knowledge.
This was the time he wrote his first book known as Qassasi ya al-Sahabah wal al-Tabieen (The Issues of the Companions and their Followers) and then started another one known as Tarikh Kabir (The big book of history).
He then went to Madinah.
After spending a total of six years in al-Hijaz (now the kingdom of Saudi Arabia), he left for Basrah, Kufah and Baghdad.
He also visited many other places including Egypt, Nisharpur and Syria.
He went to many of the cities many times for the purpose of knowledge and/or collection of Hadīth.
For example, he went to Egypt and Syria two times; and Basrah four times.
Self – Assessment Exercise Give account of knowledge and travelling of Imam Bukhārī 3.3 His Teachers and Pupils Imam Bukhārī received knowledge from different scholars of his time.
His travelling gave him advantage to meet great scholars of the time.
He never considered age or superiority before he became the student of different erudite teachers.
He met many religious scholars and particularly scholars of Hadīth like Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal.The number of his teachers or those from whom he received Hadīth was said to be more than one thousand.Among his teachers were:  Muhammad bn Salām Baikandi in Bukhārā  Abdullah bn Muhammad Maşmūdī in Bukhārā  Abu ‘Āşm Nabīl in Başrah  Abdullah bn Rajā in Başrah  Abu Abdu `r-Rahmān Magfi in Makkah  Ahmad bn Muhammad in Makkah  Abdu `l- ‘Azīz Uways in Madinah  Abu Sābit Muhammad Abdullah in Madinah  Abdullah bn Salih in Egypt 26  Saīd ibn Muhammad in Egypt  Abu Nāşir Farawīsī in Damascus Due to Imam`s commitment to knowledge, fear of Allah, simplicity, humbleness, matchless memory, God-gifted wisdom, comprehensive knowledge on the science of Hadīth, piety and generosity, he soon became an icon of knowledge and a widely recognized erudite teacher of his time.
In his time, cities like Basrah, Baghdad, Naishapur, Samarkand and Bukhara were centers of learning.
Imam went to these cities and more to dictate Ahādīth to countless people.
Many people benefited from his knowledge and his pupils spread all over differentcities.
Among his pupils were:  Abu Muhammad bn Sa`ad  Husayn bn Āmil al-Baghdādī  Muhammad bn Sulaymān al- Baghdādī  Abu Bakr bn Dawud  Umar bn Muhammad Bukhārī  Muslim bn Hajāj  Abu Abdullah al-Nasāī  Abu Bakr bn Ishaq ibn Khawārazmī  Musa Harūn Jamal  Ishaq bn Ahmed ibn Zariq al-Fārisī  Yaqub bn Yusuf bn Akram  Abdullah bn Wāşīl  Muhammad bn Abdullah Junayd  Muhammad bn Khalaf Self Assessment Exercise Enumerate the teacher and pupils of Imam Bukhārī 3.4 His Works Greater part of Imam`s life was spent on travelling from place to place in search of Hadīths.
He had little time to sit down and write books.
That notwithstanding, it should be remembered that he wrote his first book during his stay in Makkah after Hajj and also left 27 many publications.
The most famous of the books is the `al-Jāmiu `ş-Şaħīħ.
These are many of his works:  Al-Tārīkh al-Kabīr,  Khalq Af-‘āli `l-Ibād  Kitāb al-Wahīdayn,  Kitāb al- Adab al-Mufrad,  Kitab Al-Dhu‘afā,  Juz Raf- ‘ul-Yadayn,  Juz’-u `l-Qirāah khalf al-Imām,  Al-Jāmi’u `l-Kabīr,  A``t-Tafsīr Al-Kabīr,  Kitāb al- ‘Ilal,  Kitāb al-Manāqib,  Asmāu `ş-Şaħābah.
3.5 al-Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ.
(The Authentic Narrations) Imam Bukhārī was a jurist, historian and a commentator on the Qur’ān.
More importantly, he was a collector of Hadīths.
He contributed immensely to Islamic literature generally and to the science of Hadīth in particular.
He travelled thousands of miles moving from one Islamic territory to another, undergoing all sorts of difficulties, hardships, and weariness, sometimes to obtain only one narration of the Prophet (Ş).
He sometimes even had to eat grass to satisfy his extreme hunger after he had spent all his money.
Even the few hours of night in which he snatched short naps to rest a while, were not so resting for him, as he used to wake up many times in a night to classify the narrations he had collected.
Imam Bukhārī made a pact with himself that he wouldn’t include a narration from any narrator until he had personally met him, and listened to the narration with his own ears.
He never accepted narrations except from the ones he knew for being honest, diligent, accurate, fearful of Allaah, and having a sharp memory.
Imam Bukhārī was meticulous in choosing authentic Hadīths to the extent that he would perform ablution; pray two rak'ahs and supplicate to Allah for 28 guidance before including any Hadīth that had already met the set down conditions in his book.
His book of collections of Hadīths which is very much popular and on which he spent sixteen years before completion is known as“al-Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ Al-Musnad Al-Mukhtaşar min umūr Rasūlī llah Salla Allahu Alaihi Wa Sallam Wa Sunanihī wa Ayyāmihī” (The authentic and comprehensive traditions on the matters of the prophet peace and blessing of Allah be upon him, and his traditions and his lives).
The book is now popularly known as al- Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ.
(The Authentic Narrations) or al-Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ al-Bukhārī' (The authentic narrations by Al-Bukhārī).
Imam Bukhārī collected 600,000 traditions of the Prophet out of which he memorized 200,000.
It is pertinent to note that he was born at a time when Hadīth was being forged either to please rulers or to corrupt the religion of Islam.
Therefore, it was a great task for him to sift the forged or unauthentic Hadīths from the authentic ones.
He labored day and night and came out with approximately 7,275/7,397 Hadīths of which he deemed completely reliable out of the 600,000 he was said to have collected.
He began every chapter of the famous book with Qur’ānic verse to indicate the subject matter and the kind of tradition to be found in them.
He arranged the Hadīths according to Musannaf i.e.
collections classified by subject matter.
This book covers almost all aspects of life in providing proper guidance from the Messenger of Allah (Ş).
All the Hadīths in the al- Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ are grouped under 3,450 subject headings.
Muslim scholars unanimously agree that al-Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ of Imam al-Bukhārī is the most authentic book after the glorious Qur’ān.
Self Assessment Exercise Write a short review of al-Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ of Imam Bukhārī Commentaries on the al-Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ.
The most prominent commentary works on the al-Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ are as follows: 1.
Al-Kawākib ad-dārī fī sharħ Şaħiħi `l-Bukhāri.
by Muhammad bn Yusuf.
Ali al-Karmānī d. 786 AH.
It contains explanation of strange words, grammatical analysis, verification of 29  reports, names and nicknames, and reconciliation of apparent contradictions.
It was completed in Makkah Mukarramah in 775 AH.
2.
Fat-hu ‘l-bārī bishar-ħ Şaħiħ al-Bukhārī by Ahmad bn Ali bn Muhammad bn Muhammad bn Hajar al-Asqalānī from Asqalān in Egypt ( 773-852).
This is regarded as the best of all the commentaries.
3.6 His Death In 250 AH, Imam al-Bukhārī left Nishapur, a city in Khurasān for Bukhārā.
He was highly welcomed back home.
People rushed to welcome him in a great celebration in which huge tents were pitched and decorations were hung.
He was very busy in the city teaching gathering of people the ideals of Islam, especially in relation to the traditions of the Prophet (Ş).
One day, the people of Samarqand sent a message for him asking him to come to their city.
He agreed and packed his belongings with great joy.
But Imam could not get to the city before he fell ill.
He eventually died in a city called Khartank on the first of Shawwal, 256 A. H. at the age of 62.
He was buried in Khartank, a village not too far from Samarkand.
May Allah have mercy on his soul (Amen).
Self assessment exercise Describe the circumstances under which Imam Bukhāri died.
CONCLUSION Imam Bukhārī has been shown as one of the great collectors of Hadīth.
His collection of Hadīth is called: Al-Jami’u Al-Sahih Al-Musnad Al-Mukhtaşar Min Umur Rasuli Lah Salla Allahu Alaihi Wa Sallam Wa Sunanihi wa Ayyamihi.
(Authentic and comprehensive traditions on the matters of the prophet peace and blessing of Allah be upon him and his traditions and his lives).
Due to the significance of the work, Islamic Scholars regard Bukhārī as the leader and master of Islamic scholars of Hadīth.
The work was the first compilation of authentic traditions of the prophet.
Some scholars have also contributed to the quality of Bukhārī’s work by either summarizing or writing commentary on it.
30 5.0 SUMMARY He is Muhammad ibn Isma’il ibn Mughirah ibn Bardazibah al-Ja’fi.He is not only one of the six major collectors of Hadīth, he is also considered the leader or master all scholars of Hadīth.
He was born in Shawwal 194 A.H and died in the same month, 256 A.H at the age of 62.
Imam Bukhārī started memorization of prophetic traditions at the age of ten.
He travelled extensively to various places in search of Prophetic traditions (AHadīth).
He travelled to Ħijāz, Syria, Egypt, Başrah, Kufah and Baghdad to seek knowledge.
He met more than one thousand teachers and professors of Islamic sciences whom he benefited from.
He also became teacher to many pupils.
The great Imam was reported to have gathered 600,000 Hadīths out of which he selected only 7,257.
He documented the Hadīths in a book named: al-Jāmi’u ş-Şahīh.
The book is considered by the Muslim majority as the most authentic book after the holy Qur’ān.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Discuss in detail the life and scholarship of Imam Bukhārī 2. Review the book al-Jāmi ‘u `ş-Şaħiħ compiled by Imam Bukhārī 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The Selected Traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Al-Dhahabi: Tabaqatu `l-Huffāz.
Cairo.
Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalānī: Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb.
Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
31 UNIT 3: A BIOGRAPHY AND HADĪTH COLLECTION OF IMAM MUSLIM AND IT’S COMMENTARY.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Imam Muslim’s Full Name, Birth and Parentage 3.2 Early Child-Hood and Travelling in Search of Knowledge 3.3 His teachers and pupils 3.4 His works 3.5 The Şaħīħ Muslim 3.6 His Death 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Imam Muslim was one of the erudite scholars of Hadīth literature.
He spent most of his life learning, compiling, teaching and transmitting Hadīths.
In this unit, we shall study a brief history of his life and assess his contribution to the Hadīth.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that at the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Give full name, linage and parentage of Imam Muslim  Relate Imam Muslim’s early childhood and travelling in pursuit of knowledge  Mention the teachers and students of Imam Muslim  Discuss the contribution of Imam Muslim to Hadīth literature  Review the book Şaħīħ Muslim and its Commentaries 32  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Imam Muslim’s Full Name, Birth and Parentage: He was Abul Hussain Şakhru`d-Dīn Muslim bn al-Hajjāj al-Qushayrī al-Nishabūrī popularly known as Imam Muslim.
Imam Muslim, as his nisbah (lineage) shows, belonged to the Qushayr tribe of Arabia, an offshoot of the great clan of Rabī’a.
He was born at Nishapur, one of the best cities of Khurāsan in Persia in the year 202 A.H/817C.E.
His forefathers were said to have occupied important positions during the time of the orthodox Caliphs.
His parents were very religious and his father, al-Hajjāj, was reported to have been a renowned scholar of Hadīth during his life time.
As such, Imam Muslim, who was also a contemporary of Imam Bukhārī, was brought up in an atmosphere of piety.
Self – Assessment Exercise Give full name, linage and parentage of Imam Muslim.
3.2 Early Child-Hood and Travelling in Pursuit of Knowledge Imam Muslim grew up as a saint of high caliber.
His excellent moral character could be judged by the single fact that he never indulged in backbiting which has almost become the part of all human beings.He never told a lie or used offensive words.
He spent his whole life on the path of righteousness and as a God-fearing person.He was blessed with a very good retentive memory.
He started his education under his parent and in his birthplace which, at that time, had not only become a center of religion and knowledge but also had great scholars of high repute like Muhammad ibn Yahya al- Duhlī and Imam Ishāq ibn Rāhawayh.
It should be remembered that Imam Bukhārī also visited and stayed in the city.
As it was the custom of that period, he started learning the holy Qur’ān with Arabic literature and grammar before beginning the study of Hadīth.
He was said to have memorized the whole Qur’ān at the age of twelve.
After he had exployed several avenues of knowledge, especially knowledge of 33  Hadīth in his native land, Imam Muslim travelled to many other places with the aim of learning and collecting the traditions of the Prophet (Ş).
He travelled to places like Hijāz, Egypt, Syria, Yemen, Iraq and Baghdad.
He was said to have visited Baghdad many times and that his last visit was two years before his death.
He also had the opportunity of delivering lectures in many of the places he visited.
He helped immensely in the discussion of Hadīth and collected a great number of Hadīth from the scholars of Hadīth in the places he visited.
When he finished his studies in the various centers of learning, he settled down at Nishapur where he later came in contact with Imam Bukhārī.
He was so much impressed by Bukhārī’s vast knowledge and the insight he possessed on the subject of Hadīth that he kept himself attached to him till the death of the former.
He could be said to be a true disciple of Imam Bukhārī.
He devoted his rest of life in the service of Hadīth.
He wrote many books and treatises on Hadīth and other related subject but his most famous and important work is the al-Musnad al-Şahīh which contains authentic collections of Prophet Muhammad’s traditions.
Self Assessment Exercise Relate Imam Muslim’s early child-hood life and travelling in pursuit of knowledge.
3.3 His Teachers and Pupils Imam Muslim studied under many Islamic scholars of his locale.
He also visited many other places to drink from water of knowledge from the great scholars in them.
Among those he learnt from are:  Imam Bukhārī  Imam Ishaq bn Rāhawayh  Imam Ubaydullah al-Qawārīrī  Imam Shu‘bah bn Yūnus  Imam Abdullah bn Salam  Imam Ahmad bn Hanbal 34  Imam Yahya ibn Ma‘īn  Imam Qutaibah ibn Sa‘īd  Imam Ali bn Hujair Sa‘dī  Imam Mahmud bn Ghaylān al-Marwazī  Imam Abdullah bn Abdu `r Rahmān al-Dārimī  Imam Abi Kurayb Muhammad Also, many students benefited from Imam Muslim.
His students spread all over different localities where they became prominence in the realm of Hadīth.
His students include;  Imam al-Tirmidhī  Imam Abu Hātim al-Rāzī  Imam Abubakr ibn Khuzaimah  Imam Yahya bn Sa‘īd  Imam Muhammad bn Makhlad  Imam Abu Amr al-Khaffāt  Imam Muhammad bn Abdu ``l-Wahāb al-Farrāi  Imam Muhammad bn Ishaq ibn Khuzaymah  Imam Abdullah bn Muhammad al-Balkhī  Imam Şāliħ bn Muhammad al-Baghdādī  Imam Ahmad bn Nāşir al-Khafāf  Imam Ali bn Ismā‘īl al-Safār  Imam al-Makkī bn ‘Abdān Self - Assessment Exercise Enumerate the teachers and pupils of Imam Muslim 3.4 His Works Imam Muslim was a prolific writer.
He authored many works on the science of Hadīth and other fields of Islamic studies.
His works include:  Awhām al-Muhadīthīn 35  Al-Asmā wa `l-Kunya  Al-‘IIal  Al-Munfaridāt wa `l Wahdān  Mashārik Imam Malik  Tabaqāt al-Tābi‘īn  Al-As’ilatu ‘an Ahmad b. hanbal  Al-Mukhadramūn  Mashāyikhu Shu‘bah  Al-Aqrān  Awlādu `ş-Şahābah  Al-Tārīkh  Al-Tamyīz  Al-Jāmi‘u  Al-Musnad  A`ş-Şaħīħ al-Musnad 3.5 al-Musnad A`ş-Şaħīħ / Şaħīħ Muslim As said earlier, the most celebrated and important book written by Imam Muslim is known as: al-Musnad A`ş-Şaħīħ al-Mukhtaşar mina `s-Sunnah (a compilation of prophetic traditions).
Imam Muslim gathered 300,000 out of which he found only 9,200 to be authentic.
One great feature of this book of Hadīth is that it contains only traditions of the Prophet which are free from defects and unanimously accepted by great scholars of Hadīth.
It took him fifteen years to complete the compilation.
After the compilation he presented the work to Abu Zurā‘ah for his perusal.
Abu Zurā‘ah raised objection on some Hadīths and Muslim omitted them without argument.
It was the desire of Imam Muslim to present authentic traditions of the prophet to the Mulism Ummah.
Therefore he recorded only those Hadīths he considered valid among other scholars.
This could be deduced from his introduction in the work that he recorded only what was unanimously accepted as authentic.
36  Imam Muslim’s work is ranked next to Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī, though Şaħīħ Muslim was argued by many scholars to be superior to Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī, in the details of its arrangement.
Şaħīħ Muslim, was arranged according to the transmitters not according to the subject matters.
A reasonable number of scholars like al-Nawawī and Jalālu `d- Dīn al-Suyūtī have written commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim,.
Self – Assessment Exercise Write a brief review of Şaħīħ Muslim 3.6 Commentaries on the Şaħīħ Muslim Due to the reputation of Şaħīħ Muslim as a highly authentic Hadith collection, several erudite Muslim scholars wrote commentaries on the ork.
A forerunner of such riters as Imam Yahya a`n-Nasāī whose biography and Commentary on the Şaħīħ Muslim has been presented in Module 3 Unit 10.
3.
It has to be noted that Imam al-Nawawi was not the only scholar that wrote commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim.
It is claimed that there are more than 70 commentaries on Şaħīħ Muslim as there are several commentators on the work.
Other commentators include: Abu Amr Ibn Salah An erudite scholar who commented on Şaħīħ Muslim was Abu ‘Amr Uthmān ibn Abdu `r- Rahmān Şalahuddīn al-Kurdī al-Shahrazūrī.
He is popularly known as Ibn Şalāh.
Born 577 A.H. (1181 C.E) in Sharazor which is presently a part of eastern Iraq.
Ibn Salah started his education with his father who was also an Islamic specialist.
He also travelled to many other countries and center of learning to study under different religious scholars.
He was said to have travelled to places like Mosul, Baghdad, Hadedan, Naisaphur, Merv, Damascus, Allepo and Harran to acquire knowledge.
He soon became a great scholar of Tafsīr and Hadīth.
Although, he was well grounded in a variety of discipline, he was most recognized for his contribution to the field of Hadīth.
He taught the subject and other more at Şalahiyyah School in Jerusalem and Rāhawayh School in Damascuss.
Scholars like Ibn Khallikān described him as: `Exemplary scholar of Quranic exegesis, Hadīth and Jurisprudence``.
He was said to 37 have died in Damascus in 643 A.H. (1245 C.E).
His book of commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim is one of the great works which is best known for.
The title of the book is Siyānah Sahih Muslim.
This book is explanation of the Şaħīħ Muslim.
Şiyānah Şaħīh Muslim is referred to by Yahyah al-Nawawi in his own explanation or commentary.
Unfortunately, only the beginning section of Şiyānah Şaħīħ Muslim has been published.
Muhammad Taqī Usmānī Justice (Retired) Allama Mufti Uthmani also authored a commentary work on Şaħīħ Muslim known as Takmilat Fath al-Mufhim.
He is an Islamic scholar from Pakistan.
He was born in Deoband, India in 1362 A.H. (1943 C.E.)
and started his early education from his father, the late Grand Mufti of Pakistan.
He later received his Takhassus degree which is equivalent to PhD in Islamic education from Dāru `l-Ulūm, Karachi, in 1961; Master`s degree in Arabic literature in Punjab University and a bachelor of Laws (LLB) degree from Karachi University.
He served as a judge of the Federal Shariah Court of Pakistan from 1980 to 1982.
He also served as a judge on the Shariah appellate Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan from 1982 to 2002.
He wrote numerous books and articles on vital Islamic topics in Arabic, Urdu and English.
In recognition of Uthmani`s achievement in Islamic finance, he was given an award by the United Arab Emirates Vice-President and Prime minister, Muhammad ibn Rasheed al-Makhtoum during the annual International Islamic Finance Forum (IIFF) in Dubai in 2004.
He is a member of different national and international organizations.
He is one of the leading scholars living in our contemporary period.
He is an expert in the field of Hadīth and other Islamic studies.
The Takmilat Fath al-Mulhim is regarded as one of the best commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim.
This work is arguably Shaykh Taqi Usmani`s most important book in Arabic.
The august work which is in six volumes is considered the completed versions of Fath al-Mufhim fi Sharh Sahih al-Muslim started by Imam Shabbir Ahmad Uthmani.
Although, scholars like Imam Muhammad Zahid al-Kawthari regarded Shabir Uthmani`s incomplete commentary as a good commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim.
A great 38 number of scholars including Sayyid Abul Hassan Ali Nadwi acknowledged that Taqi Uthmani`s Takmilah is far better.
This book of commentary explains the Hadīth in the Şaħīħ and in relation to that deals with numerous contemporary and modern issues with great mastery and authority.
Abdul Hamid Siddique Mention could also be made of the Summarized Sahih Muslim which is the English translation of Şaħīħ Muslim by Abdul Hamid Siddique.
This summarized version eliminates unnecessary repetitions, though many authors argue that the summarized form is stilted and contains scattered errors.
There are extensive footnotes which are majorly useful.
3.6 His Death Imam Muslim left this world on 25th Rajab, 261 A.H/875 C.E at the age of 59 years.
Some reports hold that he died at the age of 55 or 57.
He was buried at Nasirabad, a suburb of Nishapur.
4.0 CONCLUSION The greatest contribution of Imam Muslim to the science of Hadīth was his collection and compilation of his work popularly known as Şaħīħ Muslim or al-Musnad a`ş- Şaħīħ.
It took him fifteen years to complete the compilation and it contains 9,200 Hadīths.
Prominent scholars of Islam agreed that Şaħīħ Muslim is the most authentic work of Hadīth next to Şaħīħ al-Bukhārīī.
Any Hadīth that Muslim and Bukhārī agreed on its authenticity in their works is regarded as the most authentic Hadīth among others.
39  5.0 SUMMARY He was Şakhru`d-Dīn Muslim bn al-Hajjāj al-Qushayrī al-Nishabūrī popularly known as Imam Muslim.
His nickname is Abu `l Hussain.
He was a pious person from religious parents.
He never indulged in backbiting.
He had good retentive memory.
He was one of the leaders of Hadīth transmitters and collectors.He was born in Nishapur in 202 A.H. and died 261 A.H.
He travelled to Hijaz, Egypt, Syria, Iraq and other places in search of knowledge.
He died in Nishapur.
His popular work is Şaħīh Muslim.
It consists of 9,200 Hadīths and it took him fifteen years to complete the compilation.
Şaħīh Muslim is regarded by scholars of Hadīth as the most authentic compilations of Hadīth next to Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī.
Many scholars of Islamic studies have written commentary on Şaħīh Muslim.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write the biography of Imam Muslim in detail.
2.
“Imam Muslim was a prolific writer in the science of Hadīth” Discuss 3.
Compare Şaħīh Muslim with Şaħīh al-Bukhārī and mention the major differences between them.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The Selected Traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Al-Dhahabi: Tabaqatu `l-Huffāz.
Cairo.
Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalānī: Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb.
Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
40 UNIT 4: THE LIFE AND HADĪTH COLLECTION OF IMAM ABU DAWUD AND ITS COMMENTARY.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Imam Abu Daud`s Full Name, Birth and Growth 3.2 His Educational Career, Teachers and Students 3.3 His works and the the Sunan Abu Dawud 3.4 His Death 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Abu Dawud was one of the leading scholars in the science of Hadīth.
He is considered next in superiority to Imam Bukhārī and Muslim in the collection and compilation of authentic traditions of the Prophet (Ş).In this study, we shall study his biography and assess his contribution to Hadīth literature.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to :  Relate Imam Abu Daud`s Full Name, Birth and Growth  Discuss education career, teachers and students of Abu Dawud  Review the work and Sunan of Abu Dawud and its Commentaries 41  3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Imam Abu Dawud`s Full Name, Birth and Growth His real name is Abu Dawud Sulaymān bn Ash’ath bn Isħāq bn Bashīr bn Shaddād bn Umar bn Imrān al-Azdī al-Sijistānī.
He was born in 202 A.H / 817 C.E in the province of Sijistan, a famous city in Khurāsān.
He belonged to the Arab tribe Azd.
He lived during the time when the Muslim world was full of eminent scholars.
Although he was born in Sijistan, he spent greater part of his life at Başrah which was a great center of learning at that time.He was blessed with an exceptional mind.
He had to read a book only once to commit its entire content to memory.
He was also a religious and pious man.
He lived an ascetic who devoted most of his time to worship and remembrance of Allah.
He kept away from men of rank, Sultans and the likes.
He started his early education in his home town, Sajastan, and traveled out later on in search of Islamic sciences and Arabic literature.
Some of the places he stayed during his studies include: ray, Harat, Kufah, Baghdad, Turasu, Dimash as Egypt and Basrah.
He also visited Iraq, Syria, and Hijāz.
He benefited greatly from the Muslim scholars of the places he visited.
Scholars are unanimous about his great ability, trustworthiness and accuracy.
He was not only a good narrator of Hadīth, he was also a good lawyer.
He was well versed in the criticism of Hadīth and an expert in distinguishing sound Hadīths from the weak ones.
Self Assessment Exercise Relate Imam Abu Daud`s full name, birth and growth 3.2 His Educational Career, Teachers and Pupils Imam Abu Dawud started learning Hadīth while he was less than 20 years old.
He was one of the most widely travelled scholars of Hadīth.
He went to Hijaz, Isfahan, Iraq, Damascus, Khurasan, Egypt, Basrah, Syria, Nisharpur, for the sole purpose of collecting Hadīths.
His collections based majorly on legal aspects of Islam because of 42  the fact that his primary area of study was law (Fiqh).
He gained high and wide reputation in his life time.
Imam Abu Daud was said to have heard Hadīth from 300 personalities.
Some of his teachers were:  Imam Ahmad bn Hanbal  Abdullahi ibn Maslama  Musa bn Isma’ila-Tabriu  Abu Amru Al-Dariri  Muslim bn Ibrahim  Abdullah bn Raja’a bn Sa’īd  Uthman bn Abu Shaybah  Ibrahim bn Musa al-Farāu  Ishaq bn Rāhawayh  Abu Thawr  Yahya bn Ma`īn Imam Abu Dawud also benefited many students of Hadīth.
His students include:  Abu `Isa al-Tirmidhī  Imam Muslim  Abu Abdurrahim al-Nasā’ī  Abubakar bn Abi Dawud ‘Uwaynah  Abu Bashar  al-Dūlabī Self – Assessment Exercise Discuss the educational career of Imam Abu Dawud and enumerate his teachers and students.
43  3.3 His Works Likewise, Imam Abu Dawud contributed immensely to the development of Islamic learning, through teaching and writing.
He wrote many works and on different aspects of Islamic sciences.
Some of them are:  Kitābu `s-Şunan  Kitābu ``l-Qadar  Kitābu Nāsikh wa al-Mansūkh  Kitābu al-Masā’il  Kitābu al-Zuhd  Kitābu al-Duā  Kitābu Ibtidau al-wahyi  Kitābu Akhbāru l-khawārij  Kitāb fadā‘ilu `l-A‘māl  Musnad Malik 3.4 The Sunan of Abu Dawud and its Commentaries Imam Abu Dawud contributed to the development of the science of Hadīth through writing, teaching and transmission.
He wrote many works on the science of Hadīth.
However, his most famous work in this field was Sunan Abu Dawud.
It contains traditions on Islamic law and other sciences.
This work is regarded as the first work on Hadīth which contains traditions on juristic rules and regulations of rituals and personal transactions.
He completed the work at Baghdad in 241 A. H. Imam Abu Daud was very careful when compiling his Sunan.
He selected only 4800 Hadīths out of 500,000 traditions he collected and examined.
He arranged them into various books which he subdivided into chapters.
He gave his sources and stated various versions of the traditions, their relative values and defect(s) if any.
The book of Hadīth was presented to his teacher, Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbali after completion.
Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbali was so pleased with the book.
44 He also included in his Sunan not genuine traditions but the weak and the doubtful ones as well.
He also commented on them as being weak or unauthentic.
To Imam Abu Dawud, a weak tradition is better than personal opinions of the scholars.
The Sunan of Abu Dawud is recognized as one of the six authentic collections of Hadīth.
Prominent Scholars commended the methodology of Abu Dawud in compiling his Sunan.
In this regard Imam Ibn al-Arabi: said “If a person has no book of knowledge except the Holy Qur’ān and this book, Sunan Abu Dawud, he will not need anything else beside them in his learning`` Sunan abu Daud was compiled during his stay in Tarsus for twenty years.
Some Commentary works of Scholars on the Sunan Abu Dawud are: 1.
Maālim al-Sunan by the polymath Abu Sulayman Ahmad bn Ibrahīm bn Khatab al-Bustī d. 388 AH.
In his concise work the author comments on vocabularies and language.
He verified reports, deduced legal in junctions and conduct.
It is published and in circulation.
2.
‘Awnu `l-Mabūd ala Sunan Abu Dawud authored by Shaykh Muhammad Ashraf bn Ali Haydar as_Siddīqī, died in the 14th century AH.
He restricted his comments on elucidation of some Arabic dialects and ambiguous expressions.
He avoided verbosity and observed brevity when giving preference to an Hadīth upon another .
He mentions the proofs of schools of laws only when necessary.
Printed in India in four big volumes.
3.
Al-Manhal al-Adhb al-Mawrud Sharh Sunan Abu Dawud authord by Shaykh Mahmud bn Muhammad bn Khattāb as-Sabkī.
This is a comprehensive work, and explanation of vocabularies in which the author shows his interest in explanation of biography of Traditionailsts.
He elucidates the meaning and judgement and teachings derivable from the Hadīths.
He mentions others who recorded the Hadīths aside himself.
He groups the Hadīths into authentic, sound and weak .
He died before completing the work year 1352 AH.
It is printed.
4.
Abridgements and Revisions of the Sunan Abu Dawud: Imam Abdu `l-Azīm bn Abdu `l-Qawī al-Mundharī , author of At-Targhib wa `t-Tarhib (d.656 H.) Al-Mundhari mentions all the five Imams who agree with Imam Abu Dawud in authenticating each of the Hadīths in the collection as well as explaining reasons underlying the Hadīths.
The Abridgement thus comes out as excellent work.
45  (ii) A revision and commentary on the Abridgement has also been written by Imam Muh.
Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawziyyah d. 751.
He added some circumstances underlying some Hadīths on which Al-Mundharī kept quiet or which he mentions incomplete, authenticating some which he did not; spoke on texts which still remain ambiguous; sometime writes extensively in the interest of readers in the Imams well-known characteristic manner.
The Abridgement and its revision have been published in one volume.
Self – Assessment Exercise Review the work and Sunan of Abu Dawud and its Commentaries 3.7 His Death Imam Abu Dawud died at Başrah on Friday in the month of Shawwal 275 A.H at the age of 73.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit portrayed Imam Abu Dawud as a giant in the field of Hadīth.
He was the leader of Hadīth scholars during his life time.
Scholars of Hadīth such as Tirmidhī, Nasāī, Abu Awnah and Bashar al-Dūlabī transmitted the Sunan from him.
Even his teacher, Ibn Hanbal wrote about him.
His major contribution to the science of Hadīth was his Sunan which contains 4,800 Hadīth selected from the 500,000 he collected.
5.0 SUMMARY Abu Dawud Sulayman ibn Al-Ash’ath bn Ishaq Al-Azdī As-Sijistānī, was the eminent Imam of Hadīth.
He was born in 202 A.H.
He studied Hadīths under Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal along with Al-Bukhārī and taught many of the later scholars of Hadīth like Tirmidhī and Nasāī.
46 Though Abu Dawud collected 500,000 Hadīths he compiled 4,800 only in his book entitled Sunan.
He taught the book in Baghdad and other major cities at that time.
He died at Başrah on Friday in the month of Shawwal 275 A.H 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS  Give the full lineage and bio data of Abu Dawud.
 Evaluate the contents of Sunan Abi Dawud.
 Compare Sunan Abu Dawud with Sunan Al-Tirmidhī.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The Selected Traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Al-Dhahabi: Tabaqatu `l-Huffāz.
Cairo.
Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalānī: Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb.
Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
47 UNIT 5: THE PROFILE AND HADĪTH COLLECTION OF IMAM TIRMIDHĪ AND IT’S COMMENTARY CONTENTS: 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The full name of Imam al-Tirmidhī and early education.
3.2 His writings 3.3 His contributions to Hadīth collection and compilation 3.4 The Sunan a`t- Tirmidhī 3.5 The Commentaries on the Sunan.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked assignment 7.0 Reference/further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Imam Tirmidhī was one of the prominent scholars of the science of Hadīth.
His work is regarded as one of the six authentic collections of Hadīth.
In this unit we shall know the profile of Tirmidhi and analyse his contribution to Hadīth collection and transmission.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that by the end of this unit, students should be able to: - The profile of Imam Tirmidhī - The contribution of Tirmidhi to Hadīth collection and transmission - Highlight the Contents of Sunan `t-Tirmidhī - Review some commentaries written on the Sunan `t-Tirmidhī 48  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The full name of Imam al-Tirmidhī and early education.
His real name is Abu Isa, Muhammad b. Isa b. Sawra b. Shaddād.
The nisbah Tirmidhī connects him with Tirmidh, a place on the upper Amu Darya.
Imam Tirmidhī was born in Dhul Hijjah 209 A.H in one of the villages called Bihra.
Between this village and the city of Tirmidh is about 10 kilometers distance.
He was of the tribe of Ghaylān.
His descendants settled in Buga during the regime of a ruler called al-Laythī bn Sayar from the tribe of Salim.
On his early life, very little is known, however, it is said he was born blind while other sources said that he lost his eye sight in his later years.
He traveled widely to Islamic centers in search of knowledge; he went to Khurasan, Iraq and Hijāz in order to collect traditions.
Self Assessment Exercise Give the profile of Imam Tirmidhī.
3.2 His writings.
Imam Tirmidhī was a prolific writer, not only in the science of Hadīth but also in other fields of Islam knowledge.
The title of some of his scholarly works includes: a. Kitāb al-Hali al-Sughra b. Kitāb a `t-Tabaqātu wa `t-Tārīkh c. Kitāb a`sh – Shama’ilu al – Muhammadiyyah d. Kitāb al-Hali al-Kubra e. Kitābu `t-Tafsīr f. Kitābu `tā – Tārīkh g. Kitābu `l-Asmā’u wa al-Kunya 49 3.3 Contribution to Hadīth collection and compilation Imam Tirmidhī traveled to various places in search of knowledge of Hadīth science.
He stayed with prominent scholars of Hadīth in his time.
Among the scholars he benefited from were Imam Bukhārī, Imam Muslim, Imam Abu Daud, A`s-Sijistānī, Qutaybah bn Sa’īd, Muhammad bn Bashar, Ishaq bn Musa and Sufyān bn Wakī ‘.
He also met Imam Nasāī Ibn Mājah Muhammad al-Mathlan, Ziyad b. Yahya, Abubakar b. Abdul Azim and studied from them.
Imam Tirmidhī was endowed with good character, retentive memory and piety.
He was a man of integrity who combined search of knowledge with fear of Allah.
As a result of that he was highly respected not only by his students but also by his teachers.
Imam Bukhārī said to him once: “what I benefited from you is greater than what you benefited from me.” Many students transmitted from him.
Prominent among them are: al-Haytham bn Kulayb, al-Shāshī, Makhlūb, Fadl, Muhammad Mahbūb al-Mahbūbī al-Mazrūī who was the transmitter of his major work on Hadīth compilation know as Sunan.
Self – Assessment Exercise Discuss the contribution of Tirmidhī to Hadīth collection and transmission.
3.4 The Sunan a`t- Tirmidhī The Sunan a`t- Tirmidhī is the major work on which the fame of the Imam rests in the science of Hadīth.
It is also called al-Jāmi‘u `t-Tirmidhī.
The work deals with matters of religious observance, law, and personal relationship with God and fellow human beings.
This work bears the title of Şahīh in the edition printed in Cairo in 1292, but elsewhere it is only called al-Jāmi‘u A glance at the list of chapters in the work shows that nearly one half of it is devoted to such subjects as dogmatic theology, popular beliefs, devotion, manners, education and hagiology.
50 The work contains far fewer traditions than that of Bukhārī or Muslim but also less repetition; two of the chapters are particularly extensive.
They are manāqib (Hagiology) and Tafsir al-Qur’ān (Exegesis of the Qur’ān).
It contains 4,000 Hadīths.
Traditions Tirmidhi’s work is distinquished by two features; the critical remarks concerning the Isnads (chains of trasmission) and the points of difference between the madhhabs which follow every tradition.
On account of the latter feature Tirmidhi’s collection may be called the oldest work on ikhtilāf that has come down to us.
In this method, he tried to mention the degree of reliability of each narrator and identify the names and the titles after which he gives his opinions about the quality of Tradition in point whether it is authentic (Şaħīħ) good (Hasan) or weak (Ðaīf).
He also mentioned the opinion of early Jurists, lawyers and Imams concerning the subject.
Self – Assessment Exercise Highlight the Contents of Sunan `t-Tirmidhī.
3.5 The Commentaries on the Sunan a`t-Tirmidhī Scholars who wrote commentaries on Sunan a`t-Tirmidhī included: (i) Imam Abubakr, Muhammad Abdullah al-Ishbīlī known as Ibn al-Arabi (d.543) in Fez.
He entitled his work: Hārithatu `l-Ahwazī fi Sharh at-Tirmidhī.
He spoke in it on Men, Chains and the Strange/Extraneous.
He also spoke on variety of grammar, creed, rules, conducts and public interest (maşālih).
He excelled in reconciling views and proofs; most especially, the school of thought of his teacher; all are with strong evidence, and brilliant explanation in eloquent Arabic with particular reference to Ibn Arabī.
Printed in Egypt.. (ii)Suyūtī d. 911.
Qūtu `l Mughtadhī alā Jāmiu Tirmidhī.
Prelude consists of place of a Jāmiu in Hadīth collection, terminologies, concise work, based on printed in India.
Some other commentaries have either remained in manuscripts of non extant or perished during fitan/ insurrection.
Self Assessment Exercise Evaluate two commentaries written on the Sunan a`t-Tirmidhī 51  His Death: Imam Tirmidhī died at one of the boroughs of Tirmidhī circa 270/ 275 A.H 4.0 CONCLUSION Muhammad bn Sawra a`t-Tirmidhī authored one of the canonical collections of Prophet Muhammad’s Traditions whose authenticity is acknowledged in the Islamic circles having traveled widely to Khurāsan Iraq and Hijāz in order for the purpose.
Teachers : Among his masters were Imams Ibn Hanbal, al-Bukhārī and a`s-Sijistānī.
Writings : Two of his works have been published.
His collection of Traditions and his Shamā’il.
a collection of traditions concerning the person and the character of Prophet Muhammad.
He had other works on various Islamic studies ascribed to him.
His collection of Hadiths bears the title of Şahīh in the edition printed in cairo, 1292; elsewhere it is called Jāmi‘u A glance at the list of chapters shows that nearly one half of the work is devoted to such subjects as dogmatic theology, education and hagiology.
The work contains far fewer traditions than those of Bukhārī, or Muslim but also repetitions, two of the chapters are particularly extensive; they are manāqib and Tafsīr.
Though traditions showing a predilection for Ali are not rare, those which favour Abu Barkr, Umar and Uthman are not lacking.
Tirmidhi’s work is distinquished by two features: the critical remarks concerning the Isnad’s (chain of transmission) and the point of difference between the Madhhabs which follow every tradition on account of the latter feature Tirmidhī’s Jāmi‘u may be called the oldest work on Ikhtilāfāt that has come down to us.
5.0 SUMMARY Imam Tirmidhī was one of the learned scholars of the science of Hadīth.
He contributed to the development of the science of Hadīth by transmitting it to students of ‘ilm and compiling it with critical analysis.
His collection of Hadīth is known as Sunan 52 Tirmidhi and was recognized by scholars of Islam as one of the six authentic collections of Hadīth.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS.
1.
Give a detail biography of Imam Tirmidhī 2.
Evaluate the Sunan Tirmidhī and comment on its originality.
3.
“Imam Tirmidhī was a polymath in the science of Hadīth” Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The selected traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Al-Dhahabi: Tabaqatu `l-Huffāz.
Cairo.
Ali Muhammad M. (1976).
A Manual of Hadīth, Lahore.
Pakistan.
Al-Subai, M.H (1949).
A`s-Sunnah wa Makānatuhā fi `t–Tashrī al-Islāmī.
H.A.R Gibs and J.H Kramne (1960).
Shorter encyclopaedia of Islam; London.
Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
53 MODULE 2: IMAMS A`N-NASĀI, IBN MĀJAH, MĀLIK AND IBN HANBAL: THEIR HADĪTH COLLECTIONS AND COMMENTARIES.
Unit 6: The Profile and Hadīth Collection of Imam Nasāī and its Commentary.
Unit 7: The life and Hadīth Collection of Imam Ibn Mājah and its Commentary Unit 8: The Biography and Contribution of Imam Malik to the Science of Hadīth.
Unit 9: The Biography and Contribution of Imam Ibn Hanbal to the Science of Hadīth.
UNIT 6: THE PROFILE AND HADĪTH COLLECTION OF IMAM A`N-NASŞĀĪ AND ITS COMMENTARY.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Imam a`n-Nasāī `s full name, linage and early life 3.2 His education and travelling 3.3 His teachers and pupils 3.4 His works 3.5 The Sunan al-Nasāī 3.6 Commentary works on the Sunan a`n-Nasāī 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Imam Al-Nasāī was one of the leading scholars of the science of Hadīth.
His work is recognized as one of the six authentic collections of Hadīth.
In this unit, we shall study his biography and assess his contribution to the science of Hadīth.
54 2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped by the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Mention the name and lineage of Imam A`n-Nasāī  Enumerate the teachers and students of Imam A`n-Nasāī  Assess the contribution of Imam A`n-Nasāī to Hadīth collection  Analyse the content and significance of Sunan A`n-Nasāī  Mention and analyse some commentaries written on the Sunan a`n-Nasāī 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Imam a`n-Nasāī `s Full Name, Linage and Early Life His name was Ahmad ibn Shuayb ibn Ali ibn Sinān ibn Abu Abdu`r-Rahmān a``n-Nasāī He was born in Nasā, a village in Khurāsan in Iraq in the year 215 A.H.
He was a man of humility and piety.
He respected learners and had love for knowledge and wisdom.
He was also trustworthy and hardworking in addition to possessing retentive memory.
These qualities assisted him greatly in his task of Hadīth collection and transmission.
It was said that he fasted every other day like the one described in the Hadīth as fasting of Dawud.
Self Assessment Exercise Mention the name and lineage of Imam A`n-Nasāī 3.2 His Education and Travelling Imam a`n-Nasāī started his learning at an early age of his life in his home town.
He studied Arabic literature first, followed by the recitation of the Glorious Qur’ān.
He travelled for the sake of knowledge at the age of fifteen.He travelled to Khurāsan, Iraq Hijaz, Syria, Jazirah, Egypt, Kufah and Damascus.
He later decided to settle in Egypt.
He became so popular in Egypt due to his educating lectures, especially on Hadīths.
He narrated Hadīths to the extent that he became famous by the title Hāfizu `l Hadīth.
Many people, including scholars would attend his gatherings to benefit from him.
Self Assessment Exercise Enumerate the teachers and students of Imam A`n-Nasāī 55  3.3 His Teachers and Pupils Imam benefited from eminent scholars of Islam.
Prominent among his teachers were:  Imam Qutaybah  Ibn Sa’īd  Imam Al-Bukhārī  Imam Muslim  Imam Abu Daud  Imam Suwayd  Ibn Nasā  Muhammad bn Nadar  Al-Marzuī  Imam Muhammad bn Ghaylān  Imam Al-Tarmidhi  Ishaq bn Rahawayh  Qatadah bn Saīd Several students of ‘ilm also benefited from the knowledge of Imam Al-Nasa’I.
His students include:  Imam Abu Qāsim al-Tabarānī  Imam Abu Ja‘far al-Tahāwī  Imam Abu Bakr Ahmed bn Muhammad known as ibn ``s-Sunni  Shaykh Ali ibn Tahāwī 3.4 His works Imam A`n-Nasāī was an erudite scholar and prolific writer in Islamic Sciences.
He left many beneficial works.
Unfortunately, many of the works were lost or not published.
His work entitled al-Mujtabā was one of his scholarly works he extracted from his Al-Sunan Al-Kubra.
His works include:  Sunan al-Kubra  Sunan al-Sughrā / Sunan al-Nasāī  Amalu `l-Yawm wa `l-Laylah 56  Khaşā’iş `Alī  Al-Jarħu wa Ta‘dīl  Kitāb al-Khaş’iş  Kitāb al-Şahābah  Kitāb Manāsik al-Hajj  Kitāb a`t-Tamyīz  Kitāb al-Ðu ‘afā  Kitāb Musnad ‘Alī .
 Kitāb Musnad Mālik  Kitāb ``t-Tafsīr.
Self Assessment Exercise Assess the contribution of Imam A`n-Nasāī to Hadīth collection 3.5 The Sunan a`n-Nasā`ī Al-Mujtabā was one of his scholarly works he extracted from his A`s-Sunan Al- Kubrā.
When he first compiled A`s-Sunan Al-Kubrā and forwarded it to the governor of Ramlah, the governor asked if all the Hadīth therein were Şaħīħ, which he replied in the negative.Thus, the governor requested that he compiled another book and in which he should gather Ahādīth Şaħīħah only.
Then, A`n-Nasāī compiled A`s-Sunan Aş-Şugrā which he later called al-Mujtabā.
The Mujtabā (Carefully chosen) is what is known as Sunan al-Nasāī.
This is the magnum opus of Imam Nasāī.
The work is being taught around the world and it has the virtue of being recognized as one of the Kutub `s-Siħāħ `s- Sittah (the six canonical books of Hadīth).
A glimpse at the scholarly work shows that the author was a traditionalist (Muhadīth) who possessed a great deal of knowledge in the area of Islamic science.
He was a traditionalist, a commentor on the Qur’ān and a first class Jurist.
He was one of the leading scholars of Hadīth collection and transmission.
He contributed immensely to the development of Hadīth literature through teaching, writing, collection and transmission.
This work is recognized by Hadīth scholars as one of the six authentic collections of 57  Hadīth.The book comprises of 5,761 traditions.
In this book, the author followed the footstep of Imam Bukhārī and Muslim.
Majorly, the Hadīths in the book are authentic.
Where there is a weak tradition, he clearly clarifies the weakness.
Some set of scholars regard Mujtabā the third authentic book of Hadīth after Şaħīħ Bukhārī and Şaħīħ Muslim.
Self Assessment Exercise Analyse the content and significance of Sunan A`n-Nasāī 3.6 Commentary works on the Sunan a`n-Nasāī Imam Suyūtī (d. 911) stated in his introduction to his commentary on the Sunan a`n- Nasaī.
: This my commentary on the Sunan of Abu Abdu r-Rahmān an-Nasāī is similar to my commentary on the Sahīhayn, Sunan Abu Dawud or Jāmi‘u Tirmidhī.
However The most important commentary works the Sunan a`n-Nasāī are: (i) Jalalu Dīn as-Suyūtī’s commentary which is a fine and concise work.
It is more of remarks than full commentaries.
It is entitled Zahru Ruba ala `l-Mujtabā.
In it he ascertained names of reporters; explained strange vocabularies and points out extraneous reports.
He mentioned some judgements and lessons derivable from the Hadīths.
It is an invaluable commentary inspite of its brevity.
(ii) Muhammad bn Abdu `l-Hādī al-Ħanafī’s Commentary popularly called as-Sindī, resident in Madina, d.1138.
He says in his commentary: This is a fine commentary on the Sunan a`n-Nasāī, exclusively on the need of the learner and the teacher concerning correct meaning, elucidation of strange vocabularies and linguistic analysis.
It is broader than Suyutis commentaries.
He made salient points in it.
These two commentaries have been published in Egypt and India.
The Egyptian edition contains texts of the work.
The two are printed in one volume.
The year of publication is 1312.
(iii) Shaykh Sirāju Dīn Umar bn Ali nicknamed ash-Shāfiī, d.804 AH.
It consists of comments on the addendums to the Şaħīhayn, Abu Dawud and Tirmidhī in one volume.
Self Assessment Exercise Mention and analyse some commentaries written on the Sunan a`n-Nasāī His Death Imam a`n-Nasāī was said to have died in Makkah or on his way to Makkah on Monday 13th of Safar, 303 A.H. at the age of 88.
He was buried in the holy city, between Safa and Marwa.
58  4.0 CONCLUSION Abu Abdur-Rahman, Ahmad bn Ali bn Shu’ayb bn Ali, a Hāfiz, was born in 215 A.H in Nasā, a city of Khurāsan.
He became famous for the study of the methodology of Hadīth, memorizing and mastering it.
His popular work known as Sunan a`n-Nasāī is third to Şaħīħ Bukhārī in terms of containing the weak Hadīths.
He lived in Egypt, then moved to Damascus in Syria and died in Makkah in the year 303 A.H.
According to some sources; he died in Ramalah near Palestine.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit opens with an introduction and stated objectives.
The first section of the main contents discuss birth, parentage and early life of Imam a`n-Nasāī; the second section relates his education and traveling for the purpose of Hadīth collection.
This is followed by a highlight of Imam a`n-Nasāī’s contributions to the science of Hadīth.
An overview of the Imams magnum opus, the Sunan a`n-Nasāī , constitutes the main focus of the Unit.
Self – Assessment Exercises and Tutor - Marked Assignments are provided to measure your understanding of the topic.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write the profile of Imam Nasāī.
2.
Evaluate the place of Sunan a`n-Nasāī in the science of Hadīth.
3. Review the content of the Commentaries on Sunan a`n-Nasāī .
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The selected traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Ali Muhammad M. (1976).
A Manual of Hadīth, Lahore.
Pakistan.
Al-Subai, M.H (1949).
A`s-Sunnah wa Makānatuhā fi `t–Tashrī al-Islāmī.
Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
Abdul Majid H.H (1978): A’imatual-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo, Buhuth al-Islami.
59  UNIT 7: THE LIFE AND HADĪTH COLLECTION OF IMAM IBN MĀJAH AND IT’S COMMENTARY CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 His Name, Birth, Character and Writing 3.2 The Sunan Ibn Mājah and Its Coemmentaries 4 Conclusion 5 Summary 6 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7 Reference/further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Imam Ibn Mājah is the sixth of the Collectors of the a`ṣ-Ṣiħāħu `ṣ-Ṣittah.
He contributed to the development of the science of Hadīth and its collection in other areas.
In this study we shall study his biography and assess his Sunan and familiarize ourselves with commentaries written on them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to :  Mention the real name and lineage of Ibn Mājah  Highlight the character of Ibn Mājah  Assess the contribution of Ibn Mājah to Islamic Science  Write an Overview of the Sunan Ibn Mājah and Its Coemmentaries 60  3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 His name, birth, character, learning and Writing His real name was abu Abdullahi b. Yazid b. Abdullahi b. Mājah al-Ru‘bī al-Qazwīnī the greatest scholars of the science of Hadīth in Qazwīn during his life time.
He was born in 209 A.H at Qazwīn, in Persia.
His character and learning Ibn Mājah had early education in his home town where he studied Arabic literature and Grammar as basis for his studies.
He traveled to many places and centres of learning in search of knowledge.
Among the cities he visited were: Khurāsan, Iraq, Hijaz, Syria, Egypt, Kufah, and Başra.
He benefited from erudite scholars of Islamic sciences such as Abubkar Ibn Abu Shaybah, Imam bn Muhammad bn Abdullahi bn Nu’mān and others.
As a ascholar, Ibn Mājah imparted knowledge to many students of Islamic sciences..
Prominent among them were Ibn Sībawayhi, Muhammad bn Isah a`ş-Şagīr Isaq Ibn Muhammad and several others.
Imam Ibn Mājah was pious, trustworthy and a hardworking student of knowledge he was a devoted Muslim who was blessed with retentive memory and love of knowledge.
His Writing Ibn Mājah was a prolific writer in various fields of Islamic sciences.
He wrote on the biography of the prophet (Ş), the Companions and their Followers.
He also wrote on Tafsīr and Hadīth literature.
Some of his writing include: Kitāb Tarikh `ş-Şaħābah and Kitābu `t-Tafsīr but the Sunan Ibn Mājah was his most celebrated work.
Self Assessment Exercise Write the full name of Ibn Mājah and describe his character.
61  3.2 The Sunan Ibn Mājah and Its Coemmentaries Ibn Mājah authored many books in the science of Hadīth.
However his most popular work in this field is: Sunan Ibn Mājah.
It contains 4,341 Hadīth.
Five scholars of Hadīth before him reported 3002 before Ibn Mājah recorded them.
Ibn Mājah added 1,339 to the number.
The addendum of Ibn Mājah are known as Zawā’id Ibn Mājah.
Sunan Ibn Mājah is the sixth in series of the Hadīth collection according to Tāhir al- Makaddasi and others.
However, some scholars are of the view that Kitābu ``d-Dārimī is the sixth while others regarded Muwatta Malik as the sixth.
Ibn Athīr commended the collection of ibn Mājah by saying “A usual book,very much useful in jurisprudence though there are many weak Hadīths in it” However, Imam Dhahabi noted that the weak tradition in Ibn Mājah are not many.
Sunan Ibn Mājah consists of 32 books in 1,500 chapters.
Among the traditions collected 428 are authentic (Şaħīħ), 199 are good (Hassan) 613, are weak (Ða’if) while 99 are doubtful or forged (Munkar of Makdhūb).
Though the work contains some weak Hadīths yet it is generally accepted by many scholars of Hadīth as one of the sixth authentic books of Hadīth.
Commentaries on His Sunan.
The most prominent commentaries on the Sunan Ibn Mājah are written by: (i) Imam Jalalu Dīn as- Suyūtī ( d. 911 AH.).
He entitled his work Misbāhu `z-Zujājah ‘alā Sunan Ibn Mājah.
He adopts the same methodology he used in his commentary on the other Sound Collection works i.e.
brevity and restriction to main points.
(ii) Shaykh Sindī al-Madanī d. 1138 AH.
: concise, providing important points; printed on the margin of the texts.
Self - Assessment Exercise Write an overview of the Sunan Ibn Mājah and Its Coemmentaries His Death.
62  Ibn Mājah died in Oazwīn on Monday, 21st Ramadan 273 at the age of 64 years.
4.0: CONCLUSION Imam Ibn Mājah was an Islamic Scholar of repute.
He contributed to the development of Hadīth literature in several ways.
His most popular work in the science of Hadīth is Sunan Ibn Mājah.
The Sunan contains 4,341 Hadīths though some of the Hadīths are weak, yet the Muhaddithūn i.e.
scholars of Hadīth recognized it as one of the six authentic books of Hadīth.
5.0 SUMMARY Abu Abdullah, Muhammad bn Yazid bn Mājah Al-Qazwīnī was born in 207 A.H.
He studied under Imann Malik and others and many people narrated Hadīth from him.
He was one of the eminent scholars of Hadīth, but his Sunan contains many weak and even Munkar Traditions.
Ibn Mājah died in Ramadan in 273 A.H. 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write the biography of Ibn Mājah in detail 2. Review the Sunan of Ibn Mājah in detail 3.
Evaluate the comments of scholars of Hadīth on Sunan ibn Mājah.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The selected traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Al-Dhahabi: Tabaqatu `l-Huffāz.
Cairo.
Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalānī: Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb.
Al-Subai, M.H (1949).
A`s-Sunnah wa Makānatuhā fi `t–Tashrī al-Islāmī.
Azami, M.M (1977).
Studies in Hadīth Methodology and Literature.
(USA).
Doi R. I.
(1980).
Basis of Sharī‘ah, Zaria.
H.A.R Gibs and J.H Kramne (1960).
Shorter encyclopaedia of Islam; London.
Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
63  UNIT 8: THE BIOGRAPHY AND CONTRIBUTION OF IMAM MĀLIK TO THE SCIENCE OF HADĪTH.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Imam Mālik’s Full Name, Birth, Search for Knowlegde and Writings 3.2 The Muwatta and its Contents 3.3 His Death 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Imam Malik was the first Islamic scholar who collected the Hadīths of the Prophet Muhammad (Ş) and compiled them into a book.
In this unit we shall acquaint you with his biography, and contribution to Hadīth literature.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to  Give a profile the personality of Imam Malik Ibn Anas  Discuss his career as an Hadith Collector and Scholar  Analyze his work on Hadīth which is popularly known as Muwatta 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Imam Mālik’s Full Name, Birth, Search for Knowlegde and Writings 64 He is Malik bn Anas bn Abī ‘Āmir.
He is related to Ahl Asbahi which was under the leader of Yemen.
His nickname is Abu Abdullah.
The dates given for his birth vary between 90 A.H. and 97 A.H.
He was said to have stayed in his mother’s womb for two or three years before he was born.
He spent most part of his life in Madinah.
His search for Knowledge Very little is known about his studies.
He was said to have studied Traditions with the celebrated scholar in Madina popularly called Rabiatu `ra’y for cultivating use of personal opinion.
Rabiah b. Farukh died in 132 A.H).
Some other prominent scholars he transmitted traditions from include: al-Zuhri, Nāfiu mawlā Ibn Umar, Abu Zinad, Hāshim bn Urwa, Yahya bn Sa‘ad, Abdullah bn Dinār, Muhammad b. Munkadir and Abu Zubayr.
A`s-Suyūtī also gives a list of 95 Shaykhs of Imam Malik.
Conversely, some prominent scholars who handed on traditions from him were: Abdullahi b. Mubarak Al-Awzā‘ī, Ibn Jurayj; Hāmid bn Zayd, al-Laythī b. Sa‘d, Ibn ‘Uyayna, and Yazīd b. Abdullah.
His Writings It is doubtful whether Imam Malik composed other works besides the Muwatta.
However, some sources attributed to him other works such as a`t-Tafsīr; Risālah fi `l-Qadar wa `r-Radd ‘ala `l-Qadariyyah, and Kitāb a`n-Nujūm.
Self Assessment Exercise Give a profile of Imam Mālik.
3.2 The Muwatta and its Contents The major work of Imam Malik on Hadīth is Muwatta.
Imam Mālik spent more than forty years in compiling the Muwatta.
After the compilation he presented it to seventy jurists among the jurist of Madinah for their comments.
Due to its significance, the Caliph 65  of the period intended to compel people to its usage but Imam Mālik refused.
The contents of Muwatta The Muwatta of Imam Malik consists of 100,000 Ahādīth.
More than one thousand students of Hadīths reported the Hadīths in the Muwatta from the author.
That was why there were differences in the copies.
Thirty transmitters were not popular.
However twenty were well known.
But the most popular transmitter was Yahya b. Yahya Al-Laythī Al- Andalusī al-Masmidī.
There are different classes of Hadīths in the Muwatta.
According to some review Imam Malik’s great work is to give a survey of law and justice, ritual and practice of Islam according to the Ijma‘ of the people of Madinah.
During the Abbasid period, there was a practical interest in setting out a “road map`` or smooth path which is the meaning of Muwatta through the far reaching differences of opinion available then”.
The most elementary questions Mālik wished to help this interest on the basis of the practice in Hijaz and to codify and systematize the customary law of Madīnah custom which he interprets from the point of view of practice.
The Muwatta thus represents the earliest stage of literary development which was common to both Fiqh and Hadīth.
The success of the Muwatta is due to the fact that it always takes an average view on disputed point.
Self Assessment Exercise Assess the Muwatta of Imam Mālik.
3.4 His Death He died in Madinah in 179 A.H. at the age of 85 after a brief illness.
He was buried at Al- Bakī‘i.
The Governor, Abdullahi b. Zaynab conducted his funeral service.
An elegy on him by Ja’afar b. Ahmad al-Sarraj is given in Ibn Khallikan.
The qubbah (dome) over his grave was destroyed by the Wahhābis.
66  4.0 CONCLUSION Imam Malik was one of the prominent scholars of fiqh (Jurisprudence) and Hadīth (traditions of the Prophet).
He was the founder of one of the four orthdeox schools of law.
He was born at Madinah in 94 A.H.
He lived in the same place and received his early education of Islam from Sahl b. Sa’d, a survivor of the companions of the prophet.
He was considered to be the most learned man of his time; and his self denial and abstinence were such that he usually fasted four days in the week.
He enjoyed the advantages of a personal acquaintance and familiar intercourse with Imam Abu Hanīfah although differing from him on many important questions regarding the authority of the traditions.
With regard to the Traditions, his authority is generally quoted as decisive.
Among his works, the only one record is one of traditions which is known as the Muwatta.
His Principal Students was Imam Al-Shafi ‘ī who afterwards founded a school of law.
He died in 179 A.H. at Madinah and was buried there.
5.0 SUMMARY Imam Malik b. Anas was a great scholar of Islamic jurisprudence and prophetic traditions.
He lived between 93 A.H. to 179 A.H. His intellectual contribution to Hadith Literature was his work titled Muwatta.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1 Write in detail the biography of Imam Mqalik 2 Discuss the significance of Muwatta Malik 3 Compare and contrast the contents of Muwatta Malik with Jami’ Al-Tirmidhi.
7.0 REFERNCE/FURTHER READINGS Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The selected traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Ali Muhammad M. (1976).
A Manual of Hadīth, Lahore.
Pakistan.
Al-Subai, M.H (1949).
A`s-Sunnah wa Makānatuhā fi `t–Tashrī al-Islāmī.
H.A.R Gibs and J.H Kramne (1960).
Shorter encyclopaedia of Islam; London.
67 Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
UNIT 9: THE BIOGRAPHY AND CONTRIBUTION OF IMAM IBN HANBAL TO THE SCIENCE OF HADĪTH.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Name, linage and birth of Imam Ahmad bn Hanbal 3.2 His traveling in search of knowledge 3.3 His Writings 3.4 His contribution to Hadīth Literature 3.5 His major work in the science of Hadīth 3.6 His Death 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Imam Ahmad bn Hanbal was one of the great scholars of Hadīth (Prophetic Traditions).
He studied under prominent scholars of Hadīth and he transmitted it to various scholars and students of Islamic sciences.
He also compiled a work on Hadīths (Prophetic Traditions) which he antitled.
Al-Musnad.
Our focus in this unit is the study the biography of this erudite Imam with particular reference to his contribution to the study and compilation of Hadīth.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you will be able to:  Give the full name and lineage of Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal  Narrate an account of his travelling in search of knowledge.
68  Provide an overview of the academic pursut of Imam Ahmad bn Hanbal.
 Outline the writings of Imam Ahmad bn Hanbal.
 Discuss Ibn Hanbal’s contribution to the Science of Hadith 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Name, Linage and Birth of Imam Ahmad bn Hanbal His name is Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Hanbal b. Hila Al-Shaibani Al-Maruzi, Al- Baghdadi.
His nickname is Abu Abdullahi.
His birth and growth His mother was at Marwa when she was carrying his pregnancy but she traveled to Baghdad where she delivered him.
Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal was born at Baghdad in Rabi’ul Awwal 164 A.H.
He grew up there and began his early education there.
Self Assessment Exercise Give the full name and lineage of Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal 3.2 His traveling in search of knowledge After studying Islamic sciences in Baghdad, he traveled to Syria and Hijāz for further studies.
He stayed with prominent Islamic scholars learning to the extent that he became famous among the leading scholars who knew the traditions of the Prophet’s companions and their followers.
He was gifted with retentive memory and intelligence to the extent that he was able to memorize almost one million Hadīths.
Self – Assessment Exercise Discuss his pursuit of Prophetic traditions 3.3 His writings Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal authored several works on Islamic sciences.
The scholarly works include; Kitābu al-‘llal, Kitābu `z-Zuhd, Kitābu `t-Tafsīr, Kitābu `n-Nāsikh wa`l-mansūkh, Kitābu fadā’ilu `ş-Şaħābah and Kitābu `l-Ashribah.
However, his most important work is al-Musnad.
3.4 His contribution to Hadīth Literature 69 Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal attended classes of Al-Qādī Abu Yusuf.
He also received the knowledge of Hadīth and Jurisprudence and geneaology of Quraysh from imam Al-kufah;.
He traveled to Yemen to study from Abdul Razak.
At Kufah, Basrah, Jazīrah, Makkah, Madinah and Syria where he met prominent scholars of Islam from whose knowledge he benefited.
His teachers of Hadīth also include; Al-Mufađal Al-Ruqashi, Sufyan b.
‘Uyaynah, Yahya b. Sa’d Al-Qitānī, Abdul Razak b. Haman A`ş-Şan-‘ānī, Sulaymān b. Dawud Al-Tayālisī, Ismā’il bn ‘Aliyyah and Sulaymān Al-Başrī.
Those who transimmited Hadīth from him include; Imam Bukhārī, Imam Muslim, Abu Da’ud, Wakī‘ bn Jarāh, Yahya b. Adam al-Kūfī and Aliyu bn al-Madanī.
He was persecuted during the rule of Al-Ma’mun b. Harun Al-Rashid for refusing to acknowledge the Bid’a of claiming “The creation of the Qur’ān introduced by the Mu’tazila.
He however stood firm against all the trials and saved the Sunna from the innovation of the mu’tazila thoughts.
He was the mostly persecuted and most firm one among all the Imams.
Self – Assessment Exercise Evaluate his general contribution to the science of Hadith 3.5 His major work in the science of Hadīth The most popular work of Ibn Hanbal in the science of Hadīth is al-Musnad.
The Musnad of Ibn Hanbal consists of 40,000 Hadīth.
Almost 10,000 among them were repeated.
His son Abdullahi included 10,000 to it while his transmitter Ahmad b. Ja ‘far al-Qādī added some.
It was Abdullahi bn Ahmad b. Hanbal who arranged the Musnad, Some anomalies cropped in, in the process but Imam Ahmad could not review it before his death.
70 The scholar who classified the Musnad alphabetically was al-Hāfiz Abubakar bn Muhammad bn Abdullah al-Makdasi al-Hanbalī.
Imam Ahmad was a genus and was gifted with retentive memory.
Abu Zahra remarked that “Ahmad used to memorized thousands of Hadīth and transmit them orally”.
There is no wonder he was listed among the commanders of the faithful in the science of Hadīth.
Ibn Hiban also commended him by saying; He was a jurist, a good memorizer who was pious and dedicated to worship.
Self – Assessment Exercise Provide a critical analysis of the Musnad Imam Hanbalī 3.6.
His Death He died at Baghdad on Friday in the month of Rabī‘u `l- Awwal 241 A.H at the age of 77.
He was buried at Bab Harb cemetery.
Many people attended his funeral.
It took a long time before people stop visiting his tomb for supplication and admonition.
4.0 CONCLUSION Ahmad bn Muhammad bn Hanbal Al-Shaybānī, known by the name Ibn Hanbal was a celebrated theologian, jurist and a paragon Hadīth scholar.
He studied Hadīth and fiqh together with other Islamic discipline in Baghdad, and then traveled to Syria and Hijāz for further studies.
He is most famous for collecting the Hadīths of the Prophet (Ş) compiled in the Musnad Ahmad bn Hanbal which contains 28 to 29 thousand Hadīths.
It was said that Ibn Hanbal memorized one million Hadīths.
He was also one of the four Imams of Islamic Jurisprudence and the founder of what later came to be known as al-Madhhab al-Hanbalī (The Hanbalī School of Islamic Law).
He died in Baghdad on Friday, 12th Rabiul Awwal 241 A.H. 71  5.0 SUMMARY Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal was a prominent jurist and scholar of Hadīth (Muhadīth).
He contributed to the development of Hadīth by transmitting them.
He memorized many Hadīths and did his best to put them into preatice.
His major work in the field of Hadīth is al-Musnad which contains almost 40,000 Hadīths.
He died at Baghdad at the age of 77.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal was a jurist and a traditionalist.
Discuss 2.
Evaluate the contents of al-Musnad of Ibn Hanbal.
3.
Compare the Musnad of Ibn Hanbal with the Jami‘u `t-Tirmidhī 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS Hassan Al-Jumal, I. M. (2003).
Hayāt al-Aimmah: Ahmad b. Hanbal; Cairo Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The selected traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Ali Muhammad M. (1976).
A Manual of Hadīth, Lahore.
Pakistan.
72  MODULE 3 Module 3 Imams Nawawī, Suyūtī, Asqalānī and Albānī: Their Hadīth Collections and Commentaries.
Unit 10: Imam Yahya al-Nawawī and his contribution to Hadīth literature Unit 11: Jalalu`d-dīn a`s-Suyūtī and his contribution to the development of Hadīth literature Unit 12: Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī and his works on Hadīth literature Unit 13: The contribution of Imam al-Albānī to the Hadīth literature.
UNIT 10: LIFE AND CONTRIBUTION OF IMAM AL-NAWAWĪ TO HADĪTH LITERATURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 The Full Name, early life and character of Imam Yahya Al-Nawawi 3.2 His Education, Teachers and Pupils 3.3 His Writings 3.4 His Commentary on Şaħiħ Muslim 3.5 His Death 3.6 Differences between Sharh Şaħiħ al-Bukhārī and Sharħ Şaħiħ Muslim 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Imam Yahya Al-Nawawī was one of the famous commentators of Hadīth.
He taught and wrote books on Hadīth.
His commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim is regarded the best 73 commentary on the book of traditions.
Though, a revered Muhaddith (Scholar of Hadīth), he was also a distinguished jurist.
In this unit, we shall study his life and contribution to Hadīth literature.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to:  Give the full name and relate the early life and character of Imam Yahya al-Nawawī.
 Highlight his education and enumerate his teachers and pupils.
 Provide evidence of his being an erudite scholar.
 Evaluate his book of commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim  Compare Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī with Şaħīħ Muslim 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Full Name, early Life and character of Imam Yahya A`n-Nawawī He is Abu Zakariya, Yahya bn Sharafuddin bn Sara bn Hasan bn Husayn bn Hajjam bn Muhammad bn Jammah al-Nawawī al-Dimashqī.
His Birth and Cnaracter Imam was born in October 631 A.H. (about 1255 CE) in Nawa, South of Damascus, in the suburb city of Howran.
His father who was a pious and virtuous man enrolled him in Madrasa al-Rawahiya in Damascus in 649 A.H.
The young al-Nawawī, initially, wanted to study medicine but later changed his mind and went for Islamic studies.
He learnt the Qur’ān by heart and also studied several books on Islamic jurisprudence in his early years.
He was courageous, obedient, trustworthy, pious and hardworking.
He considered trading such as buying and selling of books as his source of livelihood.
Imam al- Nawawī earned the respect of people, especially the learned and the elite of his locale right from his childhood due to his fear of God, piety, power of knowledge and excellent character.
He used simple dress and ate simple food.
He enjoyed religious engagement than pursuing worldly things.
Commenting on him, the celebrated Shaykh Muhyiddin said: “Imam a`n-Nawawī had three distinctive commendable qualities in his person.
If anybody has only one out of these three, people will turn to him in abundance for 74 guidance.
First, having knowledge and its dissemination; second, evading completely from the wordly inclinations and third, inviting to all that is good and forbidding al-Munkar”.
Self – Assessment Exercise Give the full name and relate the early life and character of Imam Yahya al-Nawawī.
3.3 His Education, Teachers and Pupils.
Imam received the first stage education in his hometown.
He started travelling to places in search of knowledge at the age of eighteen.
He visited Damascus where he learned from scholars of the city.
From there, he moved to Hijaz and studied from the eminent scholars of Makkah and Madinah.
Prominent among his teachers was Shaykh Yasin bn Yusuf al-Zakhshī.
In about 655 A.H. he began to write books and he was called to the Ashrafiya school of Tradition in Damascus in succession to Abu Shāmah who had just died.
He offered his services free and declined to collect salary.
His Teachers and Pupils Imam a`n-Nawawī studied under celebrated teachers that were regarded as masters and authority in different aspect of Islamic knowledge.
Many of his teachers are:  Abu Ibrahim Ishāq bn Ahmad al-Maghribī  Abu Muhammad Abdu `r-Rahmān bn Ibrahim al-Fazarī  Radiyuddin Abu Ishāq Ibrahim ibn Abu Hafş  Abu Baqa Khālid ibn Yusuf  Abu `l-Abbās Ahmad ibn Salim al-Mişrī  Abu Abdullah al-Jiyalī  Abu `l-Fat-ħ Umar bn Bandar  Abu Muhammad al-Tanūkhī  Abu `l-Faraj Abdu `r-Rahmān ibn Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Maqdisī There were also hundreds of Imam’s students.
Some of them are:  Allahuddīn Ibn `Attār  Ibn Abbās Ahmad bn Ibrāhim  Abu `l-Abbās al-Ja‘farī 75  Abdu `r-Rashīd Ismā‘īl bn Mu’allim al-Hanafī  Abu Abdullah al-Hanbalī  Abu `l-‘Abbās al-Wastī  Jamaluddīn Sulaymān Ibn ‘Umar  Shamsuddīn Muhammad bn Abu Bakr Self - Assessment Exercise Highlight his education and enumerate his teachers and pupils.
3.4 His writings Imam Yahya Al-Nawawī was a prolific writer.
Though, he lived a short life, he wrote many books and treatises on various aspects of Islamic learning.
He wrote on Islamic law, Jurisprudence, as well as Hadīth.
The following works are attributed to him.
 Kitāb Rawdatu `t-Tālibīn  Kitāb Minhāj al-Tālibīn  Kitāb Daqā’iq al-Minhāj  Kitāb al-Manāsik a`ş-Şughrā  Kitābu `t-Tibyān fi Adab Hamalat al-Qur`ān  Al-Minhāj fī sharħ Şahih Muslim  Al-Adhkār  Riyādu ş-Şālihīn  Arba‘ūna Hadīth al-Nawawī  Sharhu Arba‘ūna Hadīth  Tabaqātu `l-Fuqahā  Tahdhību `l-Asmā wa `l-Lughāt  A`t-Taqrīb fi ‘ilm al-Hadīth wa `l-Irshād fih  Taħrīr `tanbīh Self – Assessment Exercise Provide evidence of his being an erudite scholar.
76  3.5 His Commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim Imam Nawawī was a prominent scholar in the field of Hadīth.
He retained his high reputation to the present day in the field of Hadīth.
He had an exceptional knowledge of Hadiths and adopted even stricter standards than many others in its criticism.
For example he admitted only five collections of Hadīth as authentic and put Sunan Ibn Mājah on the same level with the Musnad of Ahmad ibn Hanbal.
Furthermore, in spite of his fondness for Muslim he gave a higher place to Bukhārī.
Among his major contributions to Hadīth Literature are his works known as: Arbaun Hadīth, Riyad al-Salihin, Al-Adhkar and Sharh Sahih Muslim.
More importantly, Imam’s Sharh Muslim is a book of commentary on one of the six major collections of Hadīth, Şaħīħ Muslim.
Although, popularly known as Sharħ Şaħīħ Muslim, the full name of the book of commentary is known as al-Minhaj bi Sharh Sahih Muslim.
It is a 5 volume book printed in Cairo in 1283.
In the introduction of the work, Imam al-Nawawi gives a sketch of the science of Tradition.
Generally, the Imam describes the isnād, (i.e., Chain of Narration), then explains the meanings of words and phrases in the Hadīth.
The observations on the Isnads and the grammatical explanation of the traditions are made to verify the authenticity of the Hadīth and to clarify the real message in it in the Şaħīħ Muslim.
He gives commentary from the theological and legal aspect to buttress and strengthen the subject matter.
Quotations were also made when necessary from, not only the founders of the principal Islamic schools of thought, but also older jurists like Azāi, ‘Atā’ etc.
Imam Nawawī also puts heading in Muslim’s work.
Greater passentage of scholars of Hadīth consider this work the best commentaries on Şaħīħ Muslim.
Nawawi’s commentary of Şaħīħ Muslim is brief, which may be the reason it is preferred by some Islamic scholars and leaners.
Researches has even also shown that this book of commentary is preferred by many universities for their curriculum despite the fact that Imam Ibn Hajar’s commentary of Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī, the most important book of Hadīth, is regarded by the majority as the best commentary ever written on any book of Hadīth.
77 Self – Assessment Exercise Evaluate his book of commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim 3.6 His Death Imam Yahya a`n-Nawawī returned to his hometown when he was about 45 years old.
Shortly after his arrival at Nawaa, he fell ill and died.
He died in the night of Wednesday 24th Rajab 676 A.H. at the age of 45.
3.7 Comparison beteen Sharħ Şaħiħ al-Bukhārī and Sharħ Şaħiħ Muslim Even though Ibn Hajar Asqalānī’s commentary on Şaħīħ Bukhārī and al-Nawawī’s commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim are highly valued by Muslims, it is undisputable that both invaluable works have many things in difference.
Apart from the fact that the authors are different, the approaches to the works are also different in many ways.
Comparing the methodology of the two, the following points can be inferred:  Ibn Hajar elaborated on details of the Hadīth, much like an encyclopaedia but Imam al- Nawawī was concise.
 When defining terms in the Hadīth, Ibn Hajar would elaborate on the language used but Nawawī would define the meaning of selected vocabulary.
 Ibn Hajar would mention all existing narrations of the Hadīth but Nawawī would not generally include other narrations.
 Ibn Hajar referred to fiqh derived from the Hadīth with quotations from various scholars of different schools of Islam while Imam Nawawī would usually quote from scholars who had written commentaries on Muslim such as al-Qādī Iyāđ, al-Maddrūī and al-Khatīb.
 Both would mention the various benefits to be deduced from the Hadīth but Ibn Hajar would do so on a larger scale than Nawawī.
 At the end, Nawawi’s commentary leaves the reader with a clear understanding of the Hadīth and Ibn Hajar’s commentary leaves the reader with a comprehensive understanding of the Hadīth and all that relates to it from the other books of Hadīth.
Self Assessment Exercise Comparison Sharħ Şaħiħ al-Bukhārī with Sharħ Şaħiħ Muslim 78  4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have studied the life and contribution of Imam Yahya a`n-Nawawī to Hadīth literature.
He was portrayed as a great commentator of Hadīth.
His Sharh Sahih Muslim which is a book of commentary on Sahih Muslim is an excellent and magnificient work of commentary.
He had a great reputation as a scholar and a Jurist of a high rank.
We have also established in this unit that are many other commentators on Ṣaħīħ Muslim.
5.0 SUMMARY Muhyiddin Abu Zakariyya Al-Nawawi was born in Nawa 631 A.H. and died in 676 A.H. in the same place at the age of 45 years.
He was a great jurist of the Shafi’I school of law and a prominent scholar of Hadīth.
He authored a wonderful work of commentary on Şaħiħ Muslim.
The book of commentary which is known as Sharh Sahih Muslim is considered as the leading commentary on Şaħiħ Muslim.
Some other scholars of Hadīth also commented on Şaħiħ Muslim.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1.
Give a detail biography of Imam Yahya Al-Nawawī 2. Review Imam Nawawī`s major book of commentary on Şaħiħ Muslim.
3.
Briefly examine the contribution of two other commentators on Şaħiħ Muslim.
4.
Compare Ibn Hajar’s commentary on Şaħiħ al-Bukhārī with Imam a`n-Nawawī’s commentary on Şaħiħ Muslim.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ibn Al-Attar: Tuhfat al-Talibin fi tarjamati Shaykhina al-Imam al-Nawawi Al-Suyuti, Abdul Rahman al-Minhaj Fi Tarjamat al-Nawawi Al-Dhahabi: Tazkiratu al-Huffaz,Haidarabad, n.d. pp.259-264 Al-Imam Al-Nawawi (2007), Riyāđ a`ş-Şālihīn (trans.
by Muhammad Badawi), Kuwait, Africa Muslims Agency.
79 UNIT 11.
JALĀLU `DĪN A`S-SUYŪTĪ AND HIS CONTRIBUTION TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF HADĪTH LITERATURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Full name, Birth, Teachers and Students of al-Suyūtī 3.2 His writings 3.3 His contribution to Hadīth literature 3.4 His death 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī was one of the erudite scholars of Islamic studies whose contribution to the science of Hadīth is recognized in the circle of Scholars and Students of the disciplines in many parts of the Muslim world.
Our focus in this unit is to highlight his erudition as an Hadith collector and commentator.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to:  Full name, Birth, Teachers and Students of Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī  Assess Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī as a prolific writer  Evaluate Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī’s contribution to Hadīth literature  Assess the contribution of Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī to the Science of Hadīth 80 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Full name, Birth, Teachers and Students of al-Suyūtī He is Abdu ``r-Rahmān bn al-Kamal Abi-Bakr bn Muhammad bn Sābiq b. Hammam al-Khudayr, al-Asyūtī a``sh-Shāfi‘ī.
His nickname is Jalālu `d-Dīn.
He is also called Abu `Fađl which was given to him by his teacher Al-Kinānī Al-Hanbalī.
His grandfather was of Persian origin while his mother was Turkish.
Suyūtīs father was a Qādī in Asyut and author of books on Arabic language and linguistics.
Birth Imam Suyūtī was born in the year 849 A.H. in the city of Asyūt in Egypt, a city known for its beauty, pleasant surroundings and abundant provisions.
Suyuti’s father died when he was five years old; but by that age he had memorized the Qur’ān to Sūratu `t-Tahrīm.
He finished the memorization of the complete Qur’ān before he reached the age of eight.
Teachers and Students Imam Suyūtī was endowed with great interest in seeking knowledge right from his childhood.
He was taught by Shaykh Kamalu `d-Dīn bn Haramayn with love and affection and was raised like a son by him.
He also studied various branches of Arabic and Islamic studies under the guidance of the eminent ‘ulamā’ of his time.
Prominent among them were Shaykh Shihābu `d-Dīn, Shaykh al-Islam Al-Balqānī, Sharafu `d-Dīn al-Manāwī, Imam Taqiyyu `d- Dīn al-Shiblī al-Hanafī, Muhy `d-Dīn al-Khafājī and several others among the jurists of his time.
Imam Suyūtī was so unusually gifted with intelligence and retentive memory that he was able to memorize vast texts and became an authority in many sciences of both Arabic and Islaamic studies.
Students came from many parts of the Muslim world flooding his residence seeking for knowledge.
As a result of that his, fame spread to many places.
Though Suyuti was himself an authority in Arabic language and literature, he pursued excellence in various fields of Islamic studies with vigour.
He travelled widely in search for knowledge and observe the 81 bounties and signs of Allah to mankind.
The places he travelled to include Hijāz, Syria, India and West Africa Countries.
Self Assesment Exercise Highlight the full name, birth, teachers and students of Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī 3.2 His Writings Imam Suyūtī devoted most of his time to reading and writings.
One of his students said “I know a`s-Suyūtī as an author of three works in a day in addition to other educational activities”.
It is claimed that Imam Suyūtī authored more than 500 works.
Some of these works are commentaries and summaries of important Islamic manuals.
Thus, there is little wonder that the works of A``s-Suyūtī are found in many parts of the Muslim world today.
Students as well as learned men have busied themselves studying his scholarly works and when Imam Suyūtī’s works are critically studied interesting conclusions are arrived at.
Imam Suyūtī wrote on Islamic history, Arabic literature, Qur’ān Exegesis, ‘Ulūm al-Qur’ān, and the sciences of Arabic language.
Notable among his scholarly works are: i. Husnu ‘l-Muhādarah fi akhbār Mişr wa ‘l-Qāhirah.
ii.
Tabaqāt al-Hufāz iii.
Tabaqāt al-Mufasirīn iv.
Tabaqāt al-Nahwiyīn wa `l-Lughawiyīn v. Tārīkh al-Khulafā’ vi.
Muntahā al-uqūl fi Muntahā `n-Nuqūl vii.
Lubbābu `l-Lubbāb fi Tahrīr al-As-hāb viii.
Al-Muz-hir ix.
Al-Ash-bāh wa `n-Nazā’ir x. Jam-‘u `l-Jawāmi ‘ fi `n-Nahw xi.
Al-Itqān fi ‘Ulūm al-Qur’ān 82  From the aforementioned works we can perceive the erudition of Imam Suyūtī as an authority in the fields of the twin disciplines of Arabic and Islamic studies.
Self Assessment Exercise Discuss Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī as a prolific scholar.
3.3 His Contribution to Hadīth Literature Imam Jalālu `d-Dīn Suyūtī was a great scholar of Hadīth.
Indeed, he was regarded as the most learned scholar of his time in Prophetic traditions and in the science of Hadīth and its transmitters.
Furthermore, Suyūtī reported that he memorized more than 200,000 Hadīths and he was ready to memorize more whenever he came across them.
Simultaneously, Imam Suyūtī acknowledged with humility in his autobiography Husnu `l- Muhādrah that he was blessed with knowledge in seven sciences; namely Tafsīr (exegesis), Hadīth (Prophetic traditions), fiqh (jurisprudence), Nahw (grammar), al-ma’ānī (Semantics) al-Bayān (exposition) He is known to have excelled even his teachers.
Imam Suyūtī wrote more than one hundred works in the science of Hadīth only some of which he mentioned in his autobiographical work entitled Husnu `l-Muhādarah fi Akhbār Mişr wa `l-Qāhirah.
The theme of these works is collections of Hadīth, criticism of scholars of Hadīth, the status of some Hadīths and other aspects of the science of Hadīth.
Imam Suyūtī has almost one hundred and eighty works on Hadīths.
Notable among his works in the field of Hadīth include: i. Dhayl Tabaqāt al-Huffāz: It is a summary of a work authored by al-Dhahabī (d. 748 A.H) titled Tabaqat al-Huffāz.
Suyūtī added some Huffāz (memorisers) of Hadīth and scholar of Usūl.
He arranged the stages of the Huffāz and made them 24.
He started with the Companions of the Prophet (Ş) and ended with Al-Hāfiz bn Hajar al-Asqalānī (d.853 A.H.).
ii.
Al-la’ālī al-Masnu ‘ah fi al-Ahadīth al-Mawđū‘ah This is an import work which outlines the Hadīths forged by fabricators.
Though some scholars of Hadīths such as Abu `l-Faraj al-Jawzī and Ibn Şalāħ compiled similar work 83 on fabricated Hadīths that of Suyūtī has been more comprehensive on the subject matter.
iii Tadrību `r-Rāwī fi Sharħ Taqrīb a``n-Nawawī This book deals with the principles of Hadīths and measurement to distinguish the classes of Hadīths from each other.
It states the conditions of authentic, good, weak and other categories of Hadīth.
iv al-Tashrīħ ‘alā `l-Jāmi‘ a`ş-Şahīh: A commentary on the authentic compilations of Bukhārī, Musnad Ahmad b. Hanbal, Şaħīħ Muslim, Ibn Mājah and others.
v. Jam-‘u `l-Jawāmi‘ fi `l-Sunnah It is a comprehensive work on Hadīths that contain different classes of it.
It is recognized by Islamic scholars as a major contribution to Hadīth literature and a revival of Islamic legacy of great importance.
It was published by Majma’ al-Buhūth by the order of Shaykh of al-Azhar University, in Cairo, Dr. Abdul Halim Mahmud.
vi.
Miftāh al-Jannah fi `l-Ihtijāj bi Sunnah This is a book on the significance of Hadīth, a very useful and comprehensive hand book for students and teachers of Hadīth.
It condemns in totality those who regarded the Glorious Qur’ān as the sole source of Islamic law and nothing else.
It is pertinent to note that Imam Suyūtī was said to have memorized 200,000 Hadīths.
Some scholars said 300,000 and he was quoted to have said; “If I have opportunity to come across others beside them I should have memorized them.” Therefore he intended to document all the Hadiths he had memorized and entitle it Jam-‘u `l-Jawāmi‘ but he died before then.
Self - Assessment Exercise Assess the contribution of Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī to the Science of Hadīth.
84  3.6 His death Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī died in 911 A.H at the age of 62.
To this day he is regarded as the foremost Islamic jurist and scholar of Hadīth who attained the rank of mujtahid in both knowledge and devotion.
4.0 CONCLUSION Jalālu `d-Dīn Abdu `r-Rahmān Al-Suyūtī was born in 849 A.H and died in 911 A.H.
He was a polymath and Jurist par excellence.
He contributed to the development of Hadīth literature by compiling monumental works in the science of Hadīth.
More than 500 works are attributed to him in the field of Arabic language, Islamic science and the Hadīth literature in particular.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit acquaints you with Shaykh Jalālu `dīn a`s-Suyūtī and his contribution to the development of hadīth literature.
Section one of the main content highlight his full name, birth, teachers and pupils.
Section two gives an overview of his writings and enumerates eleven of them.
Section three concludes the main contents with a critical appraisal of the contribution of Jalālu `d-Ðīn a`s-Suyūtī to the Science of Hadīth.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1 Provide a brief life history of Jalālu `d-Dīn a`s-Suyūtī with particular reference to his scholarly activities.
2 Mention ten works of Suyuti on the science of Hadīth and analyze their contents 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS  Muhammas Salih Sadiq: “al-Hafiz Jalalu Al-Din wa kitabuhu fi al-Jihad,” Dirasāt Islamiyyah Journal, Vol.
24 No 4, 1989 pp.
25-61  Faruq Abdu `l- Mu’tī (1992): A‘lām al-Fuqahā wa ‘l-Muhaddithīn: Jalālu `d-Dīn a`s- Suyūtī Imamu `l-Mujaddidīn wa `l-Mujtahidīn fi ‘Aṣrihī, Beirut.
Dar’ Al-Fikr  Adam Abdullahi al-Ilūrī; (1961).
Al-Islam fi Nijīriya wa Shaykh Uthmān bn Fūdī al- Fulanī.
Cairo.
85 UNIT 3: THE LIFE AND CONTRIBUTION OF IBN HAJAR AL-ASQALĀNĪ TO HADĪTH LITERATURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Full Name, Birth, Education and Teachers of Ibn Hajar 3.2 His Writings 3.3 His Commentary on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī 3.4 His Death 3.5 Other commentators on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the great commentators of Hadīth was Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalānī.
He was a scholar of repute who contributed to the science of Hadīth through writing and teaching.
He was one of the scholars that commented on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī.
His book of commentary is, to a great extent, being considered the best commentary on the outstanding book of Hadīth.
In this Unit, we shall study the life of Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalānī and his book of commentary on Şaħīħ al- Bukhārī.
We shall also specify some other commentators on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī.
2.0 OBJECTIVES It is hoped that at the end of this unit, you will be able to:  Present full name, birth, education and eachers of Ibn Ħajar al-Asqalānī  Enumerate and appraise the writings of Ibn Ħajar al-Asqalani.
 Appraise Ibn Ħajar’s book `Sharħ Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī  Mention some other commentators on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī and outline their works.
86 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Full Name, Birth, Education and Teachers of Ibn Hajar He is Imam al-Ħāfiż Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī, Abu `l-Fađl, Shihābuddīn, Ahmad bn Muhammad bn Muhammad bn Ahmad Al-Kinānī, Al-Shāfi‘ī.
Birth and Education Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī was born on 10th Sha‘bān, 773 A.H. in Egypt and he grew up there.
He memorized the Qur’ān at the age of nine years and also memorized al-Hāwī, the Mukhtaşar of Ibn Hājib, and other books.
He travelled to Makka and listened to the teaching of its ‘Ulamā’.
Having admired the science of Hadīth, he strived to acquire its knowledge from the prominent Shuykhs in places like Hijaz, Egypt and Shām.
Many eminent Shuykhs of his time approved his knowledge and allowed him to give lectures and religious verdicts.
Teachers Ibn Hajar learnt from many prominent teachers like:  Al-‘Izz bn Jamā‘a from whom he learnt the two primary sources of Islamic law (Qur’ān and Hadīth).
 Al-Majd al-Fayrūzabādī from whom he learnt the Arabic language.
 Al-Amān from whom he learnt the Arabic Grammar.
 Al-Badr Al-Mushtakī from whom he learnt Literature and Poetry from Him also he recited some parts of the Qur’ān in all the seven styles of recitation.
 Shaykh al-Tanūkhī where he recited some parts of the Qur`ān in all the seven styles.
 Shaykh Zayn al-Balqānī  Ibn al-Mulaqqin  Al-Ħāfidh al-Irāqī Self – Assessment Exercise Present full name, birth, education and eachers of Ibn Ħajar al-Asqalānī 87 3.2 His Works Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī was said to have authored more than 150 books, most of them being on Hadīth which was a major study flourishing during his life time.
Most of the works of Ibn Hajar are on the science of Hadīth.
Some of his works are:  Fath al-Bārī  Al-Isābah fi Tamyīz a`ş-Şahābah (A comprehensive dictionary of the Companions)  Al-Durar al-Kāminah  Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb  Taqrīb al-Tahdhīb  Ta‘jīl al-Manfa‘ah  Bulūgh al-Marām fi Takhrīj ahādīth al-Adhkār  Lisān al-Mīzān  Talkhīs al-Habr fi Takhrīj al-Rafi’I al-Kabir  Silsilatu `dhahab.
Self – Assessment Exercise Enumerate and appraise the writings of Ibn Ħajar al-Asqalani 3.3 His Commentary on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī Out of the books written by ibn Hajar on Hadīths, the most notable is Fat-hu l-Bārī`fi Sharh Sahih al-Bukhārī which is commoly known as Fathu al-Bari.
It is a book of commentary on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī.
The author was said to have started the commentary in 817 A.H. and completed it in Rajab 842 A.H.
It shows that it took the author 25 years to complete the work.
After the completion of the commentary, he held a party on which he spent 500 Dinar.
Some of the kings that graced the occasion requested for the copy and paid 300 Dinar for it.
The great book of commentary on the greatest compilation of Hadīth, was recognized by scholars of Hadīth as one of the scholarly works on the work Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī.
Commenting on the book, Abdul Hakim Murad, in the introduction to the translation of ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī`s commentary on selected Hadīth published by the Muslim Academic Trust, said: ``The importance of this literature may be gauged by the fact that at least seventy full 88 commentaries have been written on Imam Bukhārī`s great work, Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī the most celebrated of which is without question the magnificient Fat-hu `l-Bārī (Victory of the Creator) by Imam Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī.
Ibn Hajar`s explanation is very thorough and detailed.
It is a 15 volumes book in which the author commented on every Hadīth in Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī.
Often, while expounding upon the meaning of a particular Hadīth, he brings other narrations to explain it.
He classified some Hadīths into weak and gave extensive proof on the weakness.
He also gave extensive discussion regarding the situations of different narrators, grammar and morphology.
Fat-hu `l- Bārī is an excellent and vast explanation of Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī in a beautifully bound set.
It is indeed a magnificient commentary.
The book of commentary was at the peak of its category.
It is well treasured for its complete coverage of Bukhārī`s material, its mastery of the relevant Arabic sciences, the wisdom showed in drawing lessons from Hadīth and how it resolved complex problem over variant readings.
Self – Assessment Exercise Appraise Ibn Ħajar’s book `Sharħ Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī 3.4 His Death Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalānī died after ‘Ishai prayer on Saturday, 8th Dhul-Hijjah 852 A.H. May Allah reward him abundantly.
3.5 Other Commentators on Sahih al-Bukhārī It is noteworthy that the Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī has been commented on by many scholars of Hadīth, apart from Imam Asqalānī.
Though the exact number of the commentator could not be ascertained, it is posited by many scholars that there are more than seventy commentaries on book.
This could be confirmed in the statement of Abdul Hakim Murad: ``The importance of this literature (Imam Bukhārī) may be gauged by the fact that at least seventy full commentaries have been written on the great Şaħīħ Bukhārī ``.
Some of them are: 89  ‘Umdat al-Qārī fī sharħ Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī by Badru `d-Dīn al-‘Aynī  Fayđ al-Bārī Sharħ Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī by Imam al-`Aşr Anwar Shah al-Kashmīrī  Al-Kawkab a`d-Dārī Sharħ Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī by Imam Shamsu `d-Dīn al-Kirmānī  A`t-Tawshīħ by Imam a`s-Suyūtī  Irshād `s-Sārī li Sharħ Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī by Imam Qastalani  Sharħ Ibn Kathīr  Sharħ Ibn al-Mulaqqin  Sharħ Ibn Abi Hamzah al-Andalusī  Sharħ al-Bakrī  Sharħ Ibn Rashīd  Al-Mutawarī `alā abwāb al-Bukhārī by Imam Nāşiru `d-Dīn Ibn al-Munayyir.
Self – Assessment Exercise Mention some other commentators on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī and outline their works 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have reviewed the life of one of the great commentators of Hadīth, Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī.
It is established that Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani was a Muhaddith (Scholar of Hadīth) of great repute.
His book of commentary on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī, which was considered the greatest commentary so far on the subject, is also reviewed.
It is also being revealed that not only Ibn Hajar, but more than 70 other scholars commented on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī.
5.0 SUMMARY Ibn Hajar al-Asqalānī (773 A. H. – 852 A. H.) was a great scholar of Hadīth.
He compiled several works of Hadīth and wrote commentary on others.
Notable among his works is Fath al-Bārī fi sharħ Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī which is a book of commentary on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī.
While majority of Islamic scholars hold the book in high esteem, it is ascertained that there are more than 70 books of commentary on the work.
90 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS 1 Write a detailed biography on Ibn Hajar 2 Review Fat-h al-Bārī authored by Ibn Ħajar al-Asqalānī.
3 Compare Ibn Ħajar’s commentary on Şaħīħ al-Bukhārī with Imam al-Nawawī’s commentary on Şaħīħ Muslim.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdul Majid, H.H (1978); A’immatu al-Hadīth al-Nabawi, Cairo.
Abdul, M.O.A (1980): The selected traditions of Al-Nawawi, Lagos.
Al-Dhahabi: Tabaqātu `l-Huffāz.
Cairo.
Ibn Hajar Al-Asqalānī: Tahdhīb al-Tahdhīb.
Ali Muhammad M. (1976).
A Manual of Hadīth, Lahore.
Pakistan.
A`s-Subā‘ī, M.H (1949).
A`s-Sunnah wa Makānatuhā fi `t–Tashrī al-Islāmī.
Azami, M.M (1977).
Studies in Hadīth Methodology and Literature.
(USA).
Doi R. I.
(1980).
Basis of Sharī‘ah, Zaria.
H.A.R Gibs and J.H Kramne (1960).
Shorter encyclopaedia of Islam; London.
Sadiq Abul`-Hasan et.al (1980).
Dirāsāt fi `s-Sunnat al-Nabawiyyah al-Sharīfah, Kuwait.
91 UNIT 13 THE CONTRIBUTION OF IMAM ALBĀNĪ TO HADĪTH CRITICISM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The full Name of Albānī 3.2 His Writing 3.3 His Contributions to the science of Hadīth 3.4 His Death 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Shaykh Muhammad Nāsiruddīn al-Albānī was one of the prominent scholars of Islam who contributed in no small measure to the science of Hadīth in this era.
His life, works and dedication to Islamic ideals are models to present day students and teachers of Islamic studies.
We hereby acquaint you with his brief life history and contribution to the study and criticism of Hadīth.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students should be able to:  Outline the full name, birth and educational career of Shaykh Albānī  Enumerate the writings of Shaykh Albānī with an appraisal of some of them  evaluate the contribution of Shaykh Albani to Hadīth literature 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Full Name, Birth and Educational career of Albānī He is A`sh-Shaykh al-Muhadīth Muhammad Nāsiru `d-Dīn bn Nuh Najātī bn Adam.
His Kunyah (nickname) is Abu Abdu `r-Rahmān taken after his eldest son.
He was also called 92 Al-Arnūtī, a name given to those who were immigrants of Syria, and Askodari a place of his birth and al-Dimashqī, his place of residence, and al-Albani his Country of Origin Albania in Europe.
His Birth and Growth He was born in the year 1332 A.H. (1914) in the town of Ashkhodera, which was the capital city of Albānia at the time.
He lived in the town for about 9 years in a poor family.
Albāni’s father was one of the scholars of his town and a Hanafite jurist having graduated from the institute of Sharī‘ah in Istanbul, Turkey.
He returned home to be the muftī of Albānia, taught his people the tenets of their faith and call to the religion of Islam.
Shaykh Albānī was a brilliant student to the extent that one would be amazed of his brilliance and retentive memory.
As a growing young boy he learnt carpentry and later the art of horology (watch repairing) this was what the Shaykh did for living and he retained his shop until his death.
His Educational Career.
Shaykh Albānī attended a Madrasah (elementary school) called Jam-‘iyatu Is‘āf al-khariyyah at the age of nine.
It was there he had his early education in Arabic and Islamic studies.
As Shaykh Albānī himself narrated his teacher made him interested and impressed him so much to critically study all the Hadīths in Ihyā ‘Ulūm `d-Dīn.
Shaykh Albānī also used to attend discussions on Hadīth with some scholars like the great historian and Muhadīth of Halab, Shayikh Muhammad Rāghib a`t-Tabakī, when Shaykh saw the dexterity of this young Albānī he gave him an Ijāzā (certificate or licence) to narrate knowledge from him.
Shaykh Albānī spent most part of his time in the study of the books of Hadīth most especially the manuscripts of the Zāhiriyyah library.
He made the visitation of the library a daily routine 93 such that he usually spent between six and eight hours depending on the variations in weather between summer and winter.
Self – Assessment Exercise Outline full name, birth ane educational career of Shaykh Albānī.
3.2 His Writings From the compilations of Samīr bn Amin and Ibrahim bn Muhammad al-Aliyy, Shaykh Albānī was said to have authored two hundred and twenty one titles with some of the books being up to 40 volumes and a good number of them being usually more than three volumes.
Some of his writing which rely fully on authentic Aħādīth of the Prophet (Ş) on subjects of jurisprudence rank among the best materials ever gathered on those subjects and is far away from blind followship of madhhab.
Some of these books are:-  Şifatu Şalatu n-Nabiyy  Ahkāmu `l-Janā’iz  Hajjatun n-Nabiyy  Qiyāmu Ramađān wa `t-Tarāwīh  Tamāmu `l-Minaħ fi ta‘līq ‘alā fiqh `s-Sunnah.
 Adabu `z-Zifāf  Tamamu `n-Nuşħ fī Aħkam al-Masħ  A`th-Thamar al-Mustahab fi Fiqh `s-Sunnah wa `l-Kitāb 3.5 His Contributions to the science of Hadīth Shaykh Albānī authoured many books and edited several others.
His works are particularly in terms of sound verfification of traditions including the use of supporting evidences and a usual follow up with comments of scholars of the past and contemporaries to further establish his judgments.
94 The Shaykh authoured a work on Hadīth which he entitles: Silsilatu `ş-Şaħīħah wa`đ-Ða ‘īfah.
This work was compiled in line with the methodology of the salaf to purify the religion from innovatory acts of belief, worship and daily transactions.
This would enable teachers, preachers and students to know and avoid such narrations so that they do not attribute to the Prophet (Ş) what he did not say or what cannot be established as his statements.
To increase the benefit of the recognition of unestablished traditions, Shaykh Albānī compiled chains of sound Ahādīth and entitled it: Silsilatu `ş-Şaħīħah.
The pattern adopted by the Shaykh in the books is to mention the Hadīth, follow up immediately with its rulling (i.e.
whether authentic or not), mention the books of compilation of Ahādīth in which it can be found, together with a detailed discussion of its various chains of transmission and the comments of the past scholars and the present ones on the Hadīth.
Silsilatu Ða‘īfah is in 14 large volums with a total of about 7,000 s and Silsilatu `ş-Şaħīħah is in 7 large volumes with a total number of about 3,000 hadīths.
Another important contribution of the Shaykh Albānī to the science of Hadīth is his Irwā al- ghalīl fi takhrīj ahādīth Manār `s-Sabīl It is an outstanding work on the verification of Hadīths in Hanbalī book of fiqh called Manāru `s-Sabīl with relevant notes on the jurisprudential deductions in the book.
Furthermore, his work Şifatu Şalat al-Nabiyy was compiled after reading and teaching in the book of prayer” in A`t-Targhīb wa `t-Tarhīb of Al-Hāfiż al-Mundhirī to students in the year 1286 A.H. (the importance of prayer and the reward awaiting those who perform it properly) informed the compilation of the book.
In addition to writing, the Shaykh had a very good interpersonal relationship with scholars and students of knowledge.
He met many of the people of learning and both parties benefited from each other.
95 Prominent among the scholars he met were Shaykh.
Hāmid, leader of Anşāru `s-Sunnah in Egypt, Shaykh Abdu `l-Razāk Hamā, and ‘Allāmah Mujāhid al-Jawal Taqiyyu `d-Dīn.
He also held several meetings with Dr. Yusuf Al-Qardāwī and discussed important issues of knowledge with him sometimes, Dr. Yususf al-Qardawi met him to verify the authenticity of Hadīths and relying so much on such verifications.
Sometimes in some programme he would say: “I have asked concerning the authenticity of this Hadīth from al-Shaykh Muhammad Nāşiru `d-Dīn al-Albānī”.
The leader of the Muslim Brotherhood Shaykh Hasan al-Banna also wrote to Al-Albānī commending his efforts on his commentary and critique on some of the Sharī‘ah rulings published in the magazine of Ikhwānu `l-Muslimīn under the column Fiqhu `s-Sunnah written by Shaykh Sayyid Sābiq.
Self Assessment Exercise Evaluate the contribution of Shaykh Albani to Hadīth literature 3.6 His Death After a life with the search for knowledge and the teaching of it, the reawakening of the Sunnah and the defence of it, an exemplary life of complete servitude to Allah, the Shaykh died on Saturday, 23rd Jumāda `l-Ākhirah 1420 A.H. (2nd October 1999) after ‘ Asr prayer before sunset in Amman, Jordan at the age of 88 years.
Over five thousand people attended the Janāzah prayer.
May Allah be pleased with him.
5.0 CONCLUSION Shaykh Muhammad Nāsiruddīn al-Albānī was one of the prominent scholars of Hadīth in this age.
He loved the science of Hadīth and searched for its knowledge from the eminent ulamā he visited.
He was the founder of the Hadīth faculty in the University of Madinah and he taught the subject there for almost three years.
In addition to teaching, he delivered several lectures on the science of Hadīth in various parts of the Muslim world and Europe.
His writings on Hadīth are cherished and studied by both students and scholars of knowledge.
He died on 2nd October 1999 at the age of 88 years.
96 5.0 SUMMARY Shaykh Albānī was a prolific writer and erudite scholar.
He studied Islamic sciences and specialzed in Hadīth criticism.
He wrote several works on Hadīths.
Prominent among his writings on Hadīth is the anthology of authentic traditions and weak traditions he compiled.
He entitled the work Silsilatu Ahādīth `ş-Şaħīħah wa`đ-Ða ‘īfah.
He was also a Jurist who contributed to the Hanbalī School of Islamic law.
He died at the age of 88 years.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS Give a full biography of Shaykh Nāşiru `d-Dīn al-Albānī Write a critical appraisal on the contribution of Albānī to Hadīth literature.
Compare Albānī’s comments on Hadīth with the views of a`n-Nawawī.
7.0 REFERENCES\ FURTHER READINGS Ibrahim Abdu `l-Raūf and Muslim Ameen (2007).
The Biography of Great Muhadith, Shaykh Muhammad Nāsiruddīn Albānī, Riyad.
Umar Abubakar, (n.d.).
Al-Imām al-Mujaddid wa`l-Allāmah al-Muhadīth, Muhammad Nāsiruddīn Albānī.
Riyad.
Muhammad Ibrahim Al-Shaybānī: Hayātu al-Albānī wa āthāruhū wa thanāu `l-Ulamā `alayhi.
97
