 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 316 COURSE TITLE: MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT  COURSE GUIDE MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Course Team Levi Chinaka Nwodu (Course Writer) – Anambra State University, Awka Mr. Adile Iroajugh (Course Editor) – Delta State University, Abraka Chuks O. Enwerem & Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede (Course Coordinator) – NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA None MAC 316 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Abuja Office 5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058-303-3 All Rights Reserved ii  MAC 316 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………………………………….
iv Study Units……………………………………………... iv Textbooks and References …………………………….. v Assessment……………………………………………… vi Tutor-Marked Assignment……………………………… vi Final Examination and Grading………………………… vi How to Get the Most from This Course……………….. vi Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials ……………………….. vii Summary………………………………………………… vii Conclusion ……………………………………………….
vii Recommended Texts …………………………………….
viii iii  MAC 316 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION This course MAC 316: Mass Communication and National Development is designed for undergraduate students of Mass Communication.
The course provides you with basic and applicatory knowledge of the role of mass communication in national development.
At the end of the tutorials in the course, you are expected to have acquired sufficient knowledge of communication skills and approaches for enhancing development process.
You will also learn the paradigms and theories of development and their relevance in the study of mass communication and national development.
Precisely, as you go through this course, you are expected to have in-depth understanding of the use of mass communication tools, skills and strategies to promote, advocate and mobilise support for sustained national development programmes in Nigeria.
You are also expected to acquaint yourself with mainstream literature in mass communication and national development; the major discussion that embed the literature and be able to apply the basic concepts of communication and development in productive learning and conduct of successful case studies.
This course guide therefore, offers you informative insights into the course contents.
It also provides you with a list of relevant materials you will need to gain adequate familiarity with an in-depth understanding of the subject matter.
The course design is structured in such a way that would enable you gain far reaching insight into the course.
It will engage you into productive thinking through the underlying principles and theories of issues you will study.
It will also serve as a guide post to effective management of social transformation campaigns during and after the course of your study.
STUDY UNITS MAC316 is a two credit course.
The course is packaged in five modules of varying units and lengths.
The modules and the corresponding units are: Module 1 Getting Started: Conceptualising Mass Communication and National Development Unit 1 Meaning, Nature and Levels of Communication Unit 2 Perspectives on the Concept of Development Unit 3 Meaning and Essence of National Development iv  MAC 316 COURSE GUIDE Module 2 Overview of Development Paradigms, Models and Theories Unit 1 The Dominant Paradigm Unit 2 The Marxist/Socialist Paradigm Unit 3 The Emancipatory Paradigm Module 3 Strategies for Applying Communication in National Development Unit 1 Patron-Client Model Unit 2 ACADA Model Unit 3 Social Marketing Approach Module 4 Communication Research and National Development Challenges Unit 1 National Development Challenges in Nigeria Unit 2 Communication Research Interests in National Development Challenges Module 5 Tying Up: Role of Media of Mass Communication for National Development Unit 1 An Overview of Media of Mass Communication in Nigeria Unit 2 Strengths and Weaknesses of Media of Mass Communication in Nigeria Unit 3 Functions of Mass Media in National Development It is important to note that every module offers you a listing of all the units that make it up.
Each unit also offers you the content outlines, introduction and objectives with the main content preceding each unit.
Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) will be provided to enhance learning, comprehension, internalisation and retention of what you read.
To further enhance learning and effectively monitor your progress on the course, every unit will end with tutor-marked assignment which you are to work on and submit for marking.
TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCES Enormous effort was made to provide you with in-depth and useful materials you need to pass this course.
However, you will find at the end of each unit, a listing of relevant reference materials you may consult at your convenient time to enhance your understanding of the course.
I therefore, expect that you would make out time to consult as many of v  MAC 316 COURSE GUIDE the relevant reference materials as possible within the time available to you even before attempting to do your exercises.
ASSESSMENT To excel in this course, you would undergo two important assessments.
These are Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) and Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA).
Though you are not to submit the answers to SEAs questions to your tutor, it is importance you take it serious as it would help you to assess your own understanding of the course.
It would also help you to identify the areas you need to improve on as the tutorials progresses.
The tutor-marked assignment should also be taken serious and carefully answered.
It should be properly filled in your assignment file for submission and marking.
Your performance in this exercise counts a lot as 30% of your total score on the course depends on it.
You are once again encouraged to take it serious.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT You will find at the end of every unit, a tutor-marked assignment.
I expect that you will carefully answer the assignments and put them in your assignment file for submission as instructed.
Note that this course guide does not contain any tutor-marked assignment questions.
You will find them in virtually all the units of every module in the main course details.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING As a 2-credit course, the final examination for MAC 316 will last for two hours.
The examination will count for 70% of the total course grade.
Note again that the tutor-marked assignment will be 30% of the total grade.
So, your score in the Tutor-Marked Assignment plus your score in the final examination will determine your final grade in this course.
The examination questions will reflect to a large extent, the SAEs and TMAs which you are expected to have answered while studies on the course last.
I advise you make proper use of the time you have between the completion of the units and the examination to revise the whole course.
You will find this exercise useful as it will help you to be familiar with SAEs and TMAs before your final examination.
WHAT YOU WILL NEED FOR THIS COURSE To excel in this course, you will need to review your knowledge of ‘‘Introduction to Mass Communication’’.
This will certainly refresh your mind on the meaning and levels of communication as well as the importance of mass communication in any society.
Although the main vi  MAC 316 COURSE GUIDE course manual is well detailed and comprehensive, you will need to purchase at least, two textbooks out of the number of textbooks recommended to you.
This will aid your mastery of the course.
You may also need to visit some websites for additional reference materials that will facilitate your understanding of the course.
Also, you will need to visit institutional/organisational libraries particularly the ones owned by development intervention orientated institutions/organisations like World Bank, UNICEF, UNDP, USAID, DFID etc for additional insights into their communication plans, strategies and actions in development process.
Finally, you will need to cultivate quality time to rehearse what you learnt in the course on weekly basis.
This will further deepen your knowledge of the course.
FACILITATORS/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS Tutorials in this course will span through 17 hours.
The dates and locations of the tutorials as well as the name and phone number of your tutor will be communicated to you once you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments.
Your tutor will also monitor your progress in the course and will be able to assist with your SAEs and TMAs.
I therefore, encourage you to feel free to contact your tutor in case of any difficulty and ensure prompt submission of your assignments.
Always attend your tutorials and on time.
Also ensure you always participate actively in class discussions.
CONCLUSION This course is both theoretical and practical.
It requires in-depth understanding of the theoretical foundations underlying it and the ability to apply the theoretical knowledge to effective national development process.
You will therefore make the most out of the course if you cultivate the right attitude of mind towards understanding how best communication (particularly mass communication) could apply to the business of positive national development and transformation.
SUMMARY This course guide is carefully packaged to give you the right insight into MAC 316 (Mass Communication and National Development).
The course is designed to equip you with rich conceptual and theoretical as well as practical knowledge of mass communication and national development.
At the end of your studies in this course therefore, you would have learnt not only the conceptual/theoretical underpinning of the course but also, the strategic and practical ways of using mass communication to achieve national development.
However, your success in this course will depend more on the quality and quantity of time you vii  MAC 316 COURSE GUIDE put into your tutorials; the efforts you put into solving your SAE and TMA questions; and your strategic planning for engaged studying and revising of the entire course.
I sincerely wish you successful journey through your studies in the course and the entire programme.
RECOMMENDED TEXT Nwodu, L. C. & Fab-Ukozor, N. T. Communication Imperatives for Development.
Nwosu, I. E.
(Ed.).
Mass Communication and National Development.
Nwosu, P; Onwumechili, C. & Bayo M. (Eds).
Communication and Transformation of Society: A Development Region Perspective.
Onuorah E. N.
(Ed.).
Mass Communication in Nigeria: A Book of Reading.
Soola, E. O.
(Ed.).
Communicating for Development Purpose.
viii  MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Getting Started: Conceptualising Mass Communication and National Development ……………………………………… 1 Unit 1 Meaning, Nature and Levels of Communication …………………………………….
1 Unit 2 Perspectives on the Concept of Development …… 7 Unit 3 Meaning and Essence of National Development … 14 Module 2 Overview of Development Paradigms, Models and Theories …………………………………….. 21 Unit 1 The Dominant Paradigm ………………………….. 21 Unit 2 The Marxist/Socialist Paradigm ………………….. 33 Unit 3 The Emancipatory Paradigm ……………………… 38 Module 3 Strategies for Applying Communication in National Development …………………………… 43 Unit 1 Patron-Client Model ……………………………… 43 Unit 2 ACADA Model …………………………………… 47 Unit 3 Social Marketing Approach ……………………… 53 Module 4 Communication Research and National Development Challenges ………………………… 57 Unit 1 National Development Challenges in Nigeria …….
57 Unit 2 Communication Research Interests in National Development Challenges ………………… 63 Module 5 Tying Up: Role of Media of Mass Communication for National Development ……………………….. 68 Unit 1 An Overview of Media of Mass Communication in Nigeria ………………………………………….
68 Unit 2 Strengths and Weaknesses of Media of Mass Communication in Nigeria ………………….
74 Unit 3 Functions of Mass Media in National Development .. 80 None MAC 316 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 GETTING STARTED: CONCEPTUALISING MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 Meaning, Nature and Levels of Communication Unit 2 Perspectives on the Concept of Development Unit 3 Meaning and Essence of National Development UNIT 1 MEANING, NATURE AND LEVELS OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Communication?
3.2 Levels of Communication 3.3 Definitions and Characteristics of Mass Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION I assume you have read the course guide for this course.
I also assume you are now familiar with the preliminary commentary on the course guide.
This unit is the first of the four units that make up this module.
The aim of this unit is to provide you with refreshing knowledge of various levels and nature of communication.
The unit is very important to you in that it lays the necessary background for the study of mass communication and national development.
I therefore encourage you to take the tutorial and subsequent tutorials serious.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define and explain the concept of communication • identify the levels of communication • explain the nature or characteristics of various levels of communication.
1  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Communication?
Communication as a concept derived from a Latin word communicare which means make common.
The import is to share.
Today, the concept has evolved into the sharing of ideas either between oneself or between one person and another person or group of persons.
Regardless of the form, communication involves designing and sending message; receiving and interpreting message; and reacting to message received.
Message of communication could be verbal, non-verbal or both.
It is verbal when words alone are used to make expression or share meaning.
On the other hand, communication is non-verbal when we use signs, symbols and gestures to communicate.
We can also, communicate with words and signs at the same time to make meaning.
In this case, the verbal communication is reinforced with the non-verbal codes to achieve emphasis and effectiveness.
The implication is that communication is a combination of verbal and non-verbal means of sharing ideas, feelings, opinions and other vital information between individuals, groups and varied audience members.
It is the transmission of a message from a message originator called the source to a message receiver or group of receivers.
Communication is a process that pervades every aspect of human interactions and development.
Human beings therefore communicate continuously.
3.2 Levels of Communication Human communication can take place at various levels which are intra- personal, interpersonal, group and mass communication.
We shall briefly discuss each of these levels of communication below.
1.
Intra-personal communication Everyone usually communicate within oneself.
Often times, individuals ponder over an issue that is of concern to them.
An individual can think or reflect upon an issue in order to arrive at a decision or solution to his/her problem.
The same individual can also talk aloud to his/herself as is the case with soliloquy mostly over an issue that bothers him/her so much.
When such is the case, the individual is said to be engaged in an intra-personal communication.
It is called intra-personal communication because the message source doubles as the message receiver.
Intra-personal communication therefore involves a sender who doubles as the receiver; immediate feedback and highly personalised message.
2  MAC 316 MODULE 1 2.
Interpersonal communication This is the kind of communication between two or more individuals.
In this case, the source of the message differs from the receiver or receivers.
The common features of interpersonal communication are: • there is a sender who designs or encodes the message of communication • there is a receiver or two receivers who differ(s) from the sender • the receiver(s) interpret(s) or decode(s) the message • the feedback is also immediate and the message is usually personalised between the individuals involved in the communication.
Through interpersonal communication, we can influence others and be influenced by others.
3.
Group communication Two aspects of group communication exist.
These are small group communication and public speech.
A group of individual numbering between three and 15 usually engages in small group communication.
Communication at this level usually centres on an issue of common interest to members of the group.
Group communication is characterised by several senders but with one sender at a time; many receivers each of which has the potential of being a sender at a point in the communication process; communication is based on an issue of common interest to the group; feedback is usually immediate; and the message is highly depersonalised.
In the case of public speech, the receivers now become audience members which in essence are diverse in nature and very large in number.
The diverse nature of the audience of public speech often affects the understanding and interpretation of the message disseminated.
However public speeches are characterised by (1) one or more senders as is usually the case with crusade, political rally and public demonstrations; (2) receivers are described as audience and are usually heterogeneous and very large in number; (3) depending on the situation, the feedback can be immediate or delayed; and (4) public speech has potential of transforming into mass communication (that means it can be published or aired for wider public consumption).
4.
Mass Communication This kind of communication usually gets to the audience via the instrument of mass media (radio, television, cinema, newspaper, magazine, book etc).
Mass communication therefore is the process of reaching out to wider society with mass mediated messages.
Here professional communicators take responsibility of packaging and disseminating information designed to arouse special or intended meanings in innumerable receivers called 3  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT audience via an organ or combination of organs of mass media.
It involves use of advanced technological devices to gather, sift, package and disseminate messages to diverse or heterogeneous audience.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify various levels of communication stressing the unique characteristics of each level.
3.3 Definitions and Characteristics of Mass Communication There are several definitions of mass communication.
We shall consider three definitions out of the lot.
a.
Mass communication is “a process whereby professional communicators use the mass media to disseminate messages widely, rapidly and continuously to arouse intended meanings in large and diverse audience in attempts to influence them in variety of ways” (DeFleur and Denis, 1994).
b.
Mass communication is “the process of creating shared meaning between mass media and their audiences” (Baran, 1999).
c. Mass communication is “the process by which complex organisation with aid of one or more machines produces and transmits public messages that are directed to large, heterogeneous, and scattered audiences” (Dominick, 2009).
These definitions show that mass communication is a process.
They also show that the process of mass communication involves continuously creating and sharing of meaning with messages targeted at wider public called audiences and transmitted through the mass media.
Mass communication is therefore, characterised by: • enlarged sources which constitute a conglomeration of professional communicators • uncountable number of audience members who are usually heterogeneous in nature and are hardly known to each other • feedback can range from immediate to delay and can be quantified or measured • messages are disseminated through advanced technological devices • message is to a large extent depersonalised.
The above characteristics or nature of mass communication clearly shows that this level of communication is very crucial in disseminating development information at the social level.
Several scholarly 4  MAC 316 MODULE 1 definitions of mass communication such as the ones above clearly justifies that mass communication is an important tool of national development.
And since mass communication is directed at large heterogeneous audiences, it is important that you study how the process of mass communication could be effectively utilised to achieve national development which is the intent of this course.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define and explain the concept of mass communication.
4.0 CONCLUSION Our discussion so far shows that mass communication is very vital in human relation and also vital to the process of development.
In fact no meaningful development can occur in man’s social, physical and even spiritual environment without communication.
This has therefore, made the study of mass communication as well as national development most imperative.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit various levels of mass communication.
You have also learnt the technical definitions as well as the characteristics of mass communication.
The conceptual discussion of mass communication here lays the foundation for the study of mass communication and national development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define the concept “mass Communication’’ and state how it differs from other levels of communication.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Baran, S. J.
(1999).
Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Literacy and Culture.
California: Mayfield Publishing Company.
DeFleur, L. M. & Denis, E. (1994).
Understanding Mass Communication.
Illinois: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Dominick, J. R. (2009).
Dynamics of Mass Communication: Media in Digital Age.
Boston: McGraw-Hill.
5  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Ndolo, I. S. (2006).
Interpersonal Communication: Selected Readings in Relationship.
Enugu: Rhyce Kerex Publishers.
Nwodu, L. C. & Fab-Ukozor, N. T. (2003).
Communication Imperatives for Development.
Enugu: John Jacobs Classic Publishing Company Limited.
6  MAC 316 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 PERSPECTIVES ON THE CONCEPT OF DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Economic Perspective of Development 3.2 Political Perspective of Development 3.3 Philosophical Perspective of Development 3.4 Socio-Cultural Perspective of Development 3.5 Holistic Sense of Development 3.6 Relationship between Communication and Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The word development ranks among the most loosed terms in social science literature.
For this reason, professionals in diverse fields of learning tend to perceive development from their various narrow professional points of views.
This unit is therefore aimed at discussing some of the different perspectives of development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the economic perspective of development • highlight the political perspective of development • describe the philosophical perspective of development • analyse the socio-cultural perspective of development • describe the holistic sense of development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Economic Perspective of Development As we noted in the introduction, development has been defined by different professionals in different ways.
In economic sense, development is defined as: 7  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT • Economic change that realistically enhances people’s earnings in addition to raising their living standards via large scale production of goods and services (Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor, 2003).
• The capacity of a national economy whose initial economic condition has been more or less static for a long time, to generate and sustain an annual increase in its gross national product at rates perhaps 5% to 7% or more (Todaro and Smith, 2003).
• The maximisation of growth of the GNP through capital accumulation and industrialisation (Meier, 1989).
The import of the above definitions is that development in economic sense is all about growth measured in terms of gross national product (GNP).
A nation is therefore said to be developed if there is sustained upward growth from original static condition to an appreciable increase in the nation’s GNP.
In this context therefore, the indices of development are: • growth in Gross National Product (GNP) • equitable distribution of income/increased per capita income • poverty reduction and increased output per man • low rate of unemployment • increase in industrialisation and productivity.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention and discuss the indices for measuring development and growth in economic sense.
3.2 Political Perspective of Development Development in political parlance is concerned with stable, inclusive and integrative polity.
It is all about the enthronement of a political system that is all embracing and cohesive.
Development is therefore defined as conscious effort at building a viral nation.
By implication development equates nation building (Pye, 1962).
In this context, the indices of development are: • peaceful process of power succession regardless of the pattern of governance • cultural and ethnic integration • greater political tolerance • greater citizen participation in political process and activities • enormous respect for fundamental human rights.
8  MAC 316 MODULE 1 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is development in the context of political science?
3.3 Philosophical Perspective of Development Philosophers are not really concerned with material aspect of development.
Their concern however, is on man’s mental health.
Development therefore is easily associated with the level of mental alertness.
The emphasis is on mental capacity to think right and ability to properly adjust to societal norms and values.
According to Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003), development in this context refers to “the attainment of meaningful degree of mental alertness, and the sophistication of human faculties to the level the individual in society cannot only reason well but also, adopt a logical approach to issues arising from human society”.
This definition clearly shows that the indices of development in philosophical sense are: • possession of high mentality • possession of highly developed faculties • ability to reason well and adjust properly to the social system • ability to understand and interpret social trends.
3.4 Socio-Cultural Perspective of Development The major concern here is on socio-cultural perspective of development.
Development in this context is concerned with conscious move away from primordial and archaic cultures to a more cohesive, dynamic and secular ones.
The human society is said to be developed when such society creates conducive atmosphere for: • social mobilisation i.e.
where the units of the society operate in a social climate that encourages solidarity and the spirit of oneness • cultural secularity i.e.
where socio-political actions and activities are based on high level of rationality and empiricism • high prevalence of universalistic norms i.e.
human conducts and behaviours are guided by laws that are universal • recognition of achievement over and above ascription i.e.
individuals occupy positions of authority on the basis of merit rather than on basis of family status and other demographic factors.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain development from a socio-cultural perspective.
9  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 3.5 Holistic Sense of Development We have taken a look at various dimensions of development from different fields in social sciences.
While it can be reliably said that all the definitions are right in their respective narrow perspectives, it is important to emphasis that none actually captured the true essence of development in its entirety.
This segment is therefore meant to look at development not from a narrow professional perspective but from holistic sense of it as a social science term or concept.
It is important to state here that we may not really capture the true essence of development without examining few definitions from radical modernistic thinkers.
Let us therefore consider a few of the definitions that tend to reflect broad sense of holistic development.
Broadly defined therefore, development is: • Concerned with bettering the human, cultural, socio-economic and political conditions of the individual, and consequently, of society (Moemeka, 1989).
Development in human society is many-sided process.
At the level of the individual, it implies creativity, self-discipline, responsibility, and material well-being.
The achievement of any of those aspects of personal development is very much tied with the state of the society as a whole (Rodney).
3.6 Relationship between Communication and Development We have earlier defined communication as the process of sharing meaning, opinions and ideas.
We have also defined development as the continuous process of positive change from one condition to the other.
The implication is that both communication and development operate as processes, activities that are on-going.
However, communication activity or process will be meaningless if the message of communication is not understood by the targets of communication.
For this reason, individuals, governments and organisation are always in search of better and effective way of communicating with one another, citizens and organisational publics.
Knowledge of development is therefore needed to improve upon communication strategies and infrastructure to make the process of massage sharing effectives.
On the other hand, every development effort needs effective communication to succeed.
Since development agents need to work closely with development targets in order to succeed, it follows that both development agents and development targets must 10  MAC 316 MODULE 1 understand each other to be effective.
This understanding certainly comes from communication.
The above clearly suggest that there is strong interconnection between communication and development to the extent there will be no meaningful development without communication.
Okenwa (2002) buttress this point where he says: • ‘‘Communication is central to the process of development to the extent that the dependence of one on the other has virtually been taken for granted.
To properly understand this relationship between the two concepts of communication and development, it is important to put in context the role of communication in the actualisation of the process of development.’’ So, communication and development play complementary roles.
While communication facilitates understanding of and the support for development process, development in turn leads to improved communication skills and infrastructure.
Communication and development are interconnected to the extent they play complimentary role to each other.
Communication as a social interactive process plays a number of roles in the business of development.
These include: 1.
Communication creates conducive climate for participatory development by serving as social vehicle or sharing development news and information with one another.
It reduces ignorance and increases awareness as it brings development information to the people.
So, through process of communication people gain awareness of development opportunities around them as well as what to do and how to benefit from such opportunities.
2.
Through communication people are encouraged to accept and embrace positive changes that can enhance their lives.
Communication can change, modify and enhance attitudes and behaviours as well as open people’s minds to embrace messages of development.
3.
Through communication people are usually influenced to aim high and desire good things of life.
By communicating with others, people usually develop new taste to the extent of asking questions and getting answers as to what to do to achieve those tastes.
This is development.
4.
Communication gives sense of belonging and by extension, encourages even participation and greater involvement in development.
Participatory development is all involving.
Participatory development however, requires effective communication to make it truly participatory and achieve 11  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT common frame of mind and or understanding between development agent and development targets.
5.
Communication also helps people engaged in it to understand, appreciate and support government policies and programme.
Without effective communication targets of development programmes can ignorantly work against such programmes even when the programmes were designed to better their lives.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss the interface between communication and development.
4.0 CONCLUSION Communication and development are no doubt interconnected.
Communication helps to bring development messages to the attention of development targets and stakeholders.
On the other hand, development helps to facilitate the growth and effectiveness of communication infrastructure and skill.
It is on this note that we conclude that no meaningful socio-cultural, political, economic and physical development can occur in the absence of communication.
It is also concluded that there is element of development in our conscious effort to improve on the quality and quantity of communication tools as well as the effectiveness and credibility of our communication skill.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the interconnectedness between communication and development.
You have learnt the linkage between the two concepts as well as the role of communication in development process.
You would have also learnt that communication facilitates development and that development leads to the sophistication of communication skills and media development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write and submit a two-page essay (A4 11/2 spacing) on the centrality of communication in development process and clearly state the roles of communication in development.
12  MAC 316 MODULE 1 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nwodu, L.C.
& Fab–Ukozor, N.T.
(2003).
Communication Imperatives for Development.
Enugu: John Jacobs Classic Publishers.
Nwosu , I. E. (1990).
Mass Communication and National Development.
Aba: Frontier Publishers.
Okenwa, S. (2002).
Communication and Development Process.
Enugu: Margnet Publishing Communication.
13  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT UNIT 3 MEANING AND ESSENCE OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Distinction between Urban, Rural and National Development 3.2 Essential Features of National Development 3.3 Differences between Developed and Developing Nations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Nigeria today, pockets of urban cities like Enugu, Port Harcourt, Kaduna, Kano, Lagos and Abuja abound.
These cities to some extent have essential infrastructures like good roads, functional and well equipped hospitals and school, libraries, better power supply and pipe borne water to the extent they are regarded as urban areas.
On the other side of the divide, you have numerous rural communities that grossly lack basic necessities of life with very low or minimal opportunities to earn a living.
There is a misconception therefore that improvement on the quality of life in the few urban cities easily translates to national development.
This unit is meant to clear that misconception.
The essence of this unit therefore is to explain what actually constitute national development, highlight the characteristics of national development and to distinguish between developing and developed nations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define urban, rural and national development • state specific features for determining national development • enumerate the basic distinguishing factors between developed and developing nations.
14  MAC 316 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Distinction between Urban, Rural and National Development Every nation state regardless of whether it is developed or developing is usually divided into two - the rural and urban areas.
Nigeria as a sovereign nation is not an exception.
Nigeria therefore has urban cities (like Enugu, Lagos, Port Harcourt, Abuja, Kano, Kaduna, Ibadan and Owerri).
The country also has rural areas too many to mention.
Development in any area of these divides (urban or rural areas) does not directly translate to national development.
The emphasis here therefore is to understand the meaning of urban, rural and national development beginning with urban development.
A defined area can be considered urban if it undergoes continuous process of development.
This is why urban area means “an area of continuous development” (demographic.com/ab- define.pdf).
This perhaps explains why there is heavy presence of basic necessities of life in Nigeria’s urban cities while the rural areas remain in a continuous state of lack.
In Nigeria today, urban development has received and is still receiving greater attention than rural development.
This is true to the extent that rural development are merely enshrined in the nation’s development plan while very minimal effort is usually made to extend indices of development to the rural areas.
Basic amenities like functional social institutions (e.g.
schools and hospitals), big businesses (e.g.
manufacturing companies, banks and other financial institution), government agencies and corporations (e.g.
NAFDAC and Water Boards); recreation facilities (e.g.
amusement parks and fast food industries); and ICT resources (internet and its offerings) have become common features of urban life in Nigeria.
On the other hand, Nigeria’s rural areas are afflicted with poor and un- motorable roads, inadequately or non-existent potable water supply, poorly equipped and poorly staffed schools, low commercial activities and subsistent peasant agriculture that cannot produce enough food to feed itself, how much more producing raw material for the industry (Nkala;1999).
Rural development therefore involves development action plan that seeks to provide meaningful transformation of rural man and his rural community.
It entails physical, infrastructure and human development at the rural setting.
Effective rural development should therefore aim at ensuring that indices of physical, human and material developments which have 15  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT remained common features of Nigerian cities sufficiently trickles down to the rural communities.
There is no reason Nigeria’s rural communities should not enjoy constant and adequate power and water supply; good motorable roads; mechanised agriculture; functional and well staffed social institutions, and heavy investment on human capital development, to mention a few.
From the above, it is clear that urban development is strictly concerned with development occurring in urban centres.
It is also clear that rural development is concerned with the development of the rural communities.
The question then is: what is national development?
Liuis Ramiro Beltran citied in Nwuneli (1985) broadly defined national development as: • ‘‘…a directed and widely participatory process of deep and accelerated socio-political change geared towards producing substantial change in the economy; the technology, the ecology and the overall culture of a country, so that the moral and material advancement of the majority of its population can be obtained within conditions of generalised equality, dignity, justice and liberty.’’ You will notice from this definition that national development is deeper in meaning and large in scope than urban and or rural development.
It is a development that embraces and encompasses the length and breadth of a nation.
This means that developing the urban cities in isolation of the rural areas and vice verse can hardly pass for national development.
National development therefore is more of a whole system with rural and urban development serving as the functional parts of the whole system.
By implication, a nation is said to be on course for national development when both the rural and urban areas of the nation are undergoing continuous, and sustained quantitative and qualitative positive human, material and environmental transformation.
This is why Opubor (1985) argues that “any notion or definition of development in Africa that does not take into account fundamental change, for the better in the lifestyle of the peasant farmer, the fishermen, the petty trader, the herdsmen or the labourers are grossly inadequate”.
The emphasis here is on incorporating the urban areas and rural residents into the national development action plan.
This is why Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) argues that “ a conscious effort to positively transform few urban areas within a nation without transformation of numerous rural communities cannot be equated to national development.
A true national development should as a matter of 16  MAC 316 MODULE 1 necessity involve the positive transformation of the overall nation’s human capital, physical domain and material well-being.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Distinguish between urban, rural and national development.
3.2 Essential Features of National Development In the above segment, I noted that urban development is not synonymous with national development.
I also noted that national development should go beyond urban development and extend to rural areas which Edeani (1993) argues, “holds the key to national development”.
The reasons according to Edeani are: • because of the enormous size of the rural population as compared to the small percentage living in the cities, • because of the very large share of the country’s natural resources are located in the rural areas • because of the disproportionate role which the rural population plays in the economic, social and political life of the nation.
The implication is that national development as stated earlier is an integrated and accelerated development of the entire nation – the urban, the slum, and the rural.
It is on this strength that Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) articulate the features of national development as: • A widely participatory process that involves greater number of people regardless of whether they live in a rural or an urban setting.
• Substantial economic, technological, political, cultural and ecological transformation of a nation.
Transformation here implies gradual but sustained healthy movement from a poor to enhanced state of living.
Steady growth in knowledge and the acquisition of esoteric skills by the citizens to the extent the citizens become conscious about their well- being and what to do to protect and preserve it.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain what you understand by national development with emphasis on the features of national development.
17  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 3.3 Differences between Developed and Developing Nations We may not understand the differences between developing and developed nation without first understanding the whole idea of branding very few nations ‘developed nations’ and numerous others ‘developing nations’.
According to Abott (1967) ‘our world is full of sharp contrasts.
One of the sharpest is that between the poorest nations and richest nations’.
The implication is that of all the divides or contrasts that exist in the world, the one between developing and developed nations seem to be more pronounced.
Today many nations of the world (ostensibly African, Latin American and Asian countries) are described with terms like Less Developed Countries (LDC), Underdeveloped Countries (UDC), third world countries or developing nations.
In the same contemporary times, you will still find few nations (largely in North American, Western Europe and few Asian countries like Japan) that are branded developed countries or advanced countries or even first world.
You should note that the basis for this categorisation lies on a number of factors which include but not limited to: • The state of the nations’ economy • The level of per capital income • The living standard • The adequacy and level of functional institutions • The stability or otherwise of the political system • The magnitude of physical development • The number of highly skilled manpower.
Developed nations therefore refer to the ‘countries with a per capital annual income of more than $2000 and consequent higher standard of living…’ (The Webster’s Dictionary,1992).
On the contrary, The Webster Dictionary describes developing nations as ‘countries with a commensurate poor standard of living among most of the population’.
Samuelson (1973) earlier observes, “a less developed country is simply one with real per capita income that is low relative to the present day per capita income of such nations as Canada, the United States, Great Britain and Western Europe”.
Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) further submit that “some nations are considered or termed developed because the living standards in such nations are quite high when compared to the living standards in developing nations’’.
However, if you look at it critically there are great differences between developing and developed nations.
The table below therefore provides a clearer picture of the differences between developed and developing nation.
18  MAC 316 MODULE 1 TABLE 1.1: Differences between Developed and Developing Nations Developed Nations Developing Nations High literacy level Low literacy level High per capital income Low per capital income High technological breakthrough Low technological breakthrough Adequate medical care Poor medical care High employment rate High rate of unemployment Availability of highly skilled Limited number of highly human resources skilled human resources Stable political climate Unstable political climate Practice of mechanised agriculture Engage largely in subsistence farming High living standard Very low living standard Source: Nwodu and Fab- Ukozor (2003) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Developing and developed nations differ in many respects.
Discuss.
4.0 CONCLUSION National development is not limited to urban development.
It is not also limited to rural development.
National development is simply an amalgam of both rural and urban development.
It is pertinent to conclude therefore that national development entails positive transformation of the entire nation with emphasis on improving the nation’s socio-cultural, economic, political, ecological and human capital domains.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the concept of urban, rural and national development.
The unit emphases that a nation is said to be developing nationally when the entire nation (both rural and urban) is undergoing continuous and sustained positive transformation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the concept of national development and explain the differences between developed and developing nation.
19  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nkala, N.C. (1990).
“Traditional Channels of Communication and Rural Development Policy Implementation: The Neglected Symbiotic Relations.” In: I. E Nwosu, (Ed.)
Mass Communication and National Development Perspective on the Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba; Frontier Publisher.
Nwodu, L.C.
& Fab–Ukozor, N.T.
(2003).
Communication Imperative for Development.
Enugu: John Jacob Classic Publications Ltd. Nwuneli, O. E. (1985).
Mass Communication in Nigeria: A Book of Reading.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers.
20  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT MODULE 2 OVERVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT PARADIGMS, MODELS AND THEORIES Unit 1 The Dominant Paradigm Unit 2 The Marxist/Socialist Paradigm Unit 3 The Emancipatory Paradigm UNIT 1 THE DOMINANT PARADIGM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Origin, Meaning of Dominant Paradigm 3.2 Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft Societies 3.3 The Mechanic and Organic Model of Development 3.4 The Sequential or Growth Stage Theory 3.5 Need Achievement Theory 3.6 Model of Empathy 3.7 Mass Media and National Development Model 3.8 The Diffusion of Innovations Approach 3.9 Dominant Paradigm: A Critique 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Overtime, almost all the nations of the world have been in constant search for effective approach to achieving human and material development.
In recent times this search seems to be more pronounced in developing world.
Ironically most early scholarly and professionally articulated views, models, theories and postulations relating to the development of developed world were Western-derived.
This unit will examine such exogenous theories and models with a view to pointing out their relevance in Nigeria’s national development.
21 MA C 316 MODULE 2 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the meaning of dominant paradigm • enumerate various postulations that make up the dominant paradigm as well as their proponent • highlight the relevance or otherwise of each of the postulation to Nigeria’s national development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Origin, Meaning of Dominant Paradigm The term ‘dominant paradigm’ was first used by Lerner (1976) and later described as “the supper paradigm’ by Moirtana and Wilson (1990).
According to Nwosu (1995) ‘‘the term is used to describe the set of Western-derived theories that are related to the social organisation of Western Europe and the United States of America, and upon which national development efforts in African and other underdeveloped regions have been based for nearly half a century”.
Dominant paradigm therefore is used to describe a web of early development theories developed by Western scholars and prescribed as a therapeutic response to development of African, Latin American and Asian countries.
The essence of this unit therefore is to acquaint you with major proposition of the theories that make up the dominant theories pointing out how each of them has been able to or fail to address socio-cultural, economic and physical development of the underdeveloped nations with particular reference to Nigeria.
We shall therefore, examine each of the theories below.
3.2 Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft Societies Developed by Ferdinard Tonnies, a German Philosopher, the notion of Gemeinschaft and Gesehlschaft societies could be likened to a social movement.
At the level of Gemeinschaft society according to Tonnies, people were at their traditional state.
In this state, social order is achieved on the basis of interpersonal relationship within given communities and community members.
With the dawn of industrial revolution however, the emphasis began to change from traditional, more personal bonding to what Tonnies called social bonding, a situation that gave birth to Gesellschaft society.
This society is rather a complex one made possible by industrialisation.
Unlike the traditional society therefore, the Gesellschaft society acknowledges contractual approach to relationship as a critical base for achieving social order.
Here according to Nwosu (1995) people become dependent upon those 22  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT they know, and this dependence introduces a formal, impersonal, element into social relations.
The social bonding theory therefore presupposes that developing nations can achieve national development by moving from the traditional state (Gemeinschaft) to a complex industrial society (Gesellschaft) which will guarantee them speedy development and good society.
3.3 The Mechanic and Organic Model of Development This model was developed by French Philosopher, Emile Durkheim.
The model like Tonnies model also recognises that human society should move from one stage to another to achieve even development.
The major difference is that while Tonnies advocated for a movement from traditional to industrial society, Durkheim was concerned with division of labour based on specialisation.
The development target of every society in Durkheim’s view should be a movement away from mechanic solidarity stage (which is prevalent in developing nations) to organic solidarity stage considered to be the highest stage of development.
At the organic solidarity stage therefore, individuals in society will be actively engaged in services where they have reasonable degree of expertise provided such engagement according to Durkheim does not lead to ‘anomie’ where individuals in society begin to have problem relating to one another.
3.4 The Sequential or Growth Stage Theory This theory was propounded by an American economist called Walt W. Rostow.
Bearing in mind the developing nations of Africa, Asian, Middle East and Latin American, Rostow was of the view that for underdeveloped world to transform to developed stage and sustain it, they need to pass through five stages of economic growth.
These stages which in the thinking of Rostow must be sequential are: • The traditional society which Rostow described as ‘pre- Newtonian science and technology and pre-Newtonian attitude’.
At this stage the society is largely agrarian in nature and the inhabitants are both ignorant and incapable of the use of scientific means to transform their societies.
• Pre-condition for take-off stage which is described as the level of consciousness.
According to Rostow, the society begins to realise the need to employ modern scientific approaches to its agricultural and industrial production which will in turn leads to greater investment.
• Take-off stage which signals the actual take-off action and or process of effective socio-economic transformation from traditional state to modern state.
23 MA C 316 MODULE 2 • Drive for maturity which is the stage where the economy is said to have matured to the extent it is capable of generating its own take-off free from the original industry.
• The age of high mass consumption which is the stage where the industries can comfortably produce durable and reliable consumer goods and services to the extent there will be increase in real income per head; greater demands for basic needs, rise in urban population and availability of more skilled labourers.
Rostow therefore submitted that the reason nations have remained underdeveloped is because their economies have not passed through these five stages.
The import in Rostow’s sense is that for a developing nation like Nigeria to develop and sustain the gains of development, there is need for the nation to pass through these stages sequentially.
3.5 Need Achievement Theory This theory is called N-ACH and was developed by behavioural scientist called David McClelland.
N-ACH in McClelland’s own words means the ‘desire to do well, not so much for the sake of social recognition or prestige, but to attain an inner feeling of personal accomplishment’ (McClelland, 1961).
He further argues that a nation thickly populated by people with high need for achievement is likely to do things in modernise way more than other nations.
McClelland therefore posits that a society with high achievement needs is more likely to innovate, and demonstrate high entrepreneurial drive and by extension achieve high economic development (McClelland, 1961; and Okere & Ekpe, 2002).
By implication, McClelland was concerned with the psychological perspective of development since he emphasised the achievement of accelerated economic development in the backward societies by increasing their achievement motives.
The main thrust of the theory therefore is that developing nations are not as motivated to achieve high socio-economic goals in life as people in advanced countries.
As such, the infusion of high need for achievement in third world development programmes and communication will help to awaken in them the desire to achieve greater heights and by extension lead to accelerated economic growth.
24  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 3.6 Model of Empathy The model of empathy which was developed by Daniel Lerner was the first major effort to develop a universal theory of communication and modernisation as well as suggests a causal relationship between communication and modernisation (Nwosu; 1995).
The theory tried to establish casual relationship between communication and social change/ transformation.
In Lerner’s sense, the traditional society is so inert and strictly confined in nature.
These factors therefore constitute a serious hindrance to the development of the traditional society hence Lerner argues that ‘communication strategies therefore must create the appropriate attitudinal environment for constructive activity” which can be achieved by “expanding the imagination of traditional man, giving him high capacity for identification with a new aspects of the environment”.
To Lerner therefore, possession of high empathic ability remains the key to accelerated development and good life vis-à-vis society.
As Nwosu (1998) puts it, a mobile psyche creates a mobile individual and such is the key requirement of modern industrial society.
The role of mass media here as enunciated by Lerner is to provide enlightened clue for the spread or dissemination of idea, new customs and new practices required for rapid social transformation of developing nations (Lerner, 1958).
To modernise and develop the underdeveloped nations in Lerner’s view, there is need for developing nations to be empathic of the West.
Empathy here means the ability to see things in the position of another person who is higher in social, cultural, political and economic level.
Lerner therefore posits that developing nations can usher in modern transformation of their societies by empathising with the Western industrialised nations known for their highly empathic nature.
3.7 Mass Media and National Development Model Schramm (1964) in ‘‘Mass Media and National Development Model’’ was concerned with the cost-benefit approach to communication and development.
Based on this utilitarian perspective, Schramm insists that ownership and development of mass media instrument is the key to national development.
He argues that there is a link between the heights of social development attained in a nation and ownership of mass media facilities and concludes that accessibility to modern channels of communication determines the level of individual modernity.
25 MA C 316 MODULE 2 3.8 The Diffusion of Innovations Approach Developed by Everett Rodgers and Floyd Shoemaker (1971) diffusion of innovation approach is concerned with ‘interpersonal interaction among adopters of innovation within a specific social system, and the role communication plays in the process’ (Nwosu, 1995).
According to Kartz (1978), diffusion of innovation theory was ‘the first widely accepted view of how agricultural development occurs and how it can be promoted’.
Initially the diffusion approach was concerned with the stage or process farmers had to undergo in adopting new agricultural ideas.
According to Rodgers and Shoemaker (1971), adoption of agricultural innovation demands that farmers should go through certain stages which are: • Awareness • Interest • Evaluation • Initial trial • Adoption or rejection of the innovation Rogers and Shoemaker (1971) posit that when a new idea is introduced, all the targets hardly adopt the new idea at the same time.
In other words, the speed with which people adopt varies.
The scholars therefore categorised farmers introduced to agricultural innovation into: • Innovators • Early adopters • Early majority • Late majority • Laggards It is important to note that this categorisation was based on how fast the respective groups adopt the innovation.
Nwosu (1999) submits that the mass media role in the diffusion of innovation was to bring into community ideas and information from outside - ideas and information required to assist in promoting agricultural productivity.
3.9 Dominant Paradigm: A Critique A number of criticisms have trailed the dominant paradigm with reference to its import in the development of developing nation.
Nwosu (1995) categorises these criticisms into: • External and internal forces to include the foreign policies of leading industrialised nations (like U.S. and Germany), the 26  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT policies of transnational profit making firms (for examples, IBM and Routers), international lenders (for example, Citibanks, and Chase Manhattan bank), inter government agencies (for examples International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, also called the World Bank, IMF, UNESCO, and the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, GATT),and bilateral aid agencies (for example USAID).
The snag here however is that the influence of all these external forces on the development of nations is too enormous to the extent ignoring them in development plans of developing nations will make mess of the whole development process.
For instance, the economic meltdown that hit US and other developed countries in 2009 affected Nigeria’s economy particularly the stock market till date.
In the case of internal factors, Nwosu (1995) recognises the moribund domestic economic, political and cultural structures of post-colonial Africa as anathema to development plans and execution.
• Philosophical concern which played up deficiencies in individual orientation as a hindrance to individual and societal advancement.
Instances abound as McClelland insists that only N-ACH could lead to economic growth while Rogers and Shoemaker identified exogenous ideas that are emphatic could ginger revolution of rising expectations.
The dominant paradigm therefore emphases the use of people with ‘cues’ form outside to develop less developed countries.
As Nwosu (1995) puts it, “the philosophical understanding of the dominant paradigm rested on this superior- subordinate, leader-follower, or master-servant relationship’.
The import is that the dominant paradigm is a highly problematic approach to development of nations.
The reason being that the patron-client approach to development totally negates the principle of participation and inclusion which are essential in development process.
• Another criticism of the dominant paradigm is that the proponents were busy thinking for and not thinking with the people, even when they lack clear understanding of societal context under which the model was to operate.
A development model or paradigm that stresses industrialisation and behavioural change as a key to developing underdeveloped nations requires in-depth understanding of the nation’s socio-economic and cultural settings and realities.
This important fact was not taken into consideration by the proponents of the dominant paradigm or the Western model of development.
While Nwosu (1986) argues that the dominant paradigm failed in Africa because of lack of understanding that “tradition is an integral part of national life”, Myren (1974) was more blunt where the scholar says: 27 MA C 316 MODULE 2 • ‘‘One of the serious errors (with the psychological theories) has been the way we have gone about testing overseas generalisation based on research in the US.
Several years of elated reports and journals articles were devoted to proving that the same generalisation applied overseas.
It was only when we found that we did not have a body of useful knowledge for the development goals at hand.’’ • This perhaps explains why Rodgers (1976) modified his position to reflect the “synchronisation of old and new” implying a blend of traditional and modern ways of doing things rather than insisting on the abandonment of traditional life style as the only way of doing things right in Africa.
• The last major criticism against the dominant paradigm is that the paradigm over relied on the mass media as the magic wand for the development of poorly developed nations.
The works of Lerner, Rodgers, Schramm and Durkheim for instance claimed the social consequence of industrial age is that it tended to dislocate, disconnect and isolate the individual from the amorphous mass society.
Therefore mass media are needed to point the direction the individual must follow for personal and by extension, social transformation and advancement (Beltran, 1976).
This is the whole idea about the all powerful media effects which pre-supposes that mass media have absolute power to change and or reinforce opinions, attitudes and behaviours to the extent the audience members respond to mass media directives hook, line and sinker.
This assumption has been widely criticised for ignoring the fact that there are other intervening variables that can reinforce mass mediated messages to be effective.
While Katz and Lazersfeld (1955) documented evidence of mass media limited effects, Blumler and Katz (1974); Lometh, Reeves and Bybee (1977); and Stromane and Becker (1978) among others have also documented evidences of uses and gratifications as properties and factors behind individual exposure and preference to specific mass media content.
All these show that mass media do not actually possess all powerful effects.
Starosta (1976) summarises the criticisms this way: • ‘‘Mass media do not and generally cannot persuade anyone to adopt a new practice.
While media energise, stimulate, introduce, prod, implore, or create a climate conducive to, they still reach primarily those groups high in media exposure and usually favourably predisposed toward change.’’ 28  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify and discuss the major criticisms experts hold against the dominant paradigm of development.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit discussed the dominant paradigm of development.
It concludes that the application of dominant paradigm in the development process of developing nations failed because of its over reliance on outside ‘cues’ and mass media.
The paradigm also failed because it failed to recognise the traditional aspects of developing countries that are germane for positive social development.
5.0 SUMMARY Dominant paradigm is a collection of various early development thoughts, theories and model.
This term, dominant paradigm, is largely anchored on western-derived theories (mainly from Western Europe and America).
Major propositions of the paradigm were that development process in underdeveloped countries will thrive if: • Societies move away from tradition-bound to a complex modern one based on industrialisation.
• Development of the underdeveloped nations follows a linear sequential process from traditional society to pre-condition to take-off stage to drive to modernity and finally the age of mass consumption.
• Individuals in primitive society change or modify their orientations and behaviour to suit that of individuals in advanced societies.
That if the individuals in less advanced societies willingly adopt cues from outsiders (that is advanced nations of the west) while abandoning traditional ways of doing things, the nation will develop and modernised.
Mass mediated messages should be extensively utilised to fashion out new taste, attitudes and behaviours which people in developing nations should follow to achieve national development.
This unit also discussed the major criticisms against the dominant paradigm which can be summarised as follow: • The paradigm failed to take into consideration the external forces like industrial policies of the West, policies of transnational profit making firms and intergovernmental agencies which have strong impact on the national development plans.
29 MA C 316 MODULE 2 • The emphasis on individual deficit orientation which made the proponents to claim that only individuals that have high N-ACH; adhere to cues from outside; and have attributes of the West can modernise and by extension attract sustainable national development is a fallacy.
• The proponents of the dominant paradigm lack proper understanding of the social context under which the model was to operate.
The thinking that the mass media possess all powerful effects to the extent of speeding up diffusion of innovations and encouraging immediate behaviour change was a bogus claim by the proponents.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What do you understand by the term ’dominant paradigm’?
ii.
Discuss three aspects of the paradigm and offer informed criticisms of the failure of the paradigm in gingering national development in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anaeto, S.G. & Solo-Anaeto, M. S. (2010).
Development Communication: Principle and Practice.
Ibadan: Stircing-Hordan Publishers Ltd. Beltran, L. (1976).
“Alien Promises, Objects ND Methods.” Communication Research, 3, pp 107- 37.
Blunler, J.
& Katz E. (Eds).
(1974).
The Uses Of Mass Communication: Current Perspectives on Gratifications Approach.
Beverly Hill, CA: Sage Publications.
Katz, E. & Larzasfeld, P. (1955).
Personal Influences: The Part Played by People in the Flow of Mass Communications.
Glencoe: Free Press.
Kearl, B.
(1976).
‘‘Communication for Agricultural Development.” In: W.Schramm & D. Lerner, (Eds).
Communication and Change in the Developing Countries.
Honolulu: The University Press of Hawaii.
Lerner, D. (1956).
The Passing of Traditional Society.
New York: The Free Press.
30  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Lometh, G., Revees, B.
& Bybee, C. (1977).
“Investigating the Assumptions of Uses and Gratifications Research.” Communication Research, (4) 321-337.
McClelland, D. (1961).
The Achieving Society.
Prinecton, New Jersy: Van Nostrand Company Inc. Myren, D. (1974).
‘Comments on the Beltran and Colle Papers.’ In: Proceedings on Communication Strategies for Rural Development.
Ithaca, New York: New York State College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2006).
“Research and ICTs Relevance in Innovation Diffusion.” The Nigeria Journal of Communications, Vol.4, Nos.
1 &2 pp.
100-108.
Nwosu, P. (1986).
“The Dominant Paradigm and Social Change: Toward a New Model of Mass Communication for National Development in Black Africa.’ M.A.
Thesis.
Towson State University.
P. Nwosu, , C.
Onwumechili,., R. M’Bayo (Eds).
(1995) “Development Theory and Communication: An Overview.” In: Communication and the Transformation of Society: A Developing Region Perspectives.
New York: University Press of America, Inc. Okereke, O.O.
& Ekpe, A. E. (2002).
Development and Underdevelopment: Politics of the North-South Divide.
Enugu: John Jacobs Classic Publishers.
Rodgers, E. (1976).
Communication and Development: Critical Perspectives.
Beverly Hills, California: Sage.
Rodgers, E. & Shoemaker, F. (1962).
Diffusion of Innovations.
New York: The Free Press.
Schramm, W. (1964).
Mass Media and National Development.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Starosta, W. (1976).
“The Village Level Worker as Rhetorician: An Adaptation of Diffusion Theory.” Central States Speech Journal.
Summer.
pp.
144-150.
31 MA C 316 MODULE 2 Stroman, C. & Becker, L. (1978).
“Racial Differences in Gratifications.” Journalism Quarterly, 55 pp.767-771.
Rostow, W.W. (1962).
The Stages of Economic Growth.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
32  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT UNIT 2 THE MARXIST/SOCIALIST PARADIGM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dominant and Marxist Paradigm Compared 3.2 Major Premise of Marxist Paradigm 3.3 Criticisms against Marxist Paradigm 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Marxist/socialist ideology like the dominant paradigm influenced to a large extent, the knowledge of national development.
Any discussion on development thoughts would be incomplete therefore without mention being made about the Marxist paradigm of development.
This unit therefore is meant to expose you to the Marxist paradigm.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the point of convergence and point of departure between the dominant and the Marxist paradigm • highlight the basic features or propositions of Marxist paradigm • explain snag or failure of the Marxist paradigm, among others.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dominant and Marxist Paradigm Compared Overtime, the socio-political, economic and cultural environments of the West (North America and Western Europe) has been at variance with that of the Eastern Europe.
While the West for instance, advocated for private ownership of means of production and distribution, the Eastern bloc preferred public ownership of same.
These variations in ownership of production and distribution also affected their approaches to national development.
However, there are areas of commonality between the two paradigms.
These points of convergence which you should know are: 33 MA C 316 MODULE 2 • Both paradigms recognise economic growth and material wealth as the cardinal products of any development process.
The implication is that national development process must lead to economic growth as well as create conducive climate for material wealth.
• Both paradigms agree that communication is very crucial in any development process particularly at the national level.
In spite of these areas of convergence, the Marxism/socialist paradigm differ significantly from the dominant paradigm in terms of their approach to or strategy for achieving and sustaining economic growth.
Thus, the dominant paradigm perceived development as a process of change beginning from the top and trickle down, a sort of master-servant approach to development.
On the other hand, the Marxist viewed development as a participatory process that should not only involve the masses but also begin with them.
Mowlana and Wilson (1990) vividly describe development in the Marxist paradigm context as: • ‘‘The process from below, where through an elaborate feedback of political and economic machinery, the masses can participate in the production and distribution of cultural messages.
Consequently, communication can generate awareness and help organise and mobilise the masses for political change leading to economic and social development.’’ 3.2 Major Premise of Marxist Paradigm The Marxist paradigm was largely influenced by thinking and writing of Marx and Engels.
In their thinking, communication is an essential tool for society’s development.
It is for this reason that Marx and Wilson, (1990) argues that “communication is nothing more, nor nothing less, than the articulation of the social relations between people.
In a profound sense, communication is one of the most unique products and producers of society’s development”.
According to Mowlana and Wilson (1990) communication in Marxist sense becomes “a set of ideological formations that usually follow the patterns of material production in the society, contributing a factor of dynamism to the process”.
The implication is that communication in the context of Marxist paradigm is to a large extent, the major organ for mobilising the masses towards mass participation in development programmes.
The over-emphasis placed on communication in this development model clearly explains why the Marxist/socialist societies operated a highly centralised mass communication model controlled by the party hierarchy.
34  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT The major premises of Marxist development model therefore lie on the following socio-economic, political and cultural conditions.
• Major policy decisions on any given development project should be taken at the party hierarchy level.
Note that the society operated as one party state in which case voices of dissent are hardly entertained but the party voice.
In this case, the party voice easily becomes the voice of the masses.
• The instrument of mass communication should be highly centralised and strictly controlled by the party hierarchy.
• Specific development decisions taken at the party hierarchy should be disseminated via the mass media and party officials using propaganda, brainwashing, self-criticism and related techniques considered highly effective for mass mobilisation.
• The mass media disseminated messages should target a network of groups based at local levels for effective implementation of the programme.
3.3 Criticisms against Marxist Paradigm According to Nwosu (1990) Marxist model of communication and development planning “has found acceptance in a number of African nations notably Tanzania, Angola and Mozambique”.
Nwosu, further observed that development programmes in such areas as agriculture, politics, education and health were anchored on this development model.
Although this model of development recorded some success in Tanzania (Nyerere, 1968), it is not without some criticisms.
Thus, a number of criticisms have trailed this model of development.
Ugboaja (1986) documented the major criticism against this model of development as: • One way directional approach to development originally from the party hierarchy and communicated via the mass media to the masses.
Note that this top-down approach was one of the things the proponents of Marxist philosophy hold against the dominant paradigm.
The model is also non-democratic since it does not make room for involving the people at the level of initiation and planning of development programmes.
The implication is that the model totally negates the principle of participation and inclusion.
The alienation of the potential and or substantive development beneficiaries at the very beginning of development conception is considered to be grossly anti- development.
The latest major criticism against Marxist model is that the extensive use of propaganda, brainwashing, self-criticism, misinformation, 35 MA C 316 MODULE 2 disinformation and sundry misleading information is unacceptable as it can lead to mass action if the masses discover their psyche were being manipulated in the name of development (Nwodu,2007).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention and discuss the major pitfalls of Marxist paradigm of development.
4.0 CONCLUSION Marxist model of development originated from Eastern Europe.
It was the sole model of development in the then Soviet Union, China, Cuba and some East Africa countries.
The model emphases the use of party hierarchy to make specific development decision while mass media should be used to disseminate the development messages to the masses for purpose of achieving mass mobilisation.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the Marxist socialist paradigm of development.
Precisely, the unit discussed the similarities and differences between the dominant paradigm and the Marxist paradigm.
It also discussed the major premises of the Marxist paradigm.
The unit concludes with the criticism against the Marxist model of development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT In the Marxist/socialist context of development, centralised mass communication system is considered the key to national development.
Discuss this with emphasis on the major premises of Marxist model of development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Mowlana, H. & Wilson, L. (1990).
The Passing of Modernity: Communication and Transformation of Society.
New York and London: Longman.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2007).
‘Managing Development Communication Campaign for Sustainable Human Development.” In: I. E. Nwosu,, N.T.
Fab-Ukozor, & L.C.
Nwodu (Eds).
Communication for Sustainable Human Development: A Multi-Perspective Approach.
Enugu: ACCE Enugu state.
36  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Nwosu, P. (1995).
“ Development Theory and Communication: An Overview.” In: P. Nwosu, C. Onwumechili, & R. M’ Bayo (Eds).
Communication and Transformation of Society: A Development Region Perspective.
Lanhane, New York: University Press of America, inc. Nyerere, J.
(1968).
Ujama Nairobo: Oxford Unversity Press.
Ugboaja, F. (1986).
“Communication as Technology in Africa Rural Development.” Africa Media Review, 1(1).
pp.
1-19.
Wilson, D. (2011).
Communication for Social Change and Development.
Uyo: ACCE Nigeria.
37 MA C 316 MODULE 2 UNIT 3 THE EMANCIPATORY PARADIGM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Evolution of Emancipatory Paradigm 3.2 Emancipatory Paradigm and National Development 3.3 Criticism against Participatory Approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The search for a more pragmatic model that would drive national development programme particularly in developing countries like Nigeria has been a continuous one.
The emancipatory approach is yet another paradigm that differs from both the dominant and Marxist paradigms.
The essence of this unit is to discuss the emancipatory paradigm.
You are therefore expected to read this unit carefully so as to understand what makes the paradigm different from the other paradigms we have discussed already.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the origin of the paradigm • enumerate the circumstances that lead to the evolution of the paradigm • explain the differences between the paradigm and others paradigms before it • state the major premise of the emancipatory paradigm.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Evolution of Emancipatory Paradigm Emancipatory paradigm is largely an intellectual product of developing countries.
The paradigm emerged in the development literature in the mid 1970s and early 1980s.
It is an endogenous development paradigm which served as an alternative national development paradigm.
It is endogenous in the sense that the paradigm originated from developing 38  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT countries as against the dominant/capitalist and Marxist/socialist paradigms which were all exogenous thinking originating from the Western Europe/North America and Eastern Europe/China.
It is worthy to note therefore that emancipatory paradigm as the name implies was conceived as a response to the failure of both the dominant and Marxist paradigms in providing practicable solutions to the development needs of developing nations.
3.2 Emancipatory Paradigm and National Development As noted earlier, this paradigm came into existence as response to the failure of earlier paradigms of national development.
The major concern of the proponents therefore is on how to get the targets of social development, the masses precisely, to be actively involved in the development process right from the period of initiation to period of implementation and evaluation.
The proponents therefore argued that though “economic and political development are important, they are not the most important goals of development as the dominant or socialist models perceive them’’ (Nwosu, 1995).
The paradigm is therefore hinged on the following premises.
1.
National development in developing nations should not be limited to economic and political development.
It should extend to qualitative society-based growth which should lead to the emancipation of the masses from all forms of poverty.
2.
The process of national development should begin at the community level rather than from the centre or nation-state.
The emphasis here is on active participation and engaged dialogue between change agents and the clientele or change beneficiaries at every level of social change process.
3.
The use of all forms of communication technology (traditional and modern communication instrument) is very crucial for spreading or disseminating development messages and goals.
The implication is that the emancipatory paradigm believes that people in developing countries are in bondage of some sort and need to be emancipated.
The proponents were therefore of the view that the best way of emancipating the clienteles from the shackle of poverty is to engage them in participatory development process.
Scholars like Woods (1977), Moemeka (1985), Ugboaja (1986) Mody (1991), Nwosu (1990), and of recent, Okunna (2002), Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) and Nwodu (2007) have all documented evidences of effectiveness of the participatory approach in social transformation of lives and infrastructures in developing nations.
39 MA C 316 MODULE 2 3.3 Criticism against Participatory Approach Although this paradigm sounded good and more real in addressing social development in Africa, there is also a misgiving that the implementation is fraught with some faults.
According to Nwosu (1995), “the problem…is that while several claims to involve the citizenry in development projects and programmes, involvement or participation has been only at one level - the level of project/programme implementation”.
Nwosu (1990) had earlier pointed out that “involvement or participation at the other level, i.e.
in programme initiation and formulation has often been ignored or overlooked”.
This indeed is a major snag with the emancipatory paradigm of development.
Apart from this snag, the paradigm has remained the most effective development paradigm for Africa’s development.
It is for this reason that Nwosu (1995) advocated for “a dualistic participatory approach to communication and development’’.
What this means is that the citizens should be involved from the level of programme formulation to the level of implementation.
Nwodu (2007) reinforces this where he advocates for “multiple participatory approach” as against the “dualistic participatory approach”.
The multiple participation approach according to Nwodu would aim at involving the people at every stage of the development process beginning from the level of initiation or ideation, to the level of crystallisation, implementation and evaluation.
His argument is that we may not clearly ascertain the significant impact of development programme on the beneficiaries without involving the beneficiaries who should actually tell what they benefited from the development programme at the level of evaluation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain what you understand by emancipatory paradigm of development stating clearly the circumstance that led to the evolution of the paradigm.
4.0 CONCLUSION Discussions in this unit clearly shows that exogenous ideas or ‘cues’ from outside can hardly provide realistic answers to social development problems in developing countries.
The major reason is that such ideas hardly take into account the cultural realities of the developing nations.
So, neither the dominant (capitalists) paradigm nor the Marxist (socialist) paradigm is fit to drive national development programmes in 40  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT developing countries.
This is why emancipatory paradigm based on multiple participatory approach is recommend as the most effective and realistic paradigm of development in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the emancipatory paradigm of development as an alternative paradigm to dominant and Marxist paradigms of social development.
Thus, the how and why the paradigm evolved were discussed in addition to understanding how the paradigm applies to national development process.
The unit was wrapped up with criticisms against emancipatory paradigm of development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the circumstance that led to the evolution of emancipatory paradigm of development and state how the paradigm applies to development process in developing nations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Mody, B.
(1991).
Designing Massages for Development Communication: An Audience Participation-Based Research.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Moemeka, A.A. (1985).
“Communication in National Development: The Use of the Mass Media in Rural Development.” Information Yugoslavia 17 (1&2): 177-185.
Nwodu, L.C.
&Fab-Ukozor, N.T.
(2003).
Communication Imperatives for Development.
Enugu: John Jacobs Classic Publishers.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2007).
‘‘Managing Development Communication Campaign for Sustainable Human Development.’’ In: I. E.
Nwosu,., N.T.
Fab-Ukozor & L.C.
Nwodu (Eds).
Communication for Sustainable Human Development: A Multi-perspective Approach.
Enugu: ACCE Enugu State.
Nwosu, P. O.
(1990).
“Communication and Agricultural Development in Swaziland: Towards a Need–Based Integrative Model.” Ph.
D Dissertation, Howard University, Washington, D.C. 41 MA C 316 MODULE 2 Nwosu, P. O.
(1995).
“A Dualistic Participatory Framework for a Need- Based Approach to Development Communication: Lessons from Swaziland.” In: P. Nwosu,, C. Onwumechili, & R. M’Bayo (Eds.).
Communication and the Transformation of Society: A Development Regions Perspectives.
Larnhan: University of America, Inc. Okunna, C.S.
(2002).
“A Quick Look at Development Communication.” In: Okunna, C.S.
(Ed.).
Teaching Mass Communication: A Multi- Dimensional Approach.
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Ugboaja, F. (1986).
“Communication as Technology in Africa Rural Development.” African Media Review, 1 (1) pp 1-9.
Woods, J.
(1977).
“Planned Development and Transfer of Technology.” Bangkok: UNDP Working Paper, No.
3.
42  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT MODULE 3 STRATEGIES FOR APPLYING COMMUNICATION IN NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 Patron-Client Model Unit 2 ACADA Model Unit 3 Social Marketing Approach UNIT 1 PATRON-CLIENT MODEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Patron-Client Model 3.2 The Snag of Patron-Client Model 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You may have observed from our discussions in module one and two that communication is an indispensable tool for national development.
The whole of this module will be devoted to exploring various strategic ways of applying communication in national development process.
Precisely, this unit is concerned with exploring the earliest approach to using communication for national development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the meaning of patron-client model • explain the nature of communication flow under patron-client approach • analyse the burden or problem associated with patron-client approach.
43 MA C 316 MODULE 3 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Patron-Client Model Patron-client approach to managing communication for development is about the earliest attempt to apply communication in development process.
It is a fall out of the dominant paradigm in which development is viewed from exogenous (that is outside) idea and lorded over people.
It is also based on the earlier notion of bullet theory syndrome.
In this context, mass media contents were viewed as possessing magical powers of shaping audience members’ attitudes and behaviours.
In other words, the audience members’ response to mass media contents as intended by those who package the contents.
It is for this reason that earlier attempt at using communication for development was hinged on the patron-client approach.
This approach therefore does not allow targets of development massages to participate in the planning of development communications campaigns/messages that affect their interest.
The common assumption here is that the change agent (or the communicator) understands perfectly well the needs of the change beneficiaries (the audience).
The patron-client model therefore operates on the basis of using information from either foreign or urban- centered mass media to mobilise the rural people for development action.
According to Nwosu (1990): • ‘‘The communication media under this arrangement were supposed to aid and abet this patron-client relationship by emphasising the flow of most development-orientated information from the patrons (e.g.
government health, agriculture and policy agencies) located in the urban areas to the grassroots people in the rural areas, supposed clients or beneficiaries of development efforts.’’ The implication is that the primary development function of mass media of communication under patron-client or master-servant approach is to propagate or spread information from the patron who probably is not in touch with the development problem and realities of the clients.
In this case, the inordinate ambition or interest of the patron (which could be the governments, the rulers, the elites or the bureaucrats) supersede that of the masses and the media role of championing true national development projects (Nwosu, 1990) as well as the purveyance of basic needs-information that flow from or are packaged mainly from the perspectives of the patron to the clients or rural dwellers at the receiving end of these development projects (Fair, 1987).
44  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 3.2 The Snag with Patron-Client Model Development communication literature is no doubt, replete with several snags associated with patron-client approach to development.
Majority of literature also point to the fact that this approach was largely responsible for the development failures of most developing nations of which Nigeria is one (Nwosu, 1990; Nwosu, 1995 and Nwodu and Fab- ukozor, 2003).
However, the major snag associated with the patron-client approach is that it tends to alienate rather than integrate the clients who should be the actual beneficiaries of development projects.
Another snag is that the approach uses arm-chair development experts and communicators who sit at the comfort of their urban offices and homes and formulate as well as execute national development policies.
True national development should therefore aim at involving the change agents and the change beneficiaries in a healthy empirically guided dialogue to understand the actual development problems facing the change beneficiaries and how the problems can be effectively and collectively tackled.
4.0 CONCLUSION Patron-client model is certainly not a good approach to managing communication for national development.
This is because the model does not make room for healthy interaction between the change agent and the change beneficiaries.
Again, the model does not create conducive atmosphere for proper articulation of realistic development problems facing the nation particularly at the rural level/settings.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the patron-client approach to managing communication for national development was discussed.
Summary of the discussion is that the model was anchored partly on the all powerful media effects model and target on the dominant paradigm model.
The major issues discussed included the meaning and the criticisms against the dominant model.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the meaning of patron-client model pointing out the major snags associated with the model.
45 MA C 316 MODULE 3 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fair, J. E. (1987).
“The Role of the Media in Patron Relations: A Preliminary Look.” Paper Presented at the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication (AEJMC), August 3-6.
Nwodu, L.C.
& Fab- Ukozor, N.T.
(2003).
Communication Imperatives for Development.
Enugu: John Jacob Classic Publishers.
Nwosu, I. E. ( 1990) “Mass Media and Rural Development: An Analysis of Some Basic Cases, Theories and Strategies.” In: I.E.
Nwosu (Ed.).
Mass Communication and National Development.
Aba: Frontier Publishers.
Nwosu, P.O.
(1995).
“ A Dualistic Participatory Framework for a Need- Based Approach to Development Communication Lessons from Swaziland.” In: P.O.
Nwosu, C. Onwumechili & R. M’Bay, (Eds.).
Communication and the Transformation of Society; A Developing Regions’ Perspectives.
Lanhan: University Press of American, Inc. 46  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT UNIT 2 ACADA MODEL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The First A Component of ACADA Model 3.2 The CA Component of ACADA Model 3.3 The D Component of ACADA Model 3.4 The Last A Component of ACADA Model 3.5 The Major Shortcoming of ACADA Model 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The concept of ‘ACADA’ is an acronym that represents integrated communication activities for effective delivery of social change campaign.
The approach was developed by UNICEF.
According to Nwodu (2005) “ACADA model is an alternative development communication planning model that emphases thorough, realistic, practical and sustained communication approach to the evolution, design and delivery of social change campaign”.
ACADA therefore stands for assessment, communication analyses, design and action (UNICEF and Polio Partners, 2000).
In this unit, effort shall be made to explore how various components of ACADA communication planning matrix or model applies to communication action for national development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the full meaning of ACADA model • discuss what should be done at each stage of the planning matrix with vivid examples • highlight the snag with the model.
47 MA C 316 MODULE 3 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The First A Component of ACADA Model The first ‘A’ component of ACADA model stands for assessment.
It implies that before communication skills could be applied to any development process, the development agents must first assess the magnitude of the problem.
Assessment therefore calls for the collection of baseline information regarding the development problem.
The implication is that assessment is the very first step to understanding and managing national development problem facing the citizenry.
The essence of assessment which is also called pre-project analysis in some literature is to ascertain what constitute the actual development needs or problems to and how best the needs or problems can be fixed.
Nwodu (2007) elaborates on this where he informs that assessment is meant to collect via empirical means, baseline information regarding: • The nature and dimension of the problem or social issues for which intervention programme is being planned.
• To ascertain the very locality where the problem actually exist, which segment of the population should be targeted and why.
• To ascertaining existing physical infrastructure in the target area and other facilities needed to facilitate healthy relationship and interaction between change agents and change participants-cum- beneficiaries.
• Determining the major and minor partners that should support the campaign for social change in terms of funding and helping to influence others.
3.2 The CA Component of ACADA Model The CA component of ACADA model represents communication analysis.
It serves as a follow up to problem assessment.
At the level of communication analysis, the change agent is expected to evolve a realistic problem analysis with emphasis on determining aspects of the problem communication is capable of solving.
According to UNICEF and Polio Partners (2000) • ‘‘The problem identified during assessment may not be problems in their own right but manifestations, causes or explanations of the main problems.
It is important then to begin analysis with the development problem itself rather than discussing which media to use or what message to disseminate.
Only after painting a clear picture of the problem will it become evidence which groups of 48  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT people needed to be involved in the communication programme.’’ Proper assessment of the problem will make for easy articulation of problem statement.
A problem statement should therefore be succinct, precise and perceivable.
It should clearly indicate the location where the problem is most prevalence; the magnitude of the problem expressed in percentage(s); the segment of the population that is mostly affected; and the period the problem usually manifested among others.
Below is a typical example of a problem statement: • Country X had low average, 35 per cent for measles and 45 per cent for Polio among children 0-5 years of age, in the years of 1985 and 1986 (date recoded during routine immunisations) resulting in increased incidence and the absence of outreach service for populations in rural regions and urban high-density areas (UNICEF and Polio Partners, 2000).
Note that the above problem statement is very lucid and brief.
It rightly summarises the outcome of the assessment by painting a vivid picture of the situation on ground.
However, communication analysis does not end with the conceptualisation of problem statement.
It also extends to determining the aspect of the problem that communication can solve by defining in concrete terms the communication objectives – that is.
the purpose the communication for development is going to serve.
Nwodu (2005) offers a typical example of how to state communication objectives here: • ‘‘By the end of 2006, over 75% of parents and guardian will not only shun female genital mutilation (FGM) but will also encourage relatives, friends and neighbours to desist from such act as well as report any incident of FGM to appropriate authority.’’ With a concrete communication objective such as above it is clear that communication will play a number of role in addressing the already establish socio-cultural and health development problem associated with female genital mutilation, now Female Genital Cutting (FGC).
The role of communication includes among others to champion campaign against the socio-cultural practice which is inimical to human health; expose the dangers associated with the practice, mobilise support for the campaign and ginger advocacy even at interpersonal levels that would reinforce the mass media campaign.
It is important to note that communication objectives must not be stated in terms of what communication can do.
It must be stated in terms of the desired result the change agents expect to achieve at the end of the campaign/project cycle.
49 MA C 316 MODULE 3 Note also that a good communication analysis according to Nwodu (2007) further involves developing participant’s profile; ascertaining and blending participants’ media use pattern with available and accessible media existing in the area, among others.
3.3 The ‘D’ Component of ACADA Model This component which is the final step in analysis represents design.
Three things are most critical at this stage of analysis and these according to UNICEF and Polio-Partners (2000) are: a.
Determining message concepts that will bring about the desired behaviour change which should take into consideration the nature of the change targets or development beneficiaries; the behaviours to promote and factors likely to encourage the targets to adopt the desired attitude or action.
b.
Selecting the communication approach which could be any or combination of these: informing, entertaining, persuading, educating and empowering.
Note that communication approach should not be based on intuition or sentiment.
Whichever approach or combination of approaches to be taken here should depend largely on the research-based and established communication problems.
c. Choosing the message appeal and tone which should also be anchored on research findings and the desired behaviour to promote the message appeal and tone could be any or combination of these: positive or negative; rational or emotional; mass or individual; humorous or serious; one or two-sided; direct or indirect; definite or open-ended; and from a peer or from an authority.
To sum up, Nwodu (2005) adds that design involves developing plans for message development, material development, dissemination, training and plan of action.
3.4 The Last ‘A’ Component of ACADA Model Having assessed the development problem and analysis for communication situation and design, the last step is to put plans into action.
The last A component of ACADA model therefore represents action.
This therefore is the stage of implementation.
According to Nwodu (2007), ‘‘this is the stage where the overall communication plans for social development are put into action and monitored effectively with right caliber of manpower and material resources for optimum result”.
50  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT The communication for development planners should therefore develop strategic plans of action for effective implementation of the development programme.
The plan of action must therefore indicate activities to be executed on specific days or weeks or months.
A diary or calendar providing information on the delivery/implementation schedule for the activities should be developed and followed religiously to be effective.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify and explain how various components of ACADA Model apply to the management of communication for national development.
4.0 CONCLUSION The ACADA model, as you have seen from the above discussion is an integrated communication planning matrix for social development.
Although the proponents of the model did not mention feedback which is essential in communication action plan, the model has been proving to be effective in the management of communication for development.
One major aspect of national development that the model applies mostly is in the areas that concern behavioural change.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed various dimension of ACADA communication planning matrix as an effective strategy for managing communication for national development.
Thus, all the components of the acronym were explained with fitting examples.
Summary of the discussions showed that effective communication for development should begin with empirical assessment of the problem.
This is preceded by communication analysis and message design before the actual action should commence.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Using one socio-cultural problem impinging on Nigeria’s development, discuss how you can apply ACADA model in solving the problem.
Your answer must include well stated problem statement and communication objective.
51 MA C 316 MODULE 3 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nwodu, L. C. (2007).
“Managing Development Communication Campaign for Sustainable Human Development.” In: I.E.
Nwosu, N. T. Fab-ukozor, & L.C.
Nwodu (Eds.).
Communication for Sustainable Human Development: A Multi-Perspective Approach.
Enugu: ACCE, Enugu State.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2005).
“ACADA Model and Social Change Campaign in Nigeria.” Journal of Media Studies; Vol.1, No.1.
UNICEF and Polio-Partners (2006).
Communication Handbook for Polio Eradication and Routine EPI.
New York: UNICEF.
52  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT UNIT 3 SOCIAL MARKETING APPROACH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Evolution of 5Ps of Marketing 3.2 Application of Social Marketing Concept to National Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The 5Ps of marketing is one of the effective models change agents now being adopted in the management communication for national development.
This is because of its realistic application in communication plans and actions for national development.
In this unit therefore, we shall discuss how various components of 5Ps of marketing apply in the process of communication for development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the evolution of 5Ps of the social marketing concept • state the various components of the 5Ps of marketing • analyse how the 5Ps of marketing can be applied in the process of communication for development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Evolution of 5Ps of Marketing The hallmark of marketing is to achieve maximum customer satisfaction.
It is on this premise that the social marketing concept was developed as a customer-centered approach to the spreading of goods and services.
However, unlike the traditional goal of marketing which is profit-oriented, social marketing concept operates on the basis of non- profit making.
The emphasis on social marketing therefore is on the “propagation of social development values primarily as charitable and non-profit making venture (Nwodu, 2007).
According to Nwosu and Uffoh (2005): “…social marketing is based on the new marketing 53 MA C 316 MODULE 3 concept’s insistence that we must be customer-oriented and customer- driven in all that we do (e.g.
decision planning and execution) in order to give maximum satisfaction to his needs”.
The marketing concept was developed by McCarthy (1982).
Then it was the 4Ps of marketing which stands for product, price place and promotion.
However, the fifth P which stands for politics was added by Nwosu (1993).
3.2 Application of Social Marketing Concept in National Development Any discussion on the application of social marketing in national development certainly requires clear understanding of each component of the 5Ps of marketing.
It is necessary therefore to explore how each component fits into communication activities for national development.
So the first “P” in marketing context stands for product.
But in the context of mass communication and national development, the product becomes the national development project, idea or programme.
According to Nwodu (2007) products here “could be attitudes, behaviours, practice or other cultural products development agents have packaged for adoption or rejection by the beneficiaries”.
By implication, product could be national campaign for attitude change like the ‘‘Rebranding Nigeria Campaign’’.
It could also be physical infrastructure development like rural electrification project.
The second ‘‘P’’ which stands for price refers to the sacrifice which development beneficiaries has to make to gain from the development programme.
According to Nwosu and Uffoh (2005), the price component of social marketing concept represents “…such things as the time, energy, habit change, efforts and the few sacrifices to be spent or made by the members of the target population”.
This requires that communication planners for national development should of necessity articulate the prices to be paid by development beneficiaries and where possible quantify them in relation to what the target population would gain in the process”.
Physical development for instance will eat into the arable agricultural lands of the beneficiaries and that becomes the price they have to pay in order to enjoy better social infrastructure.
The third ‘‘P’’ represents place.
The emphasis here is on physical environment.
In the context of national development, it refers to place of contact for sharing of innovative ideas or distribution of materials that can enhance the well-being of the beneficiaries with less friction.
This for instance may refer to where to distribute fertilisers or mosquito nets to ensure it gets to the actual farmer or households in dire need of it.
It may also refer to determining the actual place where nursing mothers 54  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT can obtain necessary information regarding effective exclusive breastfeeding practice.
The fourth ‘‘P’’ represents promotion.
This is where communication plays key role.
The emphasis here is on the use of appropriate marketing mix to ensure wide spread of necessary information regarding the national development project, programme and or idea.
According to Nwosu and Uffoh (2005) the elements of the promotional mix include “such practices as advertising, event marketing/management, direct mail, publicity etc (non-personal methods) and face-to-face, house to house, telephone and other (personal methods)’.
Buttressing this point, Nwodu (2007:23) adds: • ‘‘Promotion here therefore means sustained dissemination of integrated Communication action or campaign for effective mobilisation of the development target for active participation in the intervention programme.
The promotion here is akin to use of multi-media approach in mobilising target for participatory development.’’ The final ‘‘P’’ which was added in marketing literature by Nwosu (1993) refers to politics.
It entails clear identification and utilisation of the political dimension of development.
Again, politics here requires that development agents should explore the potentials of the political actors and actions to ensure successful implementation of development plan/projects.
Identifying with political actors and winning their support and sympathy according to Nwodu (2007), will “influence the generality of their followers and admirers to identify with, adopt and help propagate the social development programme message to others”.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain how the components of social marketing concept help in managing communication for national development in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION Social marketing concept applies well in managing communication for national development.
Understanding its various components and how they apply to communication action for national developments is important.
Potential and substantive development agents therefore need this basic knowledge to help spread message of national development within the respective locale.
55 MA C 316 MODULE 3 5.0 SUMMARY This unit treated social marketing concept as a strategic means of managing communication for national development.
In essence, the meaning and the origin of the social marketing concept were discussed to provide background for the study.
Also, the components of 5Ps of marketing were discussed with emphasis on how they apply to mass communication and national development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain various components of social marketing concept stressing how each component applies to communication for national development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING MaCarthy, E. J.
(1982).
Essential of Marketing.
Homewood; Illinois: Richard.
D. Irwin Inc. Nwodu, L. C. (2007).
“Managing Development Communication for Sustainable Human Development.” In: I. E. Nwosu,, N.T.
Fab- Ukorzor & L. C. Nwodu (Eds.).
Communication for Sustainable Human Development: A Multi-Perspective Approach.
Eungu: ACCE Enugu State.
Nwosu, I.E.
(1993).
‘‘Disseminating Information on Environmental Issues and Problems in Rural Africa: Towards an Integrated Model.” In: S.T.
Kwame Boafo (Ed.)
Media and Environment in Africa: Challenges for the Future.
Narobi: ACCE Publications.
Nwosu, I.E.
& Uffoh, V.O.
(2005).
Environmental Public Relations Management.
Enugu: IDS.
56  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT MODULE 4 COMMUNICATION RESEARCH AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES Unit 1 National Development Challenges in Nigeria Unit 2 Communication Research Interests in National Development Challenges UNIT 1 NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Economic/Political Development Challenges 3.2 Socio-Cultural and Health Development Challenges 3.3 Infrastructure/Physical Development Challenges 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION According to DFID (2004), “with per capita income falling significantly to about $300 between 1980 and 2000 (well below Sub-Saharan average of $450), approximately 90million Nigerian’s 133million people are living in absolute poverty, on less than one dollar a day”.
Nnamani (2005) also added that: • ‘‘The income of a community, which is subdivision among families and kindred, is less than 40 percent of the norm (living on one US dollar a day…and such, which manifest more in poor infrastructure, poor nutrition, poor self- esteem, low hygienic standard, low intellectual development and lack of capacity to articulate social, economic and political environment and low per capita income.’’ The above expressions clearly indicate that Nigeria has a number of development challenges.
And the challenges touch virtually on all aspects of the country’s lives.
In this unit, we shall be discussing these challenges using Nwodu’s (2007) broad categorisation of development challenges and realities in Nigeria as frame of analysis.
57 MA C 316 MODULE 4 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the economic and political problems of Nigeria • highlight Nigeria’s socio-cultural and health problems • enumerate the infrastructural /physical development problems of Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Economic/Political Development Challenges Since 1962, Nigeria has had four distinctive national development plans.
A national development plan according to Ofoeze (2000) cited in Akpara-Aja (2000) is “a conscious action of government aimed at achieving a set of objectives- development- through specified means and procedures”.
The four development plans which Nigeria has had are: • The first developmental plan (1962-1968) which failed to revamp Nigeria’s economy as it recorded negative rate of 6.15%.
• The second developmental plan (1970-1974) named “a plan for rehabilitation, reconciliation and reconstruction” was meant to reconcile the warring Nigeria’s ethnic nationalities and to re- build all that were damaged by civil war.
This period recorded 15.6% positive growth rate because it fall within the period of ‘oil boom’ even when the development plan failed to lead Nigeria out of economic wood due to mismanagement by the then national government.
• The third developmental plan (1975-1980) which relied solely on crude oil revenue while utterly ignoring agriculture and non-oil revenue recorded a sharp decline in the nations annual growth rate from 15.63% to 2.75%.
• The fourth developmental plan (1981-85) which was the worst of its kind had the gross domestic product (GDP) recording 2.48% negative growth rate.
• The fourth national development plan was succeeded by the eight years regime (1985-1993) of the self-styled President Ibrahim B. Babangida which was characterised by increased external debt burden.
Akpara-Aja, (2000) reports that then the GDP fall sharply from 8.3% in 1990 to 4.6% in 1991 and maintained a downward slide into 3.6% and 2.9% in 1992 and 1993 respectively.
58  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Abacha’s regime introduced the Budget of Sustainable Development (1997) and later Vision 2010 which Nwodu (upcoming) described as a prelude to the present Vision ‘20:20’.
Over the years, the Nigerian economy has been wobbling leaving successive government to grapple with unfulfilled efforts to revamp the economy.
A pragmatic attempt to revamp the economy began in the year 2000 when the Federal Government signed IMF stand-by agreement for debt restructuring.
Then Nigeria received $1billon dollar credit from IMF for the purpose of effecting economic reforms.
Although the GDP appreciated in 2011 recording 6.9%, the nation is still facing a number of economic burdens like: • high unemployment • poor macroeconomic management • poor standard of living occasioned by low per capital income • over dependence on oil revenue.
On the political front, Nigeria has not had it so good.
The pre- independent and post independent political activities in the country were marred by suspicion among major ethnic nationalities in the country.
This manifest lack of cohesion among the ethnic nationalities resulted in a 30-month civil war which crippled economic and political activities in the country.
After the civil, the prolonged military intervention in the political life of the nation has also affected negatively, the political development of the nation.
In fact, Nigeria has witnessed about eight military coups which are not healthy for the political stability and development of the nation.
Even the democratic experience in the country has often been marred with poor and autocratic approach to governance, electoral irregularities and post election violence.
The import is that the present economic and political realities in the country are worrisome to the extent they challenge professional mass communicators to fashion out best strategy for managing the problem.
The major challenges which professional journalists and mass communicators should use their skill to address are: • Exposing sharp practices in governance • Championing crusade journalism in favour of economic diversification, political stability, national integration and cohesion among ethnic nationalities in Nigeria • Providing adequate information to Nigerian citizens on how to engage in genuine self-profiting ventures imperative for poverty reduction and non-involvement in political violence.
59 MA C 316 MODULE 4 3.2 Socio-Cultural and Health Development Challenges According to the Nigeria Millennium Development Goals Report (2005), corruption has been a major development challenge in Nigeria.
Continuing, the report says: • Government’s vigorous response has been to enact and enforce an anti-corruption law, to establish a powerful and effective Economic and Financial Crime Commission (EFCC) as well as an Independent Corrupt Practices and other related Commission (ICPC), and also to institutionalise Due Process to sanitise procurement process.
Although EFCC, ICPC, and Due Process have been institutionalised in Nigeria, corruption in high places has remained one of the endemic socio-cultural and even economic development problems in the country.
Related to this is the high prevalence of harmful traditional practices like Female Genital Cutting (FGC), widowhood practices, girl child marriages, denial of right of inheritance to women; and domestic violence as well as all forms of discriminations against women.
Again Nigeria at present is faced with other social/educational problems which according to Nwodu (2006) included low literacy level, poor technological advancement, limited number of highly skilled human resources, increasing number of male dropouts from schools and high cost of educational and social services.
The health sector is not anything better.
In fact, the Nigeria Millennium Development Goals number four, five and six respectively bother on reduction of child mortality; improve maternal health, and combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases.
The fact that three out of the eight goals bother on health is indicative of the fact that health related issues are very serious development problem in Nigeria.
Infants and under-five mortality rate which were respectively 91 per 1000 and 133 per live births in 1999 rose to 100 per 1000 and 201 per 1000 lives in 2003 (NMDG and NPC, 2004 ).
This situation is similar in the case of maternal mortality and the contraction of HIV/AIDS and other related diseases.
However, studies reveal that of all these health problems, attitudes to antenatal care, and the postnatal care and the quality of health delivery are factors that greatly affect maternal morbidity and mortality (NMDGS report; 2005).
The communication challenges here therefore has to do with how to generate enough media campaigns that can help to realistically address the knowledge gap, change or reinforce or modify attitudes and behaviour towards healthy practices.
60  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 3.3 Infrastructure/Physical Development Challenges Development process in Nigeria also suffers from infrastructure related problems.
Today achievement of safe portable water, accessible roads, efficient medical services, functional power supply, and functional institutions have remained tall dreams in both Nigerian rural and urban cities.
Also erosion menace, deforestation and desert encroachment among others have crippled the rate of physical development even as the environment suffers from all sorts of pollution arising from mining and oil exploration.
All these challenges one way or the other rob negatively on national development efforts.
They also demand a lot from mass communication practitioners whose responsibility is to report threats and incidence of environmental problems, write editorials to advocate for greater government concern to infrastructural/physical challenges facing Nigeria and help mobilise citizens/government support for environmental friendly programmes and or activities/actions.
4.0 CONCLUSION Nigeria, no doubt has a number of national development challenges.
These challenges are so real that they impact negatively on national development process.
Mass communication practitioners can play a number of roles in helping to cushion these challenges by drawing constant attention to those development challenges, analysing and interpreting programme and actions put up to solve the problems and mobilising support for pragmatic effort aimed at solving the problems posed by those actions.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit offered a quick insight into Nigeria’s national development challenges.
To this end, economic/political; socio-cultural/health; and infrastructure/physical factors impinging on Nigeria’s national development were discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT In spite of the concerted effort by successive governments in Nigeria to enthrone enduring national development, the nation has grappled with lots of development challenges.
Identify and explain those national development challenges pointing out what knowledge of mass communication can help in solving such problems.
61 MA C 316 MODULE 4 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akpuru-Aja, A.
(2000).
“The Present Political Economy of Nigeria and the Prospect of Vision 2010.” In: A. Akpuru-Aja, & A.C. Emeribe (Eds).
Policy and Contending Issues in Nigeria National Development Strategy: Towards a Greater Nigeria in the 21st Century.
Enugu: John Jacobs Classic Publishers Ltd. DFID (2004).
Country Assistant for Nigeria.
Abuja: DFID Publications.
Nnamanni, C.O.
(2004).
Poverty in Nigeria: We are All in it Together.
Ikeja: Lions Club Annual Lecture Series.
Nwodu, L. C. (2005) Making Career in Development Communication.” In: I. E. Nwosu, J. E. Aliede & I. Nsude (Eds).
Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets Ltd.
Nwodu,L.C.(2007).
“Communication, Poverty Alleviation and Grassroots Mobilisations for Sustainable Human Development.” In: I.E.
Nwosu, N.T Fab-Ukozor & L.C.
Nwodu (Eds.).
Communication for Sustainable Human Development: A Multi- Perspective Approach.
Enugu: ACCE Enugu State.
62  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT UNIT 2 COMMUNICATION RESEARCH INTERESTS IN NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT CHALLENGES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Preliminary Research 3.2 Message Design Research 3.3 Mobilisation Strategy Research 3.4 On-The Programme Evaluation Research 3.5 Performance Appraisal 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Experts have documented overwhelming evidence that campaigns meant to achieve national development goals often fail because of poor or even non-utilisation of research.
A whole lot of times, the campaigners often rely on intuitive knowledge to draft, package and deliver national development campaigns and jingles that hardly appeal to the audience let alone influencing them positively (Opubor 1986; Nwosu, 1990; and Edeani, 1990).
This explains the current emphasis on greater use of communication research for social change and national development (Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor, 2003; Nwodu, 2006; Anaeto and Solo- Anaeto, 2010).
This unit is therefore designed to expose you to stages of research interests in managing communication for national development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the relevance of research in communication process for national development • enumerate the various stages of research interests in communicating for national development.
63 MA C 316 MODULE 4 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Preliminary Research In some communication literature, preliminary research is often referred to as pre-project research or baseline research.
The essence of preliminary research is to accumulate baseline data needed for informed communication for national development planning, strategy and execution (Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor, 2003).
Pre-project research therefore enables development communication agents to understand the people and their environment (Okunna; 2002).
In conducting preliminary research for national development therefore, three things are usually involved namely: a.
Target community profile which according to Nwodu and Fab- Ukozor (2003) involves ascertaining the target community’s name, location, population, system of governance, religious belief, language and literacy level as well as the available infrastructure and media channels accessible to the community.
b. Ascertaining the cultural values with emphasis on the customs, norms, mores, ethical orientations, taboos, social control and ranking systems.
c. Ascertaining the target community’s ecosystem.
Emphasis here should be on finding out the community’s vegetation, climatic condition, physical challenges and problems, animal lives and sundry issues relating to the physical environment.
An understanding of this nature according Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) “would help national development agents to fathom appropriate development programme to introduce in a given community; when, and how to introduce the programme as well as determining the number and segment of society that would benefit from such a programme.
Suffice it to say in the words of Nwuneli (1985) that “programmes that begun with the collection of baseline information on the target population survive better than those that lack information on the life expectations and ambition of the target audience”.
3.2 Message Design Research Any form of communication for national development must address specific audience need to be effective.
This therefore requires that the message must not be vague.
Message design therefore requires extensive research to ascertain a number of issues which are: 64  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT a.
Message conception which calls for researching to ascertain a concrete central theme of the message.
This implies that development communication agents should be able to come up with a different message concepts all built around the central theme of the communication problem.
b.
Message articulation: when several messages concept are developed, the job of the researcher in this context is not over.
Therefore each of the message concepts needs to be properly articulated.
This involves determining the appropriate verbal and non-verbal cues or codes that would best impress the target audience.
According to Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) the research interest in this context is “to conduct a pilot study on these codes with a view to ascertaining which of the codes or combination of codes so developed are likely to make the highest impact on the target audience.
c. Message design which involves researching to determine the best way to structure the actual message of communication for nation development.
Structuring or design here implies determining the language of communication, the dialect, the choice of words and the accompanying demonstration that could make the message effective and highly impactful.
3.3 Mobilisation Strategy Research According to Udoaka (1998) mass mobilisation involves: • ‘‘The wakening or activation of the dormant consciousness of a greater number of people with the use of new ideas for the purpose of gaining their support for an action or inaction, it is a process of creating new loyalties using new ideas and appeals to reason and sentiment at appropriate time.’’ Mobilisation therefore entails rallying development agents around for active participation in national development programme.
It is all about building healthy alliance between change agents and change beneficiaries in a way that would enhance the change target’s unalloyed support for and active participation in development programme.
Research in this regard should therefore address three core issues which are: • Determining who should participate in the national development programme and who should benefit from the programme.
Programmes like exclusive breastfeeding (EBF) for instance should target nursing mothers as the participants while the actual programme beneficiaries are the infants.
The essence of this research therefore is to ascertain who should actually be mobilised for the national development programme.
65 MA C 316 MODULE 4 • Determination of communication strategy which entails determining between different modes of communication (e.g.
interpersonal, group, public or mass communication) should be more appropriate in mobilising support for the national development programme.
• Determination of period of exposure which involves determining the particular period when development targets are more likely to turn out en mass or show greater participation for the programme.
As Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) pointed out, it would amount to colossal waste of time, energy and resources to mount a morning adult education programme for a predominantly agrarian community particularly when the programme is coming up at the peak of planting season.
3.4 On-The-Programme Evaluation/ Performance Appraisal This is also called “continuing evaluation” (Okunna, 2002) or exit interview (UNICEF and Polio Partners, 2000).
Whatever is the appeal, the essence of research effort here is to determine through a quick rapid assessment how development targets are responding to an already on- going programme.
The primary motive here is to find out “what adjustment needs to be made or what is to be sustained to be effective while the development programme or project last” (Nwodu and Fab- Ukozor, 2003).
Related to this is post-project evaluation which is also called performance appraisal.
This involves critical review of the general planning and execution of national development project.
The need for this aspect of research is to guide future development endeavours.
Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) summarised this in the following words: “The major interest is to document the noticeable strengths and weaknesses of a particular already executed developmental programme for the benefit of future development programmes.’’ 4.0 CONCLUSION Every national development effort certainly requires healthy advocacy, social mobilisation and programme communication components of development process.
In depth knowledge of communication research is therefore needed to accumulate sufficient data regarding development target’s mores, behaviours, needs and aspirations, among others.
66  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit efforts were made to isolate and explain various stages of research interest in communication for national development.
Precisely, pre-project research, message design research, on-the-project programme evaluation and performance appraisal were discussed extensively.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Mention and discuss various stages of communication research interest in national development process.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anaeto, S.G. & Solo-Anaeto, M. (2010).
Development Communication: Principles and Practice.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers Ltd. Edeani, D. O.
(1990).
“The Impact of Ownership on Nigerian Newspaper Coverage of Mass Mobilisation Campaign.”, Nigerian Journal of Mass Communication, Vol.
1, No 1.
Nwodu, L. C. & Fab-Ukozor, N. T. (2003).
Communication Imperative for Development.
Enugu: John Jacobs Classic Publishing Company Limited.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2006).
“Research and ICTs Relevance in Innovation Diffusion.’’ The Nigerian Journal of Communications, Vol.4, Nos 1 & 2 pp.
100-108.
Okunna, C.S.
(2002).
‘‘A Quick Look at Development Communication.’’ In: C.S.
Okunna.
(Ed.).
Teaching Mass Communication: A Multi-Dimensional Approach.
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Opubor, A. E. (1985).
“Mass Communication and Modern Development in Nigeria.” In: O. E. Nwuneli (Ed.).
Mass Communication in Nigeria: A Book of Reading.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension.
Udoaka, N. (1998).
Development Communication.
Ibadan: Stirling- Horden Publishers.
UNICEF & Polio Partners (2000).
Communication Handbook for Polio Eradication and Routine EPI.
New York: UNICEF Publication.
67 MA C 316 MODULE 4 MODULE 5 TYING UP: ROLE OF MEDIA OF MASS COMMUNICATION FOR NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 An Overview of Media of Mass Communication in Nigeria Unit 2 Strengths and Weaknesses of Media of Mass Communication in Nigeria Unit 3 Functions of Mass Media in National Development UNIT 1 AN OVERVIEW OF MEDIA OF MASS COMMUNICATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of Mass Media in Nigeria 3.2 Structure of Mass Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Mass media according to Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) are modern channels of mass communication used for the dissemination of news and information to heterogeneous large number of people simultaneously.
Implicit in this definition is that mass mediated messages are usually directed at heterogeneous audiences living in diverse geopolitical areas, and who receive sender’s messages simultaneously.
From the above definition, it is obvious that these media of mass communication exist in appreciable magnitude in Nigeria.
Our concern in this unit therefore is to discuss the mass media landscape in Nigeria.
68  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain briefly the history of mass media in Nigeria • highlight the structure of mass media in Nigeria • expatiate on media localisation for national development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of Mass Media in Nigeria The history of mass media in Nigeria began in 1859.
Then, a European missionary named Rev.
Henry Townsend published the first newspaper in Nigeria called Iwe Irohin.
This was followed by the Anglo-African newspaper published by Robert Campbell between 1863 and 1865 in Lagos.
Over time, newspaper titles like The Nigeria Pioneer published by Kitoye Ajasa 1914-1937, The African Messenger first published in 1921 by Ernest Ikoli, The Lagos Daily Mirror founded by Obademi and popularised by Herbert Macauley in 1927, and The West African Pilot published by the great sage Dr Nnamdi Azikiwe emerged in the Nigeria mass media landscape.
See Odusanya (1976); Omu (1978), and Okafor (2002) for detailed history of Nigeria press.
However, unlike the print media that started early in Nigeria, the electronic media did not start at the same period.
Thus, the history of radio in Nigeria began in 1932.
Then the colonial masters chose Lagos as one of the centres among British colonies where radio signals were received and re-transmitted to Nigerian audience via re-diffusion method.
According to Okunna (2006): • ‘‘….between 1932 and 1950, the BBC monitoring station in Lagos was developed into an extensive radio distribution service (RDS) to cater for some dense population centres of the colonial government through re-diffusion stations located in Ibadan, Abeokuta, Ijebu Ode, Kano, Kaduna, Enugu, Port Harcourt, Calabar, Jos, and Zaria; these were converted into fully operative radio stations by the Federal Government to form the media of the Nigerian Broadcasting Service (NBS) which was established in 1951.’’ It is pertinent to note that NBS later changed to Nigeria Broadcasting Cooperation (NBC) which later metamorphosed into the present day Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria (FRCN) in the year, 1978.
Presently virtually all the 36 states of Nigeria and the capital territory Abuja now have radio stations.
And with the deregulation of the 69 MA C 316 MODULE 5 broadcast industry in Nigeria in 1992, private radio stations now operate in the country.
In the case of television, the history started in 1959 with the establishment of the Western Nigeria Television (WNTV).
The reason television started from the region was attributed to the pre-independence politics which placed more emphasis on regional rather than national development (Okunna, 1993).
So with the establishment of WNTV in 1959, other regions began to establish their own television stations.
Therefore, in 1960, the Eastern Nigeria government established Eastern Nigeria Television (ENTV).
This was followed by the Radio Television Kaduna (RTK) in 1962 which functioned as an arm of Broadcast Corporation of Northern Nigeria.
In 1977 the Federal Government established the Nigerian Television Authority (NTA).
NTA was then given exclusive right over television broadcasting in the county until 1979 when any state government wishing to operate television stations were empowered to do so.
Today private investors have joined the league of television broadcasting in Nigeria following the deregulation of broadcasting in 1992.
The case of film/cinema in Nigeria is also of interest here.
Thus, the history of film/cinema in Nigeria began with public film exhibition.
The first cinema experience in Nigerian soil began in August 12, 1903 as cinema exhibition at the Glover Hall, Lagos.
The film was exhibited then by Messer Baboa of Barcelona, Spain at the instance of Herbert Macauley (Mgbejume, 1982, Owen-Ibie, 1983 and Nwodu, 2011).
From Lagos, the cinema exhibition spread to other major towns of Nigeria like Enugu, Port Harcourt, Calabar, Ibadan, Kaduna and Aba.
The essence of the cinema exhibition by the colonial masters was to reach the country side with what the colonial administration described as social education (Jengo, 1977 and Nwodu, 2011).
The first Nigerian film was produced by Tai Obe under the aegis of Film Health Department (Balogun,1987).The Nigerian film industry suffered a number of setbacks among which are the civil war, high cost of film stock, and strenuous man-hours expended in the production of a film.
Today the use of video production and improved technology has combined to make film production less expensive and far less strenuous.
It is not in doubt that the contemporary film industry in Nigeria produces over 2500 film titles annually earning over N25b even as it employs over 125000 Nigerians (New Age, 2005; Nwenwene, 2006; Alawode, 2007; Eze, 2009 and Nwodu, 2011).
70  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 3.2 The Structure of Mass Media in Nigeria Mass media structure here pertains to the operational base vis-à-vis the impact of such base on mass media uses for national development (Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor, 2003).
Presently, the Nigerian mass media environment is replete with so many newspaper and magazine titles; several government and privately-owned radio and television stations and uncountable video titles.
In view of the population of mass media organs in the country therefore, it is safe to say that Nigeria has more than enough mass media to achieve greater social development of the nation.
However, rather than contribute effectively to the social development in both the urban and rural Nigeria, the mass media have remained an urban phenomenon.
Virtually all the national newspaper and magazine titles in the country have their headquarters either in Lagos or Abuja with branches in other urban cities across the country.
Also, all the radio and television stations are located in the urban cities.
The snag with the present over-concentration of mass media of communication in the urban areas includes: • Development activities in the urban cities are usually given wider and more prominent attention than development issues affecting the interest of rural areas where greater percentage of the citizenry live.
• Rural residents are often alienated in the fashioning of development programmes and news about them which denies them of sense of belonging.
• Development information and news from urban-situated mass media often come to the rural residents as novel ideas thereby inhibiting proper innovation diffusion.
The situation is made worse by the fact that presently, true community press and community radio do not exist in Nigeria.
According to Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003), “the current situation whereby community- based radio, television, film viewing centres, and news papers have remained tall dream is not good enough for effective and even mass communication-assisted national development”.
The way out according to MacBride et al (1980), Opubor (1985) and Nwosu (1990) is to decentralise the mass media organs in the country.
Mass media decentralisation can be done in three distinctive ways which as Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) put it are: • Physical decentralisation which emphases situating mass media organs in the rural areas from where they will operate.
71 MA C 316 MODULE 5 • Media content decentralisation which involves the inclusion of greater rural social realities in mass media content as well as fashioning out ‘”a strong feedback mechanism to guarantee interaction between media users and media operators”(Okenwa, 2000).
• Media reach decentralisation which requires designing a functional strategy that will ensure that many areas in the country (especially those living at the periphery) are reached with specific development messages regardless of wherever they may be located.
SELF-ASSESMENT EXERCISE Discuss the development problems associated with the over- concentration of mass media organs in urban areas of Nigeria and state how you think the problems can be solved.
4.0 CONCLUSION Effective utilisation of mass media to achieve accelerated national development requires drastic restructuring of the mass media organ in the country.
Mass media operators in the country should of necessity therefore, give priority attention to the present structure of mass media in the country and restructure the system in a manner that would encourage greater presence of rural realities and challenges in the nations’ mass media.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the history of mass media of communication in Nigeria.
It also considered the structure of mass media in Nigeria with particular reference to the implication on Nigeria’s development.
It criticised the present structure of mass media in Nigeria as being inimical to national development and calls for media decentralisation as solution to the problem.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Mention and discuss the advantages radio has over other media of mass communication in Nigeria’s national development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Alawode, S. O.
(2007).
“Nigeria Environment in the Eye of Nigeria Home Video.” Journal of Communication & Language Arts.
Vol.
2, 2007 pp.62-81.
72  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT Balogun, F. (1987).
The Cinema in Nigeria.
Enugu: Delta Publications.
Eze, C. (2009).
‘‘The Theatre in an Emergent Information Society: A Nigerian Approach.” In: D. E. Konkwo (Ed.)
Mass Communication in Emergent Information Society.
Owerri: Alphabet Nigeria Publisher.
Jengo (1977).
“Mass Media and Black Civilisation: The Tanzania Experience.” Second World Black and Africa Festival of Arts and Cultures, Lagos, 15 January – 12 February 1977.
MacBride, S. et al.
(1980).
Many Voices, One World; Ibadan: Ibadan University Press.
Mgbejume, O.
(1989).
‘‘Film in Nigeria: Development Problems and Promises.’’: African Media Review Series, No 7.
Nairobi.
New Age Newspaper, Friday 18th February, 2005; p.4.
Nwenwene, T. A. M. (2005) “Nigerian Nollywood Film: Problems, Perspectives and Prospects.” In: I. E. Nwosu; J. E. Aliede & I Nsude (Eds.).
Mass communication in Nigeria: One Course, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets.
Nwodu, L. C. (2003).
Communication Imperative for Development.
Enugu: John Jacobs Classic Publishing Company Limited.
Nwodu, L. C. (2011).
“Nigerian Cinema: Past, Present and Future Directions for Nigeria’s Socio-Cultural and Economic Development.” Paper presented at A 3-Day Conference on Articulation of Memory on Film Held at University of Canada, Ottawa; September 2-4.
Nwosu, I. E. (1990).
Mass Communication and National development.
Aba: Frontier Publishers.
Okenwa, S. N. (2002).
Communication and Development Process.
Enugu: Magnet Publishing Company.
Omu, F. (1978).
Press and Politics in Nigeria: 1880-1937.
Ibadan: Longman.
Opubor, A. E. (1985).
“Mass Communication and Modern Development in Nigeria.” In: O. E. Nwuneli (Ed.).
Mass Communication in Nigeria: A Book of Reading.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension.
73 MA C 316 MODULE 5 UNIT 2 STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES OF MEDIA OF MASS COMMUNICATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Electronic Media: Strengths and Weaknesses for National Development 3.2 Strengths and Weaknesses of Print Media in National Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Our study of mass media landscape in Nigeria showed that both electronic and print media abound in appreciable quantity in Nigeria.
As effective tools of mass dissemination of news and information therefore, it is expected that these mass media tools would contribute effectively to national development.
This unit is therefore designed to examine the strengths and weaknesses of some of these media of mass communication considered to be most relevant to national development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the potentials of various organs of mass communication in promoting national development • highlight the limitations of each of the organs of mass communication • enumerate the specific areas each of the medium can be used for national development.
74  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Electronic Media: Strengths and Weaknesses for National Development The major concern here is on radio, television and film.
The reason is that they are the predominant electronic media modes that are mostly employed in communications for national development in Nigeria.
Let us therefore begin with radio.
According to Onyekwere (1990), “with the exception of radio which has been found to be effective in reaching the rural Nigerian masses other channels of mass media of communication have been found to be relatively less effective”.
Reinforcing this, Ansah (1991) agrees that “of all the mass media generally available to Africans, radio is the most widespread and accessible”.
The implication is that radio by its nature has some potential that make it the most effective media tool for national development.
Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) articulate those potentials as: • Appeals to illiterate audience as development news and programmes can be broadcast to the audience within their language and dialects.
• Breaks distance barriers as its reach is amazingly wide and highly penetrating.
• Relatively cheap to procure compared to other channels of mass communication.
• Breaks the barrier of power outage as it can easily be operated using dry cell batteries.
To this Nwodu (2007) adds that with enabled GSM hand set, people now access development messages on radio without really going to buy conventional radio set.
• Appeals to audio sense in which case one can easily get exposed to it while doing other things.
• Has power of on-the-spot live transmission of events thereby keeping people living at the periphery adequately and timely informed about government polices actions and inactions as well as providing information about people living in other lands.
• Highly miniaturised to the extent users can conveniently carry it about while listening to development news and other contents.
On the other hand, television seems to be the most least applied electronic medium to national development especially as it concerns reaching the rural masses.
However, television has some potential that make it an effective medium of national development some of which included: 75 MA C 316 MODULE 5 • Appeals to senses of audio-visual which is crucial for demonstrations.
• Also breaks language and illiteracy barriers.
• Encourages group viewership good for advocacy and mobilisation.
Although television promises to be an emerging potent medium of national development the medium suffers a number of limitations which according to Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) are: • It has an acute limited reach.
• It is to date a highly urban affair.
• It is relatively costly to afford.
• It requires constant power supply to functions.
Another electronic medium that is worthy of discussion here, is film/cinema.
Ogbuoshi (2002) defines film ‘‘as a transparent flexible material in stripes or sheets of celluloid covered with an emulsion which is sensitive to light, used in taking photographs, or making motion pictures”.
Although Jimadu (1970) argues that film is ‘‘under-utilised medium for development massages for most parts of Africa” Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) articulate the advantages of film/cinema in national development process as: • It helps to break literacy barriers via indigenous films • It helps to create a feeling of empathy among the target audience, thereby motivating them to be desirous of development programmes • It aids in skill acquisition and training.
The audio-visual power of film can often re-awaken a feeling of curiosity among the viewers.
This stimulates sense of loyalty among viewers who can now learn new ideas, taste and ideals through exposure to the film promoting spirit of oneness, peace and communalism among the audience as people come together to watch there is always a force of social cohesion which, could lead to greater understanding and social harmony among the target groups.
Film also has its snags in national development process.
The weaknesses of film/cinema in development process are: • Films cost a lot to produce and the cost intensive nature of film often discourage Nigeria development agents from considering film in their media planning for national development.
• Film as a medium of development has a number of distribution problems in Nigeria.
According to Jimadu (1990:82) ‘‘there are 76  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT inadequate mobile film vans to go round the villages.’’ Today, it is in doubt whether mobile film vans are in existence in most states of the federation.
Again the activities of pirates have not encouraged increase in the production and distribution of film for development.
• The dominance of foreign films in Nigeria’s social environment often make Nigeria viewers to contextualise development in terms of foreign culture (Jimadu.1990) even the emergence of home video has not helped matters.
This is because scenes that promote foreign cultures and orientations abound in great proportion.
According to Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) ‘‘not until Nigerian film begins to address the socio-cultural, political and economic realities of the masses, it cannot effectively bring about the desired social transformation’’.
3.2 Strength and Weakness of Print Media in National Development Print media (newspaper, magazine, book and posters) industry in Nigeria is a robust industry.
Our discussion here is limited to newspaper and posters which have proved to be more potent in national development.
Newspaper, particularly rural newspaper has the potential of contributing to national development.
The strength of newspaper therefore lies on the following: • Newspaper has enough space for in-depth reportage of development issues, news and information.
• It has the potential for informed interpretation and analysis of issues thereby helping to put issues in proper perspectives.
• It has the advantage of place and time of exposure and flexibility which ensure easy comprehension and retention of media content.
• Ensure easier storage and retrieval of development information and news.
• Encourages mass education and literacy by motivating or encouraging readership habits among illiterate and new literate ones.
The above strengths do not however detract from the fact that newspaper has a number of limitations which include: • Regardless of whether a newspaper is vernacular newspaper or not, it requires some level of literacy to appreciate the contents.
• The visually impaired are often cut off from development news and information from the mass media.
77 MA C 316 MODULE 5 • Newspaper medium is largely an urban phenomenon and hardly circulate to the hinter land due to bad road and low readership.
• Newspaper is capital intensive to establish.
Next in our discussion of strength and weakness of print media uses for national development is poster.
Poster is worth discussing here because according to Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003) it wields powerful influence in the awareness generation and diffusion of development information.
Its strength lies on the following: • Well designed poster easily attracts and compels attention.
• Poster uses illustrations and few vernacular words to make important development message impactful.
• It serves as effective tools in attitude and behaviour change.
To some extent, it breaks literacy barrier as those who cannot read the contents can easily grasp the message from the illustrations.
(Nwodu, 2007).
However, poster like other forms of print media is limited by the fact that the visually impaired cannot effectively get exposed to it.
Again, though illiterate audience may understand the illustrations, they hardly have full grasp of the meaning of the message as they are incapable of reading the written words that go with illustrations.
4.0 CONCLUSION All the media of mass communication discussed have strengths and or weaknesses peculiar to each of them.
National development agents need to understand these strengths and weaknesses in their media plans and utilisation in propagating national development objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY We discussed in this unit the strengths and weaknesses of various media of mass communication in Nigeria.
Attention was therefore given to electronic media particularly (radio, television and film) and print media (exclusively newspaper and posters).
The reason is that these channels of communication have been found to be more relevant in national development programmes particularly among the rural residents.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Of all the media of national development in Nigeria, radio has remained the most effective.
Discuss this with particular reference to the strength of radio over other mass media organs in Nigeria.
78  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ansah, P. (1991).
“Broadcast and National Development.“ In: Module on Development Communication 2.
Nariobi: ACCE.
Jimadu, U.
(1990) “Documentary Film as a Medium of Development Communication in Nigeria.” In: I. E. Nwosu (Ed.).
Mass Communication and National Development: Perspectives on the Communication Development Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontier Publishers.
Nwodu, L.C.
& Fab-Ukozor, N.T.
(2003).
Communication Imperatives for Development.
Enugu: John Jacobs Classic Publishing Ltd. Nwodu, L.C.
(2007).
“Managing Communication for Sustainable Human Development in Nigeria.” In: I. E. Nwosu; N. T. Fab- Ukozor & L. C. Nwodu (Eds.).
Communication and Sustainable Human Development.
Enugu: ACCE: Enugu State.
Ogbuoshi, L. O.
(2002).
The Techniques of Film Production.
Enugu: Magnet Publishing Company.
Onyekwere, E.O.
(1990).
”The Roles of Communication in Rural Social Development.” Nigeria Journal of Mass Communication, Vol.1, No.1.
79 MA C 316 MODULE 5 UNIT 3 FUNCTIONS OF MASS MEDIA IN NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Mass Media Ownership in Nigeria 3.2 Mass Media Functions in National Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Mass media of any nation, no doubt contribute a lot to the nation’s development.
How well or otherwise the mass media contribute to national development depends essentially on the nation’s media system.
In some nations, the media operators enjoy greater freedom.
In some other nations, the freedom to own and operate media organisation suffers one form of restriction or the other.
In other nations also, media practitioners are integrated into the ruling class as way of making them less critical of the political system and government actions.
The emphasis in this unit is the patterns of mass media ownership in Nigeria and the functions of mass media in national development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the patterns of media ownership in Nigeria • state the functions of mass media in national development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Mass Media Ownership in Nigeria Nigeria’s landscape as we earlier pointed out is replete with abundant radio and television stations; newspaper and magazine titles; and flourishing movie industry.
However, we may not really understand how these media organs can contribute to national development without first understanding the mass media ownership structure in Nigeria.
There are three major patterns of mass media ownership known in communication literature.
These are: 80  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT • Public ownership in which organs of mass media are owned and controlled by the members of the public.
• Government ownership in which the national or state (regional) governments establishes, owns and control the mass media.
• Private ownership in which private investors (usually an individual or group of individuals) own and operate mass media organs (Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor, 2003).
The question at this juncture is: where does Nigerian belong in all these?
The mass media ownership in Nigeria could better be described as a mixed system.
The reason is because ownership of mass media in Nigeria is a mixture of government and private ownership.
By implication, the mass media organs are not solely owned and operated by the government.
The law permits individuals to also own and operate mass media organisations.
Thus while some are owned by the federal and state governments, others are owned by individuals with the federal government providing the legal framework guiding the operations of the media organisations.
It is important to note that before now, the federal government has the exclusive right of ownership and operations of broadcast media in Nigeria.
Later, the regional (and now the state) governments were permitted to participate in the ownership of broadcast media.
Then, individuals or private investors were not permitted by law to own and operate broadcast media until 1992 when the industry was deregulated.
Following the deregulation of the industry, privately-owned broadcast stations like Ray Power FM, AIT, Silver Bird, Orient FM(now extinct) to mention a few emerged in Nigerian mass media landscape.
As it is now, privately-owned radio and television stations like the ones mentioned above now operate in Nigeria within the legal conditions prescribed by Nigerian Broadcast Commission (NBC).
Also, print media titles like The Guardian (owned by the late Chief Ibru), Vanguard (owned by Sam Amuka), The Champion (owned by Chief Emmanuel Iwuanyanwu), Thisday (owned by Nduka Obaigbena) and Newswatch (established by Late Dele Giwa, Ray Ekpu and others) now operate and flourish in the country alongside with government owned newspapers like The Tide, New Nigeria, National Light and Nigerian Statesman.
The implication is that there is no public media ownership in Nigeria.
What obtains is a situation where government owned media corporations operate alongside with private owned media organisations with the central government providing the regulatory framework that guide the operation of mass media organs in the country.
81 MA C 316 MODULE 5 As it is often said, that he who pays the piper dictates the tune, the nature of a mass medium ownership influences the medium’s position on national development issues.
So, while government owned mass media have been found to support government actions and inactions, the privately-owned media organisations tend to be more critical of government actions (Edeani, 1991).
In spite of this manifest differing stand on issues affecting government interest, mass media organisations in Nigeria have been contributing immensely to national development.
We shall examine more of this in the next segment of this unit.
3.2 Mass Media Functions in National Development As rightly observed in unit.2 of this module, the Nigerian mass media have been contributing to national development.
In discussing the functions of mass media in national development therefore, we will rely on earlier categorisation by McQuail (1987).
This resolve is supported by the fact that “all mass media whether in the developed countries or less developed countries (LDC) serve the same function” (Onwumechili and M’Bayo, 1990).
The functions as articulated by McQuail (1987) are: a.
Information • Providing information about events and conditions in society and the world.
• Indicating relations to power.
• Facilitating innovation, adaptation and progress.
b.
Correlation • Explaining, interpreting and commenting on the meaning of events and information.
• Providing support for established authority and norms.
• Socialising.
• Coordinating separate activities.
• Setting orders or priority and signaling relative status.
c. Continuity • Expressing the dominant culture and recognising sub- cultures and new cultural developments.
• Forging and maintaining commonality of values.
d. Entertainment • Providing amusement diversion, as a means of socialisation.
• Reducing social tension.
e. Mobilisation • Campaigning for societal objectives in the sphere of politics, war, economic development, work and sometimes religion.
82  MAC 316 MASS COMMUNICATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT To drive the point home, Nwodu (2005) provides seven nuggets of mass media functions in Nigeria’s national development as: • Encouraging Nigerian citizens to engage in meaningful activities that can enhance their overall economic well-being.
• Enlisting the support of and encouraging political leaders to enthrone and embrace true democratic pattern of governance that will guarantee better life for all Nigerians and by extension inculcate in them the spirit of nationalism, as well as participating actively in the nation’s political process.
• Enlisting the support of various levels of government and donor agencies via persuasive editorial and other persuasive contents, to help create enabling environment for fighting the social problems enumerated above.
• Winning the sympathy of the tradition-bound peripheral dwellers to join the crusade against harmful cultural practices that impinge on overall mental and physical development of Nigeria citizens.
• Providing adequate information on how to avoid the spread of HIV/AIDS, breast cancer, and sundry health problems ravaging the citizens, particularly in the rural areas.
• Drawing adequate attention to the ecological problems and threats confronting the nation, especially in the rural areas.
• Sensitising industries to operate in a socially responsible manner that would make their very presence a blessing rather than a curse to their host communities as well as providing a healthy platform for the production of goods and services.
4.0 CONCLUSION Mass media of any nation certainly play significant role in national development of that nation.
For instance, the mass media have been active in informing, educating, entertaining and mobilising the audience members for national development.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit examined the nature of mass media ownership in Nigeria.
It also examined the functions of mass media in national development.
To sum, mass media provide information, entertainment for escape from the ordinary, education, social mobilisation and advocacy for support of national development cause.
83 MA C 316 MODULE 5 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the patterns of mass media ownership in Nigeria pointing out how such ownership impacts on mass media roles in national development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Edeani, D. O.
(1990).
“The Influence of Ownership on Mass Media Coverage of MAMSER.” Nigerian Journal of Mass Communication, Vol.1 No.1.
MaQuail, D. (1987).
Mass Communication Theory: An Introduction.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Nwodu, L. C. (2005).
“Making Career in Development Communication.” In: I. E. Nwosu, J. E. Aliede & I. Nsude (Eds).
Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets Ltd. Onwumechili, C. & M’Bayo, R. (1990).
“Structure and Functions of Mass Media in National Development in Africa.” In: P. O. Nwosu, C. Onwumechili & R. M’Bayo (Eds).
Communication and Transformation of Society: Developing Regions Perspective.
Lanhan, NY: University Press of America, Inc. 84
