 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 312 COURSE TITLE: NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION 1  COURSE GUIDE MAC 312 NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION COURSE DEVELOPER/WRITER Levi Chinaka Nwodu, PhD Department of Mass Communication Anambra State University, Igbariam Campus Igbariam, Anambra State chinaaks@yahoo.com lemmychi@gmail.com EDITOR Dr. Victor Ayedun-Aluma Department of Mass Communication University of Lagos HEAD OF UNIT Dr Jonathan E. Aliede, NOUN Mass Communication Programmes National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA Introduction This course is titled Newspaper Production and coded is MAC 312 is designed for undergraduate students of Mass Communication.
The course 2  provides the students with depth knowledge of newspaper production.
At the end of the tutorials in the course, students are expected to have acquired sufficient knowledge of the processes involved in newspaper production.
Students will also learn the relevant principles guiding past and modern newspaper production.
Precisely the students who have gone through this course would be expected to have in-depth understanding of the basic principles imperative for effective newspaper production.
Students would also be expected to acquaint themselves with mainstream literature in newspaper/magazine production and distribution; the major discussion that embed the literature and be able to apply the basic and concepts so learned in successful newspaper production.
This course guide therefore, offers you with informative insights into the course contents.
It also provides you with a list of relevant materials you will need to gain adequate familiarity with in-depth understanding of the subject matter.
The course design is structured in such a way that would enable you gain far reaching insight into the course.
It will engage you into productive thinking through the underlying principles of newspaper design and layout, and other issues you will study.
It will also serve as a guide post to effective understanding of newspaper production during and after the course of your study.
Study Units MAC 312 which is titled Newspaper Production is a 300 Level course for undergraduate Mass Communication studies.
It is a 3 credit unit course.
The course is packaged in five modules of varying units and lengths.
The modules and the corresponding units are: MODULE 1: NEWSPAPER: AN HISTORICAL AND GENERAL OVERVIEW Unit 1: Newspaper: How It Began Unit 2: History of Newspaper: The Nigerian Experience Unit 3: Classification of Newspaper Unit 4: Advantages of Newspaper as a Mass Medium 3  MODULE 2: NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION: GETTING STARTED Unit 1: Beat as Sources of News Unit 2: Gathering the News Unit 3: News Copy Preparation Technicalities in Newspaper Production MODULE 3: COPY EDITING AND PAGE PLANNING Unit 1: Manuscript Editing Unit 2: Photo Editing Unit 3: Unit Count and Copy Fitting Unit 4: Page Planning Unit 5: Typography and Typesetting Unit 6: Proof Reading MODULE 4: ACTUAL NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION Unit 1: Getting the Page Ready: Paste Up Unit 2: Lithography/Filming Unit 3: Plate Making Unit 4: Printing the Newspaper Unit 5: Immediate Post Printing Activities Unit 6: Newspaper Distribution MODULE 5: NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION IN ERA INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES (ICTs) Unit 1: Meaning and Components of ICTs Unit 2: Areas of ICTs Application in Newspaper Production Unit 3: Epilogue: Elements of Page Design It is important to note that every module offers you a listing of all the units that make it up.
Each unit also offers you the content outlines, introduction and objectives with the main content preceding each unit.
Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) will be provided to enhance learning, comprehension, internalization and retention of what you will be taught.
To further enhance learning and effectively monitor your progress on the course, every unit will end with one Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) which you are to work on and submit for marking.
Textbooks and References 4  Enormous effort was made to provide you with in-depth and useful materials you need to pass this course.
However, you will find at the end of each unit, a listing of relevant reference materials you may consult at your convenient time to enhance your understanding of the course.
I therefore, expect that you would make out time to consult as many of the relevant reference materials as possible within the time available to you even before attempting to do your exercises.
Assessment To excel in this course, you would undergo two important assessments.
These are Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) and Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA).
Though you are not to submit the answers to SEAs questions to your tutor, it is importance you take it serious as it would help you to assess your own understanding of the course.
It would also help you to identify the areas you need to improve on as the tutorials progresses.
The Tutor-Marked Assignment should also be taken serious and carefully answered.
It should be properly filled in your assignment file for submission and marking.
Your performance in this exercise counts a lot as 30% of your total score on the course depends on it.
You are once again encouraged to take it serious.
Tutor-Marked Assignment You will find at the end of every Unit, a Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA).
I expect that you will carefully answer the assignments and put them in your assignment file for submission as instructed.
Note that this course guide does not contain any Tutor-Marked Assignment questions.
You will find them in virtually all the units of every module in the main course details.
Final Examination and Grading As a 3-credit unit course, the final examination for MAC 312 will last for three hours.
The examination will count for 70% of the total course grade.
Note again that the Tutor-Marked Assignment will be 30% of the total grade.
So, your score in the Tutor-Marked Assignment plus your score in the final examination will determine your final grade in this course.
The examination questions will reflect to a large extent, the SAEs and TMAs which you are expected to have answered while studies on the course last.
I advise you make proper use of the time you have between the completion of the units and the 5  examination to revise the whole course.
You will find this exercise useful as it will help you to be familiar with SAEs and TMAs before your final examination.
What You Will Need for This Course To excel in this course, you will need to review your knowledge of historical overview of newspaper business and the principles of newspapering.
This will certainly refresh your mind on the meaning, essence and process of newspaper production.
Although the main course manual is well detailed and comprehensive, you will need to purchase at least, two textbooks out of the number of textbooks recommended to you.
This will aid your mastery of the course.
You may also need to visit some websites for additional reference materials that will facilitate your understanding of the course.
Also, it is important you to visit newspaper organizations additional insights into how the production process is carried out in practice.
Finally, you will need to cultivate quality time to rehearse what you learnt in the course on weekly basis.
This will further enhance your knowledge of the course.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials Tutorials in this course will span through 24 hours.
The dates and locations of the tutorials as well as the name and phone number of your tutor will be communicated to you once you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments.
Your tutor will also monitor your progress in the course and will be able to assist with your SAEs and TMAs.
I therefore, encourage you to feel free to contact your tutor in case of any difficulty and ensure prompt submission of your assignments.
Always attend your tutorials regularly and on time.
Also ensure you always participate actively in class discussions.
Conclusion This course is more of a practical based course.
The course requires in-depth understanding of the principles underlying newspaper production and 6  practice.
You will therefore make the most out of the course if you cultivate the right attitude of mind of understanding how best the principles apply to the practice of newspaper production.
Summary This course guide is carefully packaged to give you tight insight into MAC 312 (Newspaper Production).
The course is designed to equip you with rich conceptual and practical knowledge of newspaper production.
At the end of your studies in this course therefore, you would have learnt not only the conceptual/theoretical underpinning of the course but also, the strategic practical approaches to the production of typical newspaper.
However, your success in this course will depend more on the quality and quantity of time you put into your tutorials; the efforts you put into solving your SAE and TMA questions; and your strategic planning for engaged studying and revising of the entire course.
I sincerely wish you successful journey through your studies in the course and the entire programme.
Recommended Text 1.
Journalism Practice: News, Aesthetics, Ethics and Law by L. C. Nwodu 2.
Newspaper and Magazine Management, Production and Marketing by S. G. Anaeto, M. Solo-Anaeto and J.
A. Tejumaiye 3.
Effective Media Writing: Mass Media, Ad, PR and Promotions by I. E. Nwosu 4.
Public Speaking: Skill and for Success by T. J. Farrell and M. M. Farrell 5.
Modern Newspaper Practice by F. W. Hodgson 6.
Journalism: Who, What, When, Where, Why, and How by J. G. Strovall 7.
Essentials of Modern African Journalism by R. A. Akinfeleye 8.
Public Relations: Speech, Media Writing and Copy by I, E, Nwosu and S. O. Idemili 9.
Contemporary Editing by C. Friend, D. Challenger and K. C. McAdams 10.
Magazine Editing and Production (second edition) by J. W. Click and R. N. Baird 11.
Magazine and Newspaper Production by Chinenye Nwabueze 7  MAIN WORK MAC 312 NEWPAPER PRODUCTION COURSE DEVELOPER/WRITER Levi Chinaka Nwodu, PhD Department of Mass Communication Anambra State University, Igbariam Campus Igbariam, Anambra State chinaaks@yahoo.com lemmychi@gmail.com EDITOR Dr. Victor Ayedun-Aluma Department of Mass Communication University of Lagos HEAD OF UNIT Dr Jonathan E. Aliede, NOUN 8  Mass Communication Programmes National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 9  MAIN WORK MAC 312 COURSE TITLE: NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION COURSE TERM COURSE WRITER Levi Chinaka Nwodu Department of Mass Communication Anambra State University Igbariam Campus, Igbariam +234-803-7784-603 chinaaks@yahoo.com EDITOR Dr. V. S. Ayedun-Aluma Department of Mass Communication University of Lagos.
HEAD OF UNIT Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede School of Arts and Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos.
MODULE 1: NEWSPAPER: AN HISTORICAL AND GENERAL OVERVIEW 10  Before delving into the nitty-gritty process of newspaper production, it is germane to refresh your mind on the rudiments of newspaper medium.
This resolve is considered necessary given that you will appreciate the business of newspaper production more if you understand the foundation – that is, how newspaper phenomenon began, forms of newspaper and its merit as a medium of mass communication.
This introductory module is therefore designed to serve this crucial need.
The module is divided into four units.
Each of the units deals with specific aspect of the major objectives of the module.
Precisely, the units are: Unit 1: Newspaper: How it Began Unit 2: History of Newspaper: The Nigerian Experience Unit 3: Classification of Nigerian Newspapers Unit 4: Advantages of Newspaper as a Mass Medium We shall now begin to discuss each of the above units in details.
It is important you open your mind and go about tutorials in this module as though what you are going to be taught are new to you.
This will no doubt, deepen your understanding and appreciation of the basic elements of newspaper production.
UNIT 1: NEWSPAPER: HOW IT BEGAN 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Conceptual Overview of Newspaper 3.2: History of Newspaper 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading 11  1.0: Introduction In line with the main objective of this beginning module, this unit is designed to expose you to the brief history of newspaper phenomenon.
In essence, the unit is meant to refresh your mind on how what we know today as newspaper began.
The unit will lay the background for the study of newspaper production by simply exposing you to the meaning and origin of newspaper.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorials in this unit, you will be able to define and explain:  The concept of newspaper.
 The evolution of newspaper phenomenon.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Conceptual Overview of Newspaper Newspaper is simply, a printed unbound paper that contains news about current political, economic, socio-cultural, educational, environmental, scientific-cum-technological and sundry affairs as well as other relevant sales information (Nwodu, 2006).
A typical newspaper should therefore contain a blend of editorial contents (news, features/news commentaries, articles, letters-to-the editors etc.
); advertorials (advertisements, supplements and other paid commercial contents) and pictorials (pictures and illustrations that complement the news contents).
This is why Sanderman et al cited in Baran (1999) defines newspaper as “an unbound printed publication issued at regular intervals which presents information in words, often supplemented with pictures”.
The implication however, is that a typical newspaper is characterised as follow:  Unlike most publications that are bounded, newspapers are hardly bounded.
 Like every other print media modes, newspaper contents are usually permanent to the extent one can enjoy repeat exposure for as long as one is able to preserve a particular edition of a newspaper.
 It covers broad spectrum of interests ranging from politics, economic, socials, environmental, science, technology, and sundry subjects.
 It is offered periodically which could be daily, weekly or bi-weekly.
All in all, a newspaper should contain news on current issues of public importance.
It is an essential medium of mass communication which is found in almost all the nations and regions of the world.
3.2: History of Newspaper.
12  The idea about documenting daily occurrences as news began in Rome during Caesar’s reign.
Then, “the Acta Diurna (actions of the day), written on a tablet, was posted on the wall after each meeting of the Senate” (Baran; 1999, p.95).
It is important to note that the posting was usually done on a wall not walls.
The implication as Baran (1999, p.95) further informs is that “the circulation was one, and there is no reliable measure of its total readership”.
So once the report of the actions of the Senate is posted on a particular wall, people who were desirous to know the latest news went to that particular point to read the action of the day.
Those who could not go often inquired from those who were disposed to read up the posting.
However, in 1620 the documentation of events of the day on a tablet advanced to the stage of printed form.
With this development, a one-page publication called Corantos was published.
Then it was used to document specific news events hence, it was also called news sheet.
The very first news sheet was printed in Holland in 1620 and imported in England.
Soon after that production, Corantos became formidable tool in the hand of political actors who used it then to up their political ethos and interests.
According to Baran (1999, p.95): Political power struggles in England at this time boosted the fledgling medium, as partisans on the side of the monarchy and those on the side of the parliament published diurnals to bolster their positions.
When the monarchy prevailed, it granted monopoly publication rights to Oxford Gazette, the official voice of the Crown.
As politically motivated news sheet, this generation of newspapers were characterised by the following features:  They were single-paged news sheets.
 The contents were largely skewed to political news hence, the bulk of the information contained therein were tailored to service the political interest of the publishers.
 Since the contents were pigeon-holed into one page, stories were hardly in-depth – just more of tit-bits.
In 19th century, the newspaper business underwent drastic change both in structure, depth of coverage and audience.
With the spate of industrial revolution, mass movement to cities in search of white-collar jobs, increasing literacy rate and urbanization, a kind of newspaper branded “penny press” emerged to take care of diverse audience interests.
Dominick (2009, p.84) isolates conditions that necessitated the birth of mass newspaper.
These conditions as Dominick puts it are:  A printing press had to be invented that would produce copies quickly and cheaply.
 Enough people had to know how to read to support such press.
 A mass audience had to be present.
13  With all these and more in place, a ‘penny press’ was established in 1883 by the then 22- year old Benjamin Day who launched the New York Sun.
This was followed by the colourful New York Times launched by James Gordon Bennett in 1835 and Horace Greeley’s New York Tribune which made its debut appearance in 1841.
It is important to noted that the ‘penny press’ era marked the birth of modern journalism.
This is so given that the era recorded significant changes in newspapering.
The changes Dominick (2009, p.85) observes are:  It provides strong basis of economic support for the newspapers as advertisers began to exploit on the large circulation of penny papers to reach large segment of real and potential buyers.
 The pattern of newspaper distribution change from solely use of mere subscriptions to use of street sales via vendors in addition to other marketing sales strategies.
 The definition of what constitute news was redefined to the extent of recruiting reporters to go out to different beats to search for news rather than relying solely on the action of political actors.
 The techniques of news collection were improved upon to the extent that various means of obtaining current as against stale news were adopted since news items Were Seen As Valuable Commodities.
4.0: Conclusion Newspaper production has come a long way to be where it is today.
It has indeed, undergone series of evolution – evolving from the tablet form to a-paged news sheet and to what we now call modern newspaper.
The same way the production process evolves, so the contents have been diversified over time to accommodate different audience members’ varying needs and interests.
Students therefore need to understand this historical evolution and its attendant nature in order to appreciate the process of modern newspaper production.
5.0: Summary This introductory unit dealt with the brief conceptual and historical overview of newspaper medium.
In line with the objective of the unit therefore, the meaning and characteristics of newspaper were discussed.
Also, the historical evolution of newspaper was discussed.
The essence was to serve as prelude to subsequent tutorials in newspaper production.
Self Assessment Examination Define and explain the concept, ‘newspaper’.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Discuss the history of newspaper with emphasis on the conditions imperative for the birth of modern newspaper.
7.0: References/Further Reading 14  Baran, S. J.
(1999) Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Literacy and Culture; California: Melfield Publishing Company.
Dominick, J. R. (2009) The Dynamics of Mass Communication: Media in the Digital Age; New York: McGraw-Hill Nwodu, L. C. (2006) Journalism Practice: News, Aesthetics, Ethics and Law; Enugu: Rhyce Kerex Publishers.
UNIT 2: NEWSPAPER: THE NIGERIAN EXPERIENCE 15  1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: History of Newspaper in Nigeria.
3.2: Nigerian Newspaper after Iwe Irohin 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading 1.0: Introduction In unit one above, we discussed the meaning and the global perspective of the origin of newspaper.
In this unit, the emphasis is on the history of newspaper from Nigerian perspective.
In other words, we shall be discussing the history of newspaper in Nigeria.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorial in this unit, you are expected to discuss:  The history of newspaper in Nigeria  The journey so far.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: History of Newspaper in Nigeria.
According to Omu (1978, p.7): The first printing press was installed by the Presbyterian Mission when they arrived in Calabar in 1846.
Eight years later, the Reverend Henry Townsend fitted up a printing press and inaugurated a printing school in the mission compound at Abeokuta.
In 1859, he founded the Iwe Irohin which appeared as a Yoruba (sic) fortnightly but became a bilingual when an English supplement was added March 8, 1860.
By implication, the first newspaper was published in Nigerian soil in 1859 as a religious publication.
As the first newspaper to be published in Nigeria, Iwe Irohin enjoyed limited audience as a result of certain factors.
Some of the factors are:  The earlier editions were published in vernacular - precisely Yoruba.
This limited audience exposure to only those who were literate in Yoruba language.
16   The contents were limited to religious issues.
Since the mission was to help propagate the Christian faith and by extension, enhance missionary work.
 At its inception, the paper was starved of advert revenue which made its production costly.
As Nwanne (2008; pp.2-3) rightly observers Iwe Irohin did not survive for long adding that: It disappeared from the news stands in 1867 as a result of the “Ifole”, the popular uprising, which led to the expulsion of Europeans from Abeokuta, and the destruction of the mission printing press.
3.2: Nigerian Newspaper after Iwe Irohin Although the Iwe Irohin did not last long, it sure opened the way for newspaper production in Nigeria.
Decades after Iwe Irohin, Nigerians began to venture into newspaper production.
Precisely, “newspapers published by Nigerians appeared for the first time in the 1880s” (Omu, 1978).
With the demise of Iwe Irohin and the springing up newspapers published by Nigerians, the Nigeria newspaper industry has grown overtime to the extent it is now reputed as the largest in Africa.
As Omu (1978; p.26) records, “a total of fifty-one newspapers were established between 1880 and 1937” which according to him consist of:  Eleven Dailies.
 Thirty-three weeklies.
 Three fortnightlies.
 Four monthlies.
In spite of the teething problems the publishers faced then, both from the colonial masters and the economic burdens, the newspaper business continued to record steady growth in Nigeria.
In fact between early 1920s to late 1930s, provincial newspapers were established in most existing urban areas then.
For instance, places like Calabar, Aba, Ibadan, Enugu, Port Harcourt, Abeokuta, Ijebu-ode, Oshogbo, Onitsha etc., all had one provincial newspaper or the other.
Dominant among the newspapers published in the country then were Lagos Times founded by Richard Beale Blaize in 1880; Lagos Weekly Record published by Payne John Jackson; Lagos Standard by George Alfred Williams; The Nigerian Chronicle founded on November10, 1908 by Christopher Josephus Johnson and Emmanuel T. Johnson.
However, a turning point in newspapers journalism in Nigeria was recorded in 1937 following the birth of the famous the West African Pilot published by the Late Nnamdi Azikiwe.
It marked a turning point because its editorial opinion and story slant quickened nationalistic consciousness.
It quickly became a formidable channel as well tool in the hands of the crusaders of nationalism.
This period marked the beginning of professionalism in journalism practice in Nigeria.
This is so because that was the period when trained practitioners began to undergo training in news gathering, processing and production.
The implication is that prior to this period the 17  gamut of those practising journalism then ‘were not formally trained, most of them had their training on the job” (Nwanne; 2008,p.5).
Nwanne (2008, p.5) however attributes this landmark achievement in journalism education and practice to the late sage, Dr Nnamdi Azikiwe whose journalism background, which enabled him to appreciate the importance of mass communication to the extent journalism became ‘one of the earliest course Azikiwe introduced at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka - the nation’s first indigenous University, founded in October 1960.
Today virtually 70% of Universities and Polytechnics in Nigeria have Departments of Mass Communication where journalists are trained.
The newspaper industry is benefiting from this phenomenon.
With the improvement in printing technology including other gamut information and communication Technologies (ICTs), newspaper production in Nigeria is becoming a lot easier and faster with high aesthetics value.
Aliede (2010) rightly reports that the industry is flourishing in contemporary time to the extent over 250 newspapers (national, regional and local) circulate in Nigeria.
Nwodu (2012) reinforces this where he writes that the print media industry in Nigeria is a bourgeoning one which has recorded and continues to record remarkable improvements in the quality of printing among others.
Nwodu (2009; p.157) also informs that newspapers titles like the Guardian.
Punch, Champion, Vanguard and Thisday are now read online even as they compete favourably in international standard.
4.0: Conclusion Newspaper business began in Nigeria in 1886 with a religious publication by a British Missionary.
Since then the industry has grown to the extent many national, regional and local newspapers circulate regularly in the country.
Today, Nigerian newspapers are not only read in offices, homes and streets but also online.
Again quality of printing has improved tremendously to the extent digital printing seems to be the order of the day in Nigerian newspaper production.
5.0: Summary This unit discussed the history of newspaper in Nigeria.
It traced the first newspaper produced in Nigeria to Iwe Irohin – a vernacular newspaper produced and or published by a British missionary called Rev Henry Townsend.
The unit also discussed developments in Nigeria newspaper industry after Iwe Irohin.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Discuss the history of newspaper production in Nigeria with emphasis on the factors that militated against the growth of early press.
7.0: References/Further Reading 18  Aliede, J.E (2010) “‘An Appraisal of Nigeria’s Local and Foreign Images’, A Doctoral Thesis Submitted to the Department of Mass Communication, Benue State University, Makurdi.
Nwanne, B.U.
(2009) Essentials of News Reporting and Writing; Ikeja: Broads Ventures.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2012) “Issues in Nigeria Mass Media”, A Course Developed for National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN); Lagos: NOUN.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2009) “Mass Communication In Era of ICTs-Induced Globalization: the Nigerian Experience” in D.E.J Konkwo (ed.)
Mass Communication in the Emergent Information Society; Owerri: Alphabet Nigeria, Publishers.
Omu, F. (1978) Press and Politics in Nigeria: 1880-1937; Ibadan: Longman.
19  UNIT 3: CLASSIFICATION OF NEWSPAPER 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Classification by Periodicity 3.2: Classification by Reach 3.3: Classification by Ownership 3.4: Classification by Nature of Dominant Newspaper Interest 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading 1.0: Introduction The classifications of Nigerian newspaper dose not differ radically from what obtains elsewhere.
In this unit therefore we shall discuss the classes of Nigerian newspapers on the basis of the globally accepted forms or types of newspaper.
2.0: Objectives At the level of tutorials in this unit, the students are expected to explain:  The parameters for classifying newspaper.
 The actual features of each newspaper type.
3.0: Main Content.
3.1: Classification by Periodicity One of the commonest forms of classifying newspaper is by periodicity.
This has to do with frequency with which a particular newspaper title is published.
In Nigeria like elsewhere not all newspapers hit the newsstand at the same frequency.
While some hit the newsstand on daily basis, some come out on weekly basis while others appear fortnightly.
The import is that a newspaper can be classified as daily, weekly, or bi-weekly newspapers based on how frequent the newspaper is produced and pushed to the market.
Presently, most newspapers in Nigeria are either produced daily or weekly.
Examples of daily newspapers in Nigeria are the Champion, The Guardian, Vanguard, ThisDay, Punch, and The Nation, etc.
Also, weekly newspapers exist in Nigeria and the 20  examples include Business World, Insight, Newspage, Oracle, Announce, Express and a host of others.
3.2: Classification by Reach This is another classical way of categorising newspapers.
In this context, the emphasis is on the geographical areas or scope of circulation of a given newspaper.
Thus, a newspaper can be classified as:  International newspaper meaning that the newspaper circulates across national boundaries.
Apart from the fact that Nigerian newspapers are read online, most Nigerian newspapers do not circulate at international level.
 National newspapers meaning that a given newspaper can be read in most part of a country.
This means that national newspapers circulate nationally.
Nationally in the sense that such newspaper can be seen in most parts of the country.
Examples of such newspapers in Nigeria are The Guardian, The Champion, Thisday, Punch, The Nation, The Sun and many others.
 Regional newspapers which are classified as such because their reach is usually limited to a given region.
With the collapse of the old regional structure in Nigeria (note that what we have now is geopolitical zones which are smaller in scope or area compared to the former regions) much of regional newspaper are hardly seen in Nigerian newspaper landscape.
However, some newspapers can be classified as regional newspapers given the scope of their reach and the political interest they tend to service.
Newspapers like Niger Delta Standard, Pointer Express, Announcer Express and Al Mizan easily pass for regional newspapers.
 State/local newspapers also abound in greater proportion in Nigeria.
This classification is usually based on the fact that they are produced for circulation within a state or locality within a state.
Typical examples of this kind of newspapers in Nigeria include but not limited to Chronicles, Hard Truth, Kogi Graphic, Mbano Voice, National Light, Statesman, Telegraph and The Arise Express.
3.3: Classification by Ownership Newspaper can also be classified on the basis of ownership structure.
In this case a newspaper can be any of the following: a) Government owned newspaper which refers to a newspaper that owned and controlled by either the national or state government.
In Nigeria today state governments usually have state owned and controlled newspaper like Statesman (owned by Imo State government), the Tide (owned by Rivers State government) the Chronicle (by Cross River State) etc.
Apart from the east while Daily Times which was established by the national government, there is no Federal Government owned newspapers in circulation currently.
21  b) Privately-owned newspaper which is usually established and controlled by private investors.
This pattern of newspaper ownership is the commonest in Nigeria.
In fact most of the national newspapers currently in circulation in the country come under this form of ownership.
c) Mixed ownership describes a pattern of ownership in which public and private investors partner to establish the newspaper.
In this case the government owns certain percentage of the share and the private investors own some.
This is not really common in Nigeria.
The only time effort was made in this direction in Nigeria was when the Federal Government experimented with the Daily Times - an experiment that did not last.
3.4: Classification by Nature of Dominant Newspaper Interest.
Newspapers are often classified in terms of the interest area they cover.
The interest may be sports, fashion, religion, business, gender etc.
In Nigeria today most of special interest publications come in the form of magazines with few newspapers trailing behind.
Examples of such special appeal-cum interest newspapers are found largely in the areas of business and sports.
Some of such publications include the Business Day, Complete Sports and Kick off.
4.0: Conclusion.
A discussion on newspaper production needs to emphasize different forms, types or categories into which a newspaper should be produced and circulated.
Much of such forms are usually on a number of factors which were discussed in this unit.
5.0: Summary This unit discussed the classifications of newspaper.
It was meant to further serve as the precursor to our discussion in newspaper production 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Mention and discuss the parameter for categorising newspaper in Nigeria.
7.0: References/Further Reading Baran, S. J.
(1999) Introduction to Mass Communication: Media Literacy and Culture; California: Melfield Publishing Company.
Hodgson, F. W. (1984) Modern Newspapers Practice.
London: Heinemann.
Nwabueze, C. D. (2011) Magazine and Newspaper Management and Production, An Introduction Text; Owerri: Topshelve Publisher.
22  UNIT 4: ADVANTAGES OF NEWSPAPER AS A MASS MEDIUM 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Characteristics of Newspaper 3.2: Advantages of Newspaper 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction In spite of the advantages of immediacy (live broadcast) which broadcast media have over the print media, the newspaper business has continued to thrive in many parts of the world including Nigeria.
Today, broadcast media even complement use of newspapers for dissemination of information via press review.
Ordinarily, it is expected that the newspaper industry should squeeze up in the face of all these and for want of patronage.
This was not to be.
What keeps newspaper operators in business is largely because of the unique nature of newspaper as medium of mass communication.
This unit will discuss those advantages and more.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorials in this unit, you would explain:  The characteristics of newspaper.
 The merits of newspaper over other medium of communication.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Characteristics of newspaper.
As a distinct medium of mass communication, newspaper has some features that are unique to it.
These features have to some extent distinguished newspaper from other media of mass communication.
Some of these characteristics according to Groth in Okunna and Omenugha (2012) are as follow: 1.
A newspaper must be published periodically at regular intervals 23  2.
These intervals should not be less than once a week.
3.
It must be mechanically reproduced.
4.
It must be timely.
5.
It must offer freedom of access to all readers, that is, it must be available to everyone who can afford the cover price.
6.
Its content must not be aimed at any select group in the society.
3.2: Advantages of Newspaper One of the major snags in Nigeria newspaper business is that overtime the nation has not seen much of rural newspaper that can effectively cater for rural development needs.
Though newspaper titles which were regarded as community newspapers like Community Concord, Udoka and Gaskiya Tafi Kwaobo existed in the past, their contents and news slants were largely tailored in the fashion of urban elite newspaper (Nwodu and Fab- Ukozor; 2003).
According to Kasoma (1991, p.14) a typical participatory rural newspaper should: Be compiled, printed and published in the locale which it is meant to serve by the rural people themselves and it should be published in language spoken by the majority of the people for whom it is published.
Although Kasoma focused on rural newspaper the urban newspapers in Nigeria have also their own teething problems.
Both urban and rural newspapers in Nigeria suffer low patronage-cum-readership which according to Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor (2003;p.73) is attributed to low literacy level in Nigeria.
Another problem is that the newspaper environment in Nigeria has witnessed the birth and demise of many ad hoc publications.
They are regarded as ad hoc in the sense that those publications were usually established to service the political interests of the publishers.
So once the political campaigns are over, win or lose the publishers withdraw from funding the publications and the newspapers will die unnatural death.
Newspapers like other printed matter have also been accused of limiting their exposure to literate audience.
This to a large extent is true given that one requires some level of literacy to be exposed to newspaper contents.
In spite of all these snags, newspaper medium has some advantages that make it unique.
Apart from the traditional functions of informing, educating, persuading and entertaining the masses, which are peculiar to other mass media organs, newspaper plays other functions.
Some of these functions-cum-advantages as Nwosu (1990, p.190) states include but not limited to: 1.
Providing better interpretation or in-depth developmental stories that place developmental issues and facts in greater perspectives.
2.
Having advantages of place and time of exposure and flexibility, which ensures easy comprehension and retention of media content.
24  3.
Ensuring easier storage and retrieval for limitless repeat exposure any time, any day and anywhere (emphasis added).
4.
Serving as viable tool for mass education and mass literacy by motivating and encouraging readership habits among illiterates and new literates in the society.
It is imperative to note that in spite of all odds against newspaper medium, the medium has continued to compete favourably with other media of mass communication because of these unique advantages.
In producing a newspaper therefore, conscious effort needs to be made at ensuring that the newspaper is well produced to reflect those enduring advantages.
4.0: Conclusion.
A number of challenges face newspaper industry in Nigeria.
In spite of these challenges, the industry has continued to wax strong.
The reason is because newspaper has some advantages that are unique to it some of which were discussed here.
5.0: Summary.
This unit explored the unique advantages of newspaper as a medium of mass communication.
In doing this, the characteristics, the problems associated with newspaper as a medium of mass communication and the advantages of newspaper were discussed.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment.
Discuss the constraints and merits of newspaper as a medium of mass communication.
7.0: References/Further Reading Kasoma, F. (1991) “Rural Newspaper As Agent of Development” , in Module on Development Communication 2, Nairobi: ACCE.
Nwodu, L.C.
and Fab-Ukozor, N. T. (2003) Communication Imperatives for Development; Enugu: John Jacobs Classic Publishing.
Nwosu, I. E. (1990) Mass Communication and National Development: perspectives on the Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria; Aba: Frontier Publishers.
Okunna, C. S. and Omenugha, K.A.
(2012) Introduction to Mass Communication; Enugu: New Generation Books.
25  MODULE 2: NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION: GETTING STARTED Contrary to what many may think, newspaper production does not start with activities in the press (printing house).
It does not start from the point editors and sub-editors are working on the manuscripts submitted by the field reporters either.
The actual production process begins the moment the reporter delves into the field to hunt for news.
It is germane therefore that in discussing the process of newspaper production, students should be exposed to preliminary activities that serenade the actual newspaper production.
In the previous module, we discussed some conceptual issues you need to know before embarking on intensive study of newspaper production.
In this module, you will be gradually exposed to beginning issues involved in newspaper production.
The essence of this unit therefore, is to equip you with those preliminary issues-cum-activities that lay the background for actual newspaper production.
That in a nut shell is the object of this module.
The module is arranged in four units to enable informed and exhaustive discussion.
The units are as follow: Unit 1: Beats as Sources of News Unit 2: Gathering the News Unit 3: News Copy Preparation Unit 1: Beats as Sources of News 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objective 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of News Beat 3.2: Major News Beats in Nigeria.
4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading 1.0: Introduction The starting point of newspaper production is the gathering of news.
In essence, no production can actually take place without news item and other contents to be produced.
Students of journalism often wonder how journalists gather volume of information that fills the pages of their news medium.
It is important to state therefore that news and other editorial contents of a newspaper do not fall from the moon.
They are deliberately searched for, gathered, prepared and delivered for mass consumption (Nwodu; 2006).
26  Nwodu (2006, p.87) further informs that the search for news “takes reporters to various areas and institutions where news items are found”.
These are simply the news beats.
This unit shall therefore focus attention on beats as sources of news in a given society.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorials in this unit, you are expected to discuss:  The meaning of beat.
 Various news beats.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of News Beat News beats are simply “special interests areas or places where reporters are assigned to for purpose of continuous coverage” (Nwodu; 2006, p.87).
Beat in this context therefore is an institution, agency or establishment were a reporter goes to on regular basis to gather information about happenings in that specific area for publication in his/her news medium.
So when a reporter is assigned to a particular beat by the editor, that reporter undertakes the coverage of events emanating from that beat for his/her medium.
This is why a reporter who covers a given beat is often called special beat reporter or by the name of the beat he covers.
For instance, the reporter who covers energy beat may be branded ‘energy beat reporter’ whereas one assigned to cover economic matters goes by the name, ‘economic beat report’.
A specialised reporter therefore is “limited to same aspects of news coverage or to a particular beat” (Nworgu and Nwabueze; 2005, p.55).
Once a beat is assigned to a reporter, he/she automatically assumes the responsibility of ensuring daily coverage of activities in that beat.
There is a limit to what can go for news from that beat.
According to Nwodu (2006, p,88) “news from advertising agencies, news release, news from roving reporters and special assignment reporters are hardly regarded as news from the beats”.
News from the beat must therefore come from a specific news area.
News beat is therefore very crucial in news gathering and production.
The relevance of news beat in the process of news gathering, processing and production according to Nwodu (2006, p. 88) includes among others:  It enhances day to day work of news organisations by making news readily available.
 It boasts the quality and quantity of news carried by news organisation.
 It leads to specialisation in news reporting.
The more a reporter covers a special beat the more he specialises in the coverage of such beat.
3.2: Major News Beats in Nigeria We earlier define news beats as specific areas where a reporter is officially assigned to for continuous reporting.
In this segment, we shall examine some of the common news beats 27  in Nigeria and the major information usually sought from such beats.
The beat as Nwodu (2006, p.88-89) categorises them are: 1.
Police/Crime Beat This is where crime beat reporters usually go to obtain follow up information about judicial killing/assassination, arrest of hoodlums and robbery suspects, arson and sundry criminal activities.
The major contact person that clarifies issues when reporters seem to be in doubt or needs to attribute information/stories on crime suspect, rounding off criminals, exposing hideouts for criminals, parading of crime suspects is usually the Police Public Relations Officer (PPRO).
The reporter assigned to this beat also covers police special events like press conference, passing out parade (POP), anniversaries, and sundry social activities of the police.
Note that institutions like Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC), Independent Corrupt Practices Commission (ICPC) come under this beat.
2.
Judiciary or Court Beat.
Covering judiciary beat seems to be the hardest aspect of reporting.
This is because of the kind of jargons often used in the administration of justice.
However, reporters assigned to this beat often monitor and report updates of celebrated and or controversial cases relating to misappropriation of public fund by top governments/public officials, rape, cases of divorce involving public figures etc.
The judiciary beat reporter also reports social functions relating to judiciary and sundry matters like appointment of justice, judges and magistrates; call to bars; special court session for departed colleague; judicial panel of inquiry; human rights activities etc.
3.
Government House Correspondence The beat reporters cover government activities including their actions and inactions.
Government here covers both the federal, state and local governments.
So it is the responsibility of the beat reporter to always report the activities of the president, the governors, the local govt chairman, and their aids on regular basis.
Note the emphasis is on the executive arm of the government.
4.
Legislative/Parliament Beat Reporter The national and state assemblies as well as the local government council are very important news sources.
For this reason, newspaper edition in Nigeria and indeed elsewhere usually assign people to cover the activities happening in these assemblies and even in the constituencies and wards they represent.
5.
Science, Power and Mines.
Many a time, the scientific and technological lives of a nation are faced with a number of developments and challenges.
A breakthrough in medical/biological science, an advancement in a given aspect of technology, construction of dam, breakdown in power installations, appointments in ministry of science and technology; and so on are all 28  newsworthy.
It takes the effort of science, power and mines beat reporter to chronicle the activities for use in the production of newspaper.
6.
Agriculture This beat is also very crucial to newspaper audience in Nigeria.
This is so because both subsistent and large scale mechanised agriculture are practiced in Nigeria.
The agricultural beat reporters therefore work closely with Ministry of Agriculture and extension service in order to continuously report developments, issues and sundry activities in the industry.
7.
Education The beat reporter is concerned with continuous coverage of education Ministry; tertiary, secondary and primary educational institutions, issues and developments in the educational industry.
8.
Sports The reporter assigned to this beat, covers every aspect of sports and the ministry of sports, Because of the enormous interest Nigerians have in sports and the broad range of sporting activities that go on in the country newspaper editors often assign reporters to cover different aspects of sporting activities.
For instance, the reporter that covers football for a newspaper may differ from the one that covers marathon race or boxing etc.
9.
Recreation and Leisure Entertainment is a thriving business in Nigeria today.
The home movies (both English and vernacular with or without English subtitle) are thriving.
Comedians are waxing strong.
The music industry is flourishing.
Fast food industry is booming.
In all, people are increasingly realising the importance of hanging out in recreation centres to be entertained and to give their lives good treat.
So reporting entertainment and recreation has become a serious news beat where reporters are assigned to for frequent coverage.
So the reporters report activities taking place in recreation centres with emphasis on: who is doing what in the industry, and the activities of the movie/entertainment stars.
10.
Banking /Finance As the name implies, this beat involves banking, insurance, assurance, stock market and sundry financial institutions that service business and economic activities of a country.
So the beat reporter is saddled with the responsibility of covering events, development and challenges arising from this beat.
11.
Armed Forces/Para-Military Beat This beat covers the Army, Navy, Air force, Custom, Immigration, Civil Defence, Road Marshal (safety) and sundry institutions meant to protect the territorial integrity of the nation.
In some newspaper organisations that have strong financial base and are well staffed, reporters are usually assigned to different arms of this beat.
However, in some fledging ones, a reporter can cover all including police though not effectively.
29  Health/Hospital Beat The reporter of health /hospital beat undertakes the coverage of health related issues including activities taking place in the health ministry.
He/she reports epidemic, discovery of new diseases, vaccines, new health challenges, healthy health practices etc.
12.
Foreign Affairs The beat reporter reports internal & external affairs, diplomacy and polices.
Often times, the beat reporter can travel to other nations to cover special events like UN Session, a country’s General elections and other international issues of interest to the nation.
The beat reporter most times monitors the wire service and extract international news he thinks will be of interest to the newspaper audience.
4.0: Conclusion It is important to note that what we have here does not cover all the areas where a newspaper reporter can gather news.
What we have discussed here are the major once.
There are other sundry areas which either the roving reporter or the general interest reporter can cover and report to his/her newspaper editor publication.
5.0: Summary We earlier said in this unit that newspaper production begins with the beat.
This is because it is the news gathered from different beats that make up the bulk of newspaper content without which there will be no news to produce.
This unit therefore discussed the meaning and importance of news beat as well the types of news beat.
Self- Assessment Examination Define and explain the importance of news beat in newspaper production.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Mention and discussed five major news beats known to you.
7.0: References/Further Reading Hodgson, F.W.
(1984) Modern Newspaper Practice; London: Heinemann.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2006) Journalism Practice: News, Aesthetics, Ethics and Laws; Enugu: Rhyce Kerex.
Nworgu, K.O and Nwabueze, C.D.
(2004) Mass Media Writing: Form and Style; Owerri: Ultimate Books.
30  Unit 2: GATHERING THE NEWS 1.0: Introduction Before the actual newspaper production, news stories have to be gathered, written and edited for audience consumption.
News gathering therefore, is an essential part of newspaper production.
This unit is therefore concerned with this crucial aspect of newspaper production.
2.0: Objectives It is hoped that at the end of tutorial in this unit, you will expected to discuss:  The tools for news gathering.
 Skills required for effective news gathering skills and reporting.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Gathering the Story According to Ngwu (2000; p. 29): News stories do not just drop on their own on the newspaper pages...they have to be collected and written by selected hands in the media industry whose duty is to search for them, gather them and compile them for onward transmission to the audience.
The implication is that without a reporter who gathers and reports the news, there will be no news to produce for mass consumption.
And as Ngwu (2000; p.29) further observes, ‘reporters get their news item from a variety of sources’.
These are what we summed up as beat or other sources the reporter needs to see him/her self as ‘prospector who digs and digs removing the top soil to reach the one beneath’ (Odogwu; 2009, p.2).
In digging for news therefore the reporter needs to understand the right person or group of persons to meet in his/her assigned beat in order to obtain authentic information.
Reporters source most of their news reports from people who wield religious, political or economic power.
This does not mean that other people not linked to power cannot make news.
It simply means that the more prominent one is, the more his/her actions and inactions make news.
However, in gathering news whether from prominent person or other sources, the reporter needs to adopt certain approaches.
These approaches are: a.
Speeches from chief executives during an institution’s special events like silver/golden jubilee of the organisation; public presentation of a company research and development; matriculation/convocation ceremony of educational institution; independence anniversary of a country.
In this case, the reporter needs to be at the scene of the event and write stories based on the written or oral address presented by the chief executive.
31  b.
Interview as news Gathering Tool It is not all the time that reporters source news through event coverage.
Reporters often rely on interview to obtain background and or insider information about news-worthy event or happening.
According to Nwodu (2006; p.93) an interview is: A question and answer interaction between a reporter or reporters (interviewer or interviewers) and a source (interviewee) for the purpose of obtaining in-depth and background information concerning an issue or occurrence which the source by virtue of learning, position or happenstance is in position to know and willing to share.
Summers et al (1995; p.46b) also define interview as “an occasion when a famous person is asked questions about their life, experiences, or ideas for a newspapers, magazine, TV programme etc”.
Nwodu (2006; p. 94) categories individuals who should be mostly interviewed into: I.
An eye witness of an event or occurrence for which an interview is sought.
II.
A personality who by virtue of his position in the society wields influential opinion on burning national issues.
III.
An expert in a given field who by virtue of his/her penetrating superior knowledge of the area can divulge information that can clarify rather than confound a nebulous situation or event.
IV.
Chief executive of an organisation around which the event necessitating an interview revolves.
V. Victims (survivors) of an act (like accident, robbery incidence or fire disaster) because of their practical experience of the act.
To ensure successful interview, the interviewer (that is the journalist) should take a number of steps which include:  Define the purpose of the interview before meeting the interviewee.
 Research on the subject of the interview and the personality to be interviewed to ensure that no stone is left unturned.
 Book appointment with the interviewee to ensure the interviewee does not fail.
 Prepare some questions on the subjects to enable you gather as much relevant information as possible in the course of the interview.
 Ask follow up questions when necessary.
32   Be polite to the interviewee during the interview.
Even if you are insulted, ignore the insult and press for the information.
 Where the interviewee cited a document during the interview politely request for the document at the end of the interview.
Also request for an opportunity to come back to the interviewee for further questioning or clarification when in doubt.
3.2: Monitoring the Media You can also enhance your information gathering skill by monitoring other media organs.
This monitoring is necessary to fish out breaking news or issues which your medium for one reason or the other, did not capture.
That could help serve as a lead which you can dig for fresh angle or facts to the story which even the medium that broke the news may not get to that extent.
This digging for fresh fact can even yield a scope (special report which is exclusive to your medium).
Most time editors feel delighted to produce scoops because scoops help to distinguish a newspaper organisation from others in the estimation of newspaper audience.
So monitoring other newspaper is very important in that it helps the reporters, sub-editors and editors to achieve a number of goals to include:  Ascertaining what others packaged in their news contents which your medium missed.
 Determining fresh angle to a poorly treated hot news item published or aired in other news media.
 Determining how other news media covered news items also covered by your newspaper with a view to fathom how the story was treated and produced which your medium could improve on to make your subsequent news treatment and production better.
3.3: Deciding the Event to Report/Cover According to Nwodu (2006; p.2): Events like the botched coup in Serra Leone in year 2000; America’s 2000 Presidential election impasse; the 2001 World Igbo Summit in America; the killing of Laurent Kabila (the former President of Democratic Republic of Congo); the 2001 visit of the Archbishop of Canterbury to Nigeria; the shocking 2-1 defeat of the highly rated Super Eagles of Nigeria in the hands of the lowly rated Liberian Counterpart in the 2002 World Cup qualifying series; the bombing of World Trade Centre (WTC) tower in America; the Ikeja bomb blast in Nigeria; the 2004 Okija Shrine saga; the 2005 Belview and Sosoliso plane Crashes in Nigeria and many such occurrence challenge journalists at the spur of the moment (or at the moment of occurrence) to offer their numerous 33  audience fresh, sizzling (hot) and juicy news and news analysis about these events.
What this long excerpt purport is that numerous seen and unforeseen events take place on the daily basis.
As they occur, reporters face serious challenges as to which event to cover in preference to numerous others.
Deciding on which event to cover and the aspect of news to gather from an event so decided become essential part of the process of news gathering which the reporter must not approach with levity.
This decision is necessary given that an event does not become news merely because it occurred.
It can only be substantive account of them (Nwodu; 2006 p.2).
Reporters often face serious problems deciding what to cover in preference to another.
This is because the unethical reporter is often motivated by selfish interest rather than public interest in deciding what to cover.
In this case consideration is given to an event where the reporter expects fatty envelop from the event organiser rather than event that holds greater interest to members of the public.
Another problem here is that of the editors’ interests.
Situations abound where editors receive gratification from cheap publicity seekers and insist a reporter should cover their events/activities against the wish of the reporter and that of the public interest.
Apart from these ethical and gate keeping problems, experts have over the years, establish parameters for gauging or determining which event should be covered in preference to others (MacDougal, 1977; Nwosu, 1996; Okenwa et al 2000; Nwabueze, 2005 and Nwodu, 2006).
It is important to note that these parameters are focused on the news determinates or values which emphasises: 1.
Timeliness - is the event around which a potential news story will emanate timely?
2.
Proximity - how close or otherwise is the event likely to be to the newspaper audience?
3.
Prominence - how important is the potential news event and the personalities involved?
4.
Magnitude - how significant is the potential news event in terms of degree of occurrence?
For instance it will be unprofessional to cover an averted accident in preference to one in which many people died.
5.
Human Interest/Consequence - what impact is the potential news likely to wield on the audience and places of occurrence?
By the time an ethical reporter applies these principles in deciding what to report and publish he/she will be contributing immensely to the production of quality news that can enhance the overall newspaper production.
34  4.0: Conclusion Knowledge of the cannons and techniques of news gathering is very crucial in newspaper production.
This is so because it helps the reporters, editors and all those involved in news gathering, writing and production to understand and appreciate what makes the news and how to package the news to add meaningfully to the overall aesthetics of newspaper.
5.0: Summary This unit focused on key issues involved in news gathering process.
It also highlighted the techniques for news gathering.
Self Assessment Examination Discuss the factors you will consider most in deciding the event to cover against others.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Define the concept “interview” and explain the steps you would take to conduct a successful interview.
7.0: References/Further Reading MacDougal, C. (1997).
Interpretative Reporting, Ottawa: Macmillan Publishing.
Ngwu, C. D. (2000) “The News Gathering Devices” in S.N Okenwa, S.E.
Udeze and C.D.
Ngwu (eds.)
The Media World: Exploration in Writing and Productions.
Enugu: Bismark Nwabueze, C.D.
(2005) The Art of Investigative Reporting: A P Practical Guide; Enugu: Daisy Press.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2006) Journalism Practice: News, Aesthetics, Ethics and Laws; Enugu: Rhyce Kerex.
Nwosu, I.E.
(1996) Effective Media Writing; Mass Media, Advertising, PR and Promotion; Enugu: E-Nok Publishers.
Summers, D. Et al (1995) Longman Dictionary OF Contemporary English; England: Longman.
35  UNIT 3: NEWS COPY PREPARATIONS 1.0: Introduction 2.0: ObjectiveS 3.0: Main Content 3.1: From the Reporter’s Diary 3.2: Preparing the News Copy 3.3: More on Event Coverage 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction One of the essential newspaper pre-production activities is the actual news writing.
When the news is not properly written therefore it can delay the process of newspaper production.
This is why it is important to discuss news copy preparation as essential aspect of newspaper production.
This is the major emphasis in this unit.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorial in this unit, you would be able to explain:  News writing skills for print media.
 Basic rules for preparing news copy.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: From the Reporter’s Diary The actual news production starts with the reporter’s diary.
This usually a short note where a reporter juts down salient points made by a news source while covering an event.
Although reporters now use electronic devices like midget, GSM Handset, U-tube enabled cameras etc in gathering news, such devices have not taken the place of reporter’s diary.
At best, they complement reporter’s dairy.
The reasons are obvious and include the fact that:  The electronic devices for one mechanical reason or the other, may fail to record the news source’s voice.
 Even when the voice is recorded, it may not be clear for easy transcribe.
36   The reporter may be choked by time that transcribing recorded information may be an uphill task for the reporter.
So when any or combination of these is (are) the case (s), the reporter can easily and effortless rely on his/her note book (diary) to churn out good news out of the event covered.
It is therefore advisable that reporters should always attend events with their diary.
The question therefore is what should fill up the diary?
In other words what should a reporter record in his/her diary?
The simple answer to this is that the reporter should note salient points that occur in the scene of event he/she is covering in the dairy.
Such salient points constitute potential news which will become substantive news once the reporter writes a story out of the salient points and gets the story processed and published.
Below is a typical example of how facts are noted down on a reporter’s diary.
Figure1.
A Sample of Content of Reporter’s Dairy.
Occasion: 25 Convocation Ceremony of Ulamou University.
Dateline: Okwe Owerre Date: 22nd January, 2013 Highlights of VC’s Speech (Prof O.B.K.
Afuniocha)  Thanked all in attendance  Call for 10% increase in subvention to the university  Charged graduating students to be good ambassadors of the university and the country  University provides good atmosphere for learning  Urged philanthropies to assist government in funding university education.
 Regret that physical training activities are low in the university  Reason, lack of fund to develop sports arena in the university.
 Said the university management is eager to partner with investors willing to develop, operate and handover the needed sports arena.
Response by the Visitor (President Isike Adum):  Government committed to funding education at all levels  Will look into the demand for increased subvention.
 Government to provide ultra-modern ICT complex to encourage learning.
 Government to construct a mini-stadium to encourage sporting activities.
Other highlights  400 Bachelors, 102 Postgraduate Diploma, 43 Masters and 11 PhD Degrees awarded in various disciplines.
 Honorius causer award to 4 prominent business mogul The reporter’s diary that is as comprehensive as above will aid the reporter to write not only an in-depth news story but also, information rich feature story out of the event.
However, it is important to note that the content of the dairy is just a reminder of the key points emanating from the convention.
37  By the time the reporter sits back to do the actual story, these points will easily serve as a reminder that will guide him/her to prepare a good news copy.
3.2: Preparing the News Copy In getting news copy or sheet ready for editorial production, reporters are often advised to write the story on one side of the paper.
The news content could be written and forwarded to the sub-editor or the editor either in long hand or type-written.
Regardless of whether it is hand written or typed, the writer is expected to leave enough margin on the left side of the paper.
The margin is for the editor to mark for the printer.
‘Marking for the printer’ means editor’s and or sub-editor’s note instructing the printer on what to do with the edited copy during typesetting and printing.
Other technical aspects of news writing which help in facilitating news production according to Nwodu (2006; p.66) are: 1.
Ensure the top of every sheet used for particular story is properly identified or marked by:  Clearly writing the by-line (the reporter’s name).
 The story slug line usually written at the left topside of the paper.
This is usually a phrase of not more than four words which labels the story, aids headline writing and must reflect the main subject of the story.
The implication is that first page of news sheets of written news should according to Nwodu show case the following:  By-line of the news story.
 Slug or catch line - writing a phrase that reflects the essence of the story.
 Date line which is the name of town or city where the event took place.
 Date of the actual day the story was filled in by the reporter.
 The actual news story writing in paragraph.
 An indication that the story has either ended or continuing in the first page (see the illustration for typical sample).
38  Figure 2: A sample of news copy (sheet) showing the first page of News Sheet.
By-line: Chizaram Adachukwu Slug line: NOUN Convocation Ceremony Date line: Lagos Date: August 8, 2012 Space for headline.
Space for marking for Zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz the printer Zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz Zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz More or end.
Note that the reporter who filled in a story hardly writes the headline.
It is the responsibility of the sub-editor or the editor (depending on who actually edited the news sheet) to write the headline on the space provided.
Headline is usually written based on the slug line and the lead.
Note also that at the base of the news sheet you will find the word more in circle.
It indicates that the story has not ended.
It flows into the next page.
If the story ended in that first page or in any other page, there is need to indicate that by writing “end” and circle the ‘end’.
Therefore you either write “more” or “end” to indicate that a story is either continuing or has ended respectively.
The end of the story can therefore be indicated by 39  writing “end” or with symbol of harsh which could be single harsh (#) or double harsh (##).
It is important to note again that “the beginning of any additional sheet for a running story should be labelled “add 1 or 2” depending on the sequence of the flow of the story and number of additional pages (Nwodu; 2006,p.68).
Each additional page should also bear the slug line (catch line) so that if there is a mix up, or that any page fall off, it can be easily sorted out.
This is illustrated below: Figure 3: Additional News Sheet.
Add 1 Slug line: NOUN Convocation Ceremony Margin for editors marking for the printers.
# or ## or end The sub-editor should use any of the signs indicated to show that the story has ended.
It must not be written as indicted in the additional sheet.
What is illustrated here is that one out of the three options should be used at a time.
Therefore and as earlier indicated, it is either the sub-editor uses single harsh (#) or double harsh (##) or end to signify that the story has ended.
40  3.3: More on Event Coverage There is a slight difference in preparing a news sheet or copy for a mere news report and news coverage.
While all that we discussed above apply to both, preparing for event or news coverage require additional technicalities.
Before, we delve into the additional technicalities it is pertinent to distinguish between simple news reports and event coverage.
Nwodu (2006, p.69-70) elaborates on this where he writes: While reporting means writing a single story on an event, coverage requires keeping track records of activities or reporting several stages of developments pertaining to a running event.
An event that featured the commissioning of water project by a state governor may not last beyond two hours.
In this case, a routine reporter simply reports what happened at the commissioning ceremony and nothing more.
Compare this to a reporter assigned to cover event like trade fair, sports competition, rail or plane crash rescue mission, labour crisis or strike, protracted civil unrest, to mention a few.
Events like these are not merely reported, they are covered.
News coverage is therefore used to describe segmented or series of reporting of a single event that “span though a period of time” (Nwodu, 2006, p 70).
In a situation like this, it is pertinent to ensure that: Each part and addition to the story, which may be intended for certain editions, must be clearly identified so that it can pass smoothly into the production system without delay or confusion (Hodgson, 1984, p.20 The implication is that stories on running events come in bits.
A reporter covering trade fair for instance can file in several stories on the same subject as the event unfolds.
To avoid confusion therefore, the folio of a ready to be sent story should be marked ‘MFL’ or ‘MCL’ which respectively means ‘more to follow’ or ‘more to come later’.
In this case Hodgson (1984, p.21) counsels: If there is some important later material the reporter can‘re-nose’ his/her story – i.e.
send a new introductory section consisting of may be several paragraphs.
The numbered catch-line the material should be preceded by the words ‘new lead’.
4.0: Conclusion Knowledge of the technicalities in preparing news copy is very essential in newspaper production.
It facilitates proper typing and preparation of the copy for efficient editing.
It also provides insight into the depth of the story and the story sequence.
As a student of newspaper production, you should therefore take tutorials here serious as it is one of the core pre-production processes.
5.0: Summary Tutorials here dwelt on news copy preparation technicalities in newspaper production.
In line with the objectives of the unit, technical issues like documenting facts in reporter’s dairy, steps in preparing the news copy and facts on event coverage where discussed.
41  Self Assessment Examination Using relevant examples, distinguish between event reporting and event coverage.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Discuss extensively and with fitting illustrations the process of preparing a typical news copy.
7.0: References/Further Reading Hodgson, F.W.
(1984) Modern Newspaper Practice; London: Heinemann.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2006) Journalism Practice: News, Aesthetics, Ethics and Laws; Enugu: Rhyce Kerex 42  MODULE 3: EDITORIAL ASPECTS OF NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION In newspaper production, editorial production is very crucial in that this stage lays the foundation for the actual printing and collation.
In other words, editorial production is one the stages a newspaper man must treat with seriousness in order to excel in actual production of a newspaper.
The module therefore is designed to expose you to the technicalities involved in editorial production with emphases on copy editing, page planning or design and sundry processes associated with editorial production.
To ensure in-depth tutorial, this module is divided into the following units UNIT 1: Manuscript Editing UNIT 2: Photo Editing UNIT 3: Unit Count and Copy Fitting UNIT 4: Page Planning Unit 5: Typography and Type Setting Unit 6: Proof Reading.
UNIT 1: MANUSCRIPT EDITINGs 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning and Essence of Copy Editing 3.2: What Editors Look Out for in copy Editing 3.3: Editing Signs and Symbols 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction.
Editing is a job that rewards you for reading well ‘(Friend, Challenger and McAdams; 2000, p.2).
This is true in the sense that the editor must have to read a story thoroughly before he begins to edit a manuscript.
And by reading a story thoroughly the editor develops clear sense of what to edit.
He/she assumes the position of the writer and even tends to understand the story more than the reporter.
Editing therefore is very crucial in 43  shaping up a news story filed in by a reporter in acceptable grammatical, legal and professional standards.
This unit is therefore meant to expose you to the crucial task of editing.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorial in this unit it is expected that you discuss:  The meaning and essence of editing.
 What to look out for while editing.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning and Essence of Copy Editing According to Akinfeleye (1982, p.59) “copy editing in its simplest definition is the process or act of eliminating unwanted details of a copy for smooth reading and quick understanding”.
This implies that every story filed in by a field reporter is deemed to contain some errors which the editor or sub-editor is expected to expunge through the process of editing.
The essence of editing therefore is to ensure the copy fit into available space ear-marked for it in the newspaper.
The essence is to also ensure that the copy is accurate, coherent, clear, concise and simple (Akinfeleye, 1982, p.59).
3.2: What to Look Out for in Copy Editing According to Nwosu (1992, p.240) editing involves: Activities that include correcting the language, improving on the style of the original copy, checking for and removing all kinds of typing and other errors, ensuring that the copies are in accord with the editorial policy of the organisation, re-writing the copy when necessary without changing its message, writing down its length when necessary to fit into available space, writing titles and headlines for each copy or story, editing/scaling or cropping photography and illustration to fit into space allocated to them, indicating the required type sizes and typefaces, writing the captions or cut- lines for the photographs, removing or editing illegalities and vulgarities from the copies and doing everything that will help the printer to give you a near-perfect printed story...
The implication is that editing is a serious business in newspaper production.
It calls for thoroughness and is hardly done with levity.
It is usually done inside either the hand or type written copy.
Because of the increasing newspaper contents, the common practice now is to type the copy to facilitate easy reading and editing.
Note that copy editing is usually done with pencil.
The essence is to allow for easy erasure in case something was edited in error.
However, it is important to emphasize what should be edited for which Nwosu stated in the quote above.
In a nut shell, a copy is usually edited to expunge errors which could be any or combination of the following: 44  I. Grammar to ensure the copy is reproduced in acceptable universal grammatical standard.
II.
Winding sentences to make them sharper, clearer and concise.
III.
Legal to ensure the copy does not contain anything that will attract avoidable litigation.
IV.
Space to ensure the story depth does not get unnecessarily lengthy to the extent of over shooting the available space.
V. Organisation’s editorial policy and house style to ensure the story format and language do not run counter to the policies and in-house style.
VI.
Re-writing the story to ensure poorly written juicy or important story does not get thrown to the waste paper basket.
3.2: Editing Signs and Symbols Actual copy editing is usually done with editing signs and symbols.
These are “graphic short-hand for effective communication between the editor and the printer or typesetter (Nwosu, 1992, p.240).
Simple signs and symbols are usually used to facilitate this communication by the editor and the printer, a few words most times appear on the edited copy.
Note that special tools for copy editing are:  Eraser for erasing any error in editing.
 Pencil which can be easily erased when editing is done in error.
 Ruler for drawing line where necessary and for measuring space.
 Dictionary, reference books and encyclopaedia for referencing when in doubt.
 Style book for ascertaining the house style when in doubt.
 Editing signs and symbols.
Note also that an editor or sub-editor needs to possess certain qualities for efficiency in editing.
Some of such qualities are that he/she must be: I. Mentally alert.
II.
Patient and meticulous III.
Conscientious to endure the stress.
IV.
Intelligent and creative Below are some editing signs and symbols culled from Nwosu (1992, p.294).
45  4.0: Conclusion Copy or manuscript editing is the major starting point of the actual newspaper production.
A well edited copy no doubt, makes the work of both the typesetter and the printer easy.
It is important that students should learn practical editing as stepping stone to newspaper production.
5.0: Summary This unit exposed you to the nitty-gritty exercise of editing.
Precisely it dealt with the meaning and essence of editing; what the editors look out for in copy editing and the signs- cum-symbols editors use to facilitate communication between them and the typesetters and or printers.
Self Assessment Examination Define editing stressing the major things editors edit for in manuscript editing.
46  6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment.
Using editing signs and symbols edit the paragraph below to demonstrate your knowledge of editing.
This you can do by correcting what you think is wrong with the underlined words and what should fill the broken lines.
Biologers and social scientist often examane parts in other to understood -- ----- whole in whot is conventionally refered to ------ systemic analysis.
Just as cells made up larger units from organs which in turn forms the biological individual so also individuals were the basic units of families, clans, trades, villagers and tows that makes you a society (corrupt version takes from Okonkwor, 1992,p.
207).
7.0: References/Further Reading Akinfeleye, R. A.
(1982) Essentials of Modern African Journalism: A Premier; Miral Printing Press.
Friend, C.; Challenge, D.; and McAdams, K.C.
(2000) Contemporary Editing; Illinois: NTC/Contemporary Publishing Group.
Nwosu, I. E. (1992) “Public Relations Publications: Principles, Types, Readership, Contents, Editing and Production” in I. E. Nwosu and S. O. Idemili (eds.)
Public Relations: Speech, Media Writings and Copy; Enugu: ACENA Publishers.
Okonkwo, R. C. (1992) “The Media Society, Research and Public Relations Writing” in I. E. Nwosu and S.O.
Idemili (eds.
), Ibid.
47  UNIT 2: PHOTO EDITING 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning and Essence of Photography 3.2: Photo Editing Process 3.3: Photo Cropping, Scaling and Fitting to Space 3.4: Caption Writing 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction Photographs play enormous role in newspaper pages.
Apart from adding to the overall aesthetics of a newspaper, it helps to emphasize and document social conditions (Nwodu, 2008,p 26).
According to Udeze (1995) a good photograph must be able to “register facts, ideas and emotions with greater accuracy than human eyes.
A good photograph from the foregoing needs no translator and it fixes in the mind more readily than words”.
For a photograph to play such roles, it has to be well taken and properly edited.
This unit is therefore designed to offer you an illuminating insight into photo editing as part of editorial production.
2.0: Objectives After going through tutorials in this unit, you are expected to vexplain:  The meaning and essence of photograph.
 How to edit photograph.
3.0: Main Content.
3.1: Meaning and Essence of Photography In natural science (physics precisely) the word “photo” means light.
On the other hand, the word, “graphy” means writing.
Thus, it is the synergy between the two words that is called photography.
Stripped of all technicalities therefore, photography is the process or techniques of producing images that mirror reality” (Akinfeleye, 1982, p.77).
According to Fred A Barnard, a Chinese photographer-cum-journalist, “a picture is worth a thousand 48  words”.
The implication is that picture can easily convey instant message faster and more vividly than words.
The essence of photo editing therefore is to shape up pictures in a manner they will convey meaningful message with minimal words.
Photo editing is important in newspaper production in that according to Akinfeleye (1982, p.77), it helps correct errors caused by: a) The press photographer’s inexperience and ineptitude; and b) Those word-orientated editors and sub-editors who don’t know how to use pictures to say what words cannot say; or don’t know how to tell the news stories that only pictures can tell discretely.
3.2: Photo Editing Process Photo-editing is a multi–layer process which begins right from the stage the photographer focuses the camera on the object of interest to him/her.
It is at this point that the cameraman decides the angle from which to take the photograph, what action to emphasis in the photograph, the field of depth etc.
Experienced press photographer usually takes all these photo-editing decisions right on the field without anybody guiding him/her.
Editors often rely on their wealth of experience to take good shots and produce good pictures.
A picture is considered good if according to Akinfeleye (1982, p. 78) it will: a) Say it like it is.
b) Catch the eyes of the reader.
c) Convey information more vividly than the printed words.
d) Move tie-back effects on the reader.
After the shots have been taken, the next step in the process of picture editing takes place in the dark room.
This is where the film is developed and enlarged for printing from the negative (that is the film).
Note that in contemporary times, where digital cameras are used to take photographs, the dark room activities now take place in the computer.
So when the films are developed, enlarged and produced; the picture so produced and considered good are selected for publication based on their “relevance to a story and the position of the figures in the picture in relation to the space available on the page’ (Hodgson, 1984, p. 108).
Continuing Hodgson (1984, p. 108) says: For instance, pictures must not look out of the page or away from the story which the photograph illustrates.
In certain cases, in ‘head’ shots for instance, it is sometimes the practice to reverse the print so that the face or eyes look in the required direction, provided that this does not harm the image in any way or make nonsense of background detail.
In addition to this, the tonal quality of a picture in usually considered before deciding which photograph should be selected to either accompany a story or tell a story on its own.
This is necessary because selecting a picture that is blurring, churlish and drab-looking; such picture will not reproduce well when printed.
49  3.3: Photo Cropping, Scaling and Filling to Space After selecting the appropriate photograph to be used in newspaper production the next stage is to crop the photograph into the required shape and size it can fit into the required space.
Note that in newspaper production, pictures are hardly cut rather they are cropped using the following tools:  Sharpened soft pencil for marking  Ruler for accurate measurement.
‘Cropping’ means to mark off parts of a photograph which the photo-editor does not want to use in a publication.
For instance, the board or gray area of a printed photograph is not necessary in newspaper production.
So what is usually done is to place the photograph face down onto a light source such as a light box in which the bulbs shine up through a ground glass screen, outlining the details” (Hodgson, 1984, p.109).
So cropping is not cutting or dissecting the pictures.
It is indicating the unneeded part of the photograph by marking out such unneeded areas of the picture.
Photo cropping is followed by photo scaling.
Note that a photograph can be scaled up or down.
To scale up means enlarge the picture to a specific size usually indicated at the back of the photograph.
On the other hand, to scale down means to reduce the photograph to size smaller than the original size of the photograph.
Note that if the photograph is to be reproduced in the news page as it is (that is no enlargement or reduction is required), the photo-editor will simply mark “size to size” or “like it is” on the photograph.
Scaling or proportioning pictures for production can be done using mathematical or L- square or diagonal method.
Any of the methods adopted depends largely on which one the photo-editor prefers.
Mathematical approach is usually used to determine the required depth for shapes that are not obvious.
According to Click and Baird (1979, p.161) the computation can be carried out thus: Original Width ꞊ Reproduction Width Original Depth Reproduction Depth.
The scholars added that when three of the dimensions are known, the fourth can be found quickly e.g.
8 ꞊ 4 10 x.
When cross multiplied we now have: x꞊40÷ 8꞊5 So the depth, of the picture is 5.
Next commonly used approach is the diagonal method.
A picture can be vertical rectangle, or horizontal rectangle or square shaped.
Whatever the shape, we can use diagonal method to scale up or down as shown below: 50  Figure 4: A vertical rectangle shape picture.
Note that the dotted lined indicate the size of the original picture needed in the newspaper space.
The dotted lines outside the original picture indicates that the picture should be enlarged white those inside indicate reduction to the required size.
Figure 5: scaling of Horizontal rectangular shaped picture.
Figure 6: Scaling square picture 51  3.4: Caption Writing Photo-editing is not complete without caption writing.
This is why Akinfeleye (1982, p.80) submits that “a picture on the page a newspaper is useless without a caption/cutline or underline”.
This is because, captions or cutline helps to identify the person (s) appearing in the picture and the occasion where the picture was taken.
It is important to note that caption is usually written and printed below or underneath a picture for purpose of explaining the phograph.
Akinfeleye (1982, p. 80-81) isolates eleven qualities of a good caption where he insists that a caption must: i.
Identify the persons appearing in the picture.
ii.
Provide details about the other angles of the picture.
iii.
Avoid stating the obvious and never contradict the picture with the caption.
iv.
Minimize the use of unnecessary adjectives and adverbs - they don’t add better meaning rather, they make your caption look FRESHER THAN FRESH.
v. Pertinent explanations about the picture should be in short but very clear sentences.
A maximum word per caption should be 18-21 words.
vi.
Caption should be written in the present tense to give a sense of immediacy.
vii.
Provide greater elements of the 5w and H of the picture (i.e.
the who, what, where, when, why and how).
viii.
Should not be editorialised- i.e.
say it as it is - don’t put yourself in the caption.
ix.
Caption should not be ambiguous.
It should be very clear, concise and simple.
x.
Let your caption supplement the picture (e.g.
Senator X is shaking hand with Governor Y in this picture admirably - is superfluous as far as good caption is concerned.
The reader can see the hand-shaking therefore, you should look at the picture carefully see what the reader needs to be told in plain language therefore you should tell the readers the significance of the handshaking).
xi.
Full identification- initials are not allowed in good caption writing.
Therefore the first name should be given.
E.g.
Senator Yakubu Adeojo.
Since newspaper contents are thoroughly edited before actual newspaper production and distribution, photo-editors are expected to use these nuggets as yardstick for editing picture captions or cut-lines.
4.0: Conclusion.
Proper edited photograph adds to the aesthetic quality of newspaper layout and production.
It is important therefore that tutors should guide the students proper in the process of photo-editing to enhance the students’ understanding of newspaper production.
5.0: Summary Emphasis in this unit is on the meaning, essence and process of photo-editing.
Also treated in this unit is the need for and basic principles of writing captions.
52  6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Discuss the relevance of pictures in newspaper production and explain with relevant illustrations/examples the methods of scaling pictures for efficient newspaper production.
7.0: References/Further Reading Akinfeleye, R.A (1982) Essentials of Modern African Journalism: A Premier, Lagos: Miral Press.
Click, J. W. and Baird, R. N. (1979) Magazines Editing and Production: Brown Company Publishers.
Friend, C.; Challenger, D.; and McAdams (2000) Contemporary Editing: Illinois: Brown Contemporary Publishers Group.
Hodgson, F.W.
(1984) Modern Newspaper Practice; London: Heinemann.
Udeze, S.E.
(1995) Essentials of Photojournalism and Photography; Enugu: Metason Publishing Company.
53  UNIT 3: PAGE PLANNING 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Reasons for Planning Newspaper Page 3.2: Planning the Page 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction.
Imagine a newspaper page in which the contents are scattered.
Such page can hardly attract readers’ attention not to talk of providing eye comfort.
For this reason, editors usually prepare a caricature of a newspaper page before the actual production.
To this end editors try to position all the contents of each newspaper page in a manner that will give them insight into what the actual page will look like when finally produced.
So, as architects use architectural design to fathom well in advance how a house would look like when completed, so editor use dummy sheets to plan newspaper pages in order to know what the newspaper page will also look when produced.
The unit is therefore designed to expose you to the essential issues and steps involved in newspaper page planning (design or layout).
2.0: Objectives After going through intensive tutorial in this unit, you are expected to explain:  How to plan newspaper page.
 Why page planning is necessary.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Reason for Planning the Page According to Hodgson (1984, p.90): There is a method in the way newspapers are put together.
Stories and features are not just dropped into the pages as they are written... there is an overall plan or model in the editor’s mind of the sort of content the pager must have 54  To ensure that contents do not spill into one another and confuse the unsuspecting newspaper audience, the newspaper pages are usually planned and well designed.
Page planning and design are therefore, very crucial aspect of editorial production that usually task the editor’s psychological disposition and sense of aesthetic.
Page design is therefore aimed at achieving three major goals which Hodgson (1984, p.81) describes as: 1) To attract the eye of a potential reader.
2) To sign post the various items and signal their relative importance.
3) To give a newspaper a recognizable visual character.
As Friends et al (2000) put it, the goals of a good layout design include among other things to:  Introduce the audience to the publication.
It is the front door to the news, the first thing readers...see.
 Help establish a sense of priorities.
It suggests before anyone has read a single word, which stories are the most important and which are the least important.
 Simplifies the process of absorbing the news.
It helps the audience find its way from picture to headline to story and then through the story itself.
 Saves time.
News consumers seem to have less time than ever, but it is pointless for editors to simply throw up their hands and blame the audience or the frantic pace of modern life.
By implication, the page contents (headline, by-line, the text, the pictures and other contents) need to be properly positioned on the page in the manner that provides eye comfort and enhance readership.
3.2: Planning the Page According to Okoro and Agba (1995, p.70) “layout, to a large extent, is what creates this appearance: involves an immediate visual reaction”.
It is pertinent therefore that before the actual printing a of newspaper, the editor should have a well planned layout that provides insight into what the newspaper will look like hen printed.
A layout therefore is “a drawing which shows the placement of all the message elements in position for newspaper, magazines or book to be printed” (Udeze, 2000, p.188).
A typical newspaper page may therefore contain some of the following:  Headline  News stories  Pictures  Advertisements etc.
If all these contents are not properly planned and positioned, the page will look littered and repulsive, dull and uninteresting.
Page planning is therefore the process of putting these elements into a composition to achieve harmony, pleasing contrast and overall aesthetics.
Effective page planning therefore begins with visualising the layout.
Visualisation here means tinkering out the relative importance of the elements to be positioned in terms of 55  type of publication, nature of story and the nature of audience.
Udeze (2000, p.188) expands on this in the following words: The layout for a sensational magazine or tabloid newspaper will not be the same as one for clarification, sensational magazine and newspaper may use screaming banner headlines of 48inch bold across six columns for a story on sex scandal involving states in Nigeria, but an elite newspaper and news magazine may consider it an unnecessary act of sensationalism... at a more practical level, the layout for Punch, The Guardian and The Concord newspapers cannot be the same thing with that of Every Time, Lagos Life and Coal City News.
The implication in that in visualizing the page layout, the editor must put into consideration the nature of the medium that will carry the news.
However, in most newspaper organisations, page planning is usually done in three phases which are:  Phase one, thumbnail or miniature layout which involves sketching or organising elements on a ruled newspaper sized sheet called dummy sheet.
The process is technically referred to as dummying.
Since the dummy is less expensive the editor can afford to do the planning here severally to get what he/she wants since it lays the background for achieving a more creative idea.
At best, it serves as the first draft which is subject to several amendments.
 Phase two, rough layout which is usually an advancement of the thumbnail.
It is simply “the refining and preparing of a thumbnail sketch to an appropriate size” (Udeze; 2000p.190).
 Phase three is usually more comprehensive than others.
It usually a prototype of a finished product.
This phase requires extreme care because any mistake at this stage will tell on the finished product.
Udeze (2000; p. 190) summarises what is done at this phase or stage in the following words: It involves actual paste up of type, actual cuts of photograph and headline counts and contains information or instruction to printers on four major things viz: the size and kind of type to use example 48 points Gothic bold, 15 point upper and lower cases italic bold; the size, colour, and type of paper example 90 grams blue glossy art paper, the colour of ink to be used example black lettering on light red background; and the number of copies to be printed example 500,000.200 copies...
The implication is that every stage or phase of page planning brings the planner closer to what the actual or finished work will look like and possibly help him/her to identify necessary adjustments to make before the final printing.
This is why Dominick (2002, p.137) describes it as printing or blueprint of the page from the upcoming issues that shows the content in their proper order”.
Illustrating these phases is instructive here.
56  Figure 7: A sample of a thumbnail Mast head Commercial Date of publication/ vol.
Lead Story PIX 1 Story 2 Story 3 Commercial Note that what was done here is to simply indicate were everything should be.
At this level, most of the positioning is usually guessed.
So anything or a number of things can change position or size by the time the real thing is conceptualiSe.
What is done here is to merely indicate the things that will go into a page without actually being detailed in terms of the size of the space those things will occupy.
57  Figure 8: A Sample of A Rough Page.
LOGO MIRROR AD zzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz 48 pts Pope, Iman Meets PIX 1 up/cases zzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz across 3 - Sue Religious Tolerance colums zzzzzzzzzzz By Ebere Nwodu Police Nabs Crime Suspects zzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz Advert full zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz colour zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz saecproesrsa t2e s zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz column zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz NWOSU Weds Okorocha zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz Owerri Eed Agog 32 pts across 2 zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz colums PIX 1 zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzz zzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz Gothic zzzzzzzzzzzz bold zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz US To Assist Nigeria on Security zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz 22 pts zzzzzzzzzzzz Byz Ozzdze zBzrzaszsz zzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz acocrluomssn 2s zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz Aerial zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz PIX 2 zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzz Cutline zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzz Rochas & Obasanjo 10 pts zzzzzzzz Bodoni zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz bold zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzz Nash Natural Water AD Advert 3 zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz columns zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz PIX 3 zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzzzzzz zzzzzzzz 58  Note that this is more comprehensive and more specific than the one before.
This gives more specific details in terms of specific position or space allotted to each story, the type sizes, type face and colours; the number of columns a headline is proposed to occupy etc.
It is from this that the comprehensive layout which serves as a prototype of the actual layout is developed and produced as galley proof.
4.0: Conclusion Page planning is very crucial in newspaper production.
Packaging newspaper contents without proper layout planning and design is like building a house without architectural design or plan.
A well planned page therefore, facilitates smooth newspaper production and by extension, makes the page look pleasing when produced.
5.0: Summary This unit treated page planning from practical point of view.
Thus, reason or rationale for page planning, steps or phases in page planning and practical demonstration of page planning were treated here.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Explain what you understand by page planning backing up your explanation by planning a newspaper page containing two photographs, ¼ page advert, and 4 news items.
7.0: References/Further Reading Agba, P. C. and Okoro, N. (1995) Fundamentals of Graphics Communication; Enugu: Arena Publishers.
Dominick, J. R. (2009) The Dynamics of Mass Communication: Media in Digital Age; Boston: Mc Graw Hills.
Friend, C.; Challenger, D.; and McAdams (2000) Contemporary Editing: Illinois: Contemporary Publishers Group.
Hodgson, F.W.
(1984) Modern Newspaper Practice; London: Heinemann.
Udeze, S. E.(2000) “Approaching The Newspaper Layout” in Okenwa, S. N., Udeze, S.E.
and Ngwu, C.C.
(eds.).
The Media World: Explorations in Writing and Production; Enugu: Bismark Publishers.
59  UNIT 4: UNIT COUNT AND COPY WRITTING.
1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Copy Fitting: Meaning and Essence 3.2: Methods of Copy Fitting 3.3: Unit Count System 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction Page planning requires to a large extent, precision.
This is so because it is not enough to specify the page where a story headline and body should be.
It therefore requires a clearer idea of the spaces they will occupy.
In determining the space therefore, there is need to fathom, the number of letters that will fit into specific space.
This is the essence of unit count.
This unit therefore deals with determining space for copy as a prelude to page planning.
2.0: Objectives It is expected that at the end of tutorials in this unit, the students explain:  Determine space for a given headline  Calculate space for copy.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Copy Fitting: Meaning and Essence As we noted in the introduction to this unit, no meaningful page planning can take place without first, determining the space available in every newspaper page.
To fit a copy or headline into the available space therefore requires a clear picture of the depth of the copy and the available space that will contain it to avoid over or under matter.
This determination is done through the process of copy fitting.
Copy fitting therefore is all about computing for the space requirements for a given print media content.
Defined in a more elaborate term, copy fitting means “the act or process of computing quickly 60  newspaper/magazine space requirement for a news item in a given type-face and size” (Akinfeleye; 1982, p.56).
The essence of copy fitting therefore is to ensure that a selected news item is properly accommodated in the limited available news hole.
It therefore ensures effective arrangement of different news items in the news hole to the extent none will spill into another or struggle for space.
3.2: METHOD OF COPY FITTING Determining the space for a given story or copy can be done in several ways which are square-inch method, the word-count method, the character count method, mathematical method and type writer method.
The choice of which of these methods to be used depends largely on which of them the editor finds most convenient in relation to the newspaper’s editorial policy.
We shall quickly discuss these approaches that are commonly in use in Nigerian newspaper industry.
 The square-inch Method: This form of copy fitting is usually done using a square- inch table.
The table therefore specifies the number of words required for square- inch method when a given point size was used.
It is necessary to reproduce the table here to facilitate our understanding of how to determine space with it.
Table 1: The Square-Inch Table Size of type (points) Number of words per Words per square inch square-inch.
if leaded two points.
6 points 47 34 7 points 38 27 8 points 32 23 9 points 27 20 10 points 21 16 11points 17 14 12 points 14 11 Culled from Akinfeleye (1982, p.56) The table can be conveniently used by: a) Determining the total number of words in a copy to be fitted into a page.
b) Determining the point size in which the letters that make up the words are to be printed.
c) Determining the means of calculating the number of words per inch.
d) Determining the required space through dividing, the number of words in the copy by the number per square inch contained in the table.
61  2.
Mathematical Method of Copy Fitting As the name implies, this approach involves a lot of computations to determine the amount of space required for a copy.
The editor needs to possess certain normative qualities which include sense of arithmetic to be able to use this approach.
Computing for space a copy will occupy is therefore done in three major steps or stages.
These steps are as follow: i.
Determine the number of character per printed line (PL) by multiplying column width by the appropriate character per PICA.
ii.
Find the number of printed lines the copy will take by dividing the total number of characters by the number of characters per printed line.
iii.
Determine space by multiplying the number of printed lines by the thickness of typeface.
(Note that the thickness of typeface is given by adding the point size and the leading).
It is important to note that certain things are usually given in computing for space using the mathematical approach.
Those things that are given include: a.
The total number of words that make up the copy.
b.
The required point size in which the copy will be printed.
c. The leading which is the space between two lines.
All we have discussed in mathematical approach may not make much meaning except we demonstrate it.
Assume therefore that a copy that has a total of 1006 words is to be printed in 10 points size with leading 2 points.
You can determine the space by following the steps above.
So: Step 1: Determine the number of characters per printed line.
i.e.
column width × appropriate character per PICA 10pts ꞊ 2.9 xter per PICA ...20× 2.9 ꞊ 58 xters Step ii.
To find the total number of printed lines the article will take.
꞊ total number of xters in the copy = No of xters PL 58 xters ꞊ Since 1 word ꞊ 5 xters, 1006 words × 5 ꞊ 5030 xters ...total numbers of printed lines ꞊ 1 ×5030 ꞊ 86.7PL = 58 62  Step iii.
To Determine the Space Space ꞊ No of PL × thickness of typeface (pt size + leading) ꞊ 86.7 × (10 + 2) ꞊ 86.7 × 12 ꞊ Therefore space ꞊ 1040.4inches It is also important to note the following standard measures concerning character per PICA when computing for space.
Table 2: Given Character per PICA Point Sizes Character Per PICA 8 3.3 9 2.9 11 2.5 72 Inch 3.3: Unit Count System We cannot end this unit without discussing unit count system.
Unit count is usually used to determine appropriate space for headlines in the newspaper pages.
Headlines are very crucial in newspaper layout since according to Nwodu (2006, p.66) they help to:  Grade the news.
 Sell the newspaper.
 Distinguish one news item from the other.
 Add to the overall aesthetics of the newspaper lay.
It follows therefore that headlines should be properly fitted in a given space to play these crucial roles.
Unit count system is therefore required to determine the number of letters of certain type size and face that can conveniently fit into a given space.
According to Akinfeleye (1982, p.55): Headlines are fitted on the basis of CPP (character per pica) counts.
Fitting headlines is usually guided by the ‘across the column unit count’ which is often 18 to 20 widths for a 12 – point typeface.
Display types (that is very big type sizes) are usually used for fitting headline unlike the body type which comes in small type sizes.
For this reason, a lot of care and tact are required in fitting headline to a specific space.
In most newspapers, editors use unit count table to determine space for headlines.
The table clearly spelt out the unit sizes of letters (both upper and lower cases), numbers, punctuations and spaces.
Below is a typical example of unit count table used in most news rooms: 63  Table 3: Universally Assigned Units to Specific Letters Specifications No.
Of Units All lower case letters (except m, w, f, l, 1 unit.
i, t) All numbers – figures (except 1).
1 unit.
Lower case letters m, w, 1 ½ units Lower case letters f, l, i, t 1 ½ units.
All upper case letters (except M, W, Q.)
1 ½ units.
Upper case letters M, W, Q.
2 units.
Number 1 ½ unit.
Punctuation ½ unit.
Space ½ unit.
With the above specifications, one can easily compute the units of a headline that will fit into a space.
4.0: Conclusion Proper determination of appropriate space for fitting headlines and news copy enhance page planning in newspaper production.
This is because determining whether available space can take a particular headline and copy help a lot to ensure that the editor does not go back to the draughts board to contemplate what to do with a news item planned for a page that lack space where such news item can be accommodated.
This is why editors, sub editors and all those involved in editorial production should of necessity master headline and copy fitting techniques before actual page planning and design.
5.0: Summary Tutorial in this unit dwelt on headline and copy fitting.
Thus, the meaning of copy fitting, methods of copy fitting, and unit count system were discussed with relevant examples.
Self Assessment Examination: Using unit count techniques, determine the space units that will accommodate the headline below: Onwa Sets To Run For Presidency.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment.
What is copy fitting?
Using relevant examples, explain two methods of copy fitting known to you.
64  7.0: References/Further Reading Akinfeleye, R.A (1982) Essentials of Modern African Journalism: A Premier, Lagos: Miral Press.
Click, J.W.
and Baird, R.N.
(1979) Magazines Editing and Production: Brown Company Publishers.
Nwodu, L.C.
(2006) Journalism Practice: News, Aesthetics, Ethics and Laws; Enugu: Rhyce Kerex.
65  UNIT 5: TYPOGRAPHY AND TYPESETTING 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Understanding Typography 3.2: Typesetting 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction.
The primary effort at converting written material (news, article, feature, advert or speech) into print starts with editing (Nwosu, 1996 p.109).
This is true given that editing is the starting point of getting the written copy (usually in typewritten) ready for printing.
However, the very first section of printing room where the edited copy gets to for further processing is the typesetting room.
This is where the types are selected and typeset to produce the proof.
This unit will therefore examine typography and typesetting as part of the essential processes of news production.
2.0: Objectives After going through tutorials in this unit, it is expected that the students to discuss:  The meaning and nature of typography.
 The process of type selecting and setting.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Understanding Typography.
According to Hodgson (1984, p.101): The type character of a newspaper is to achieved the consistent use of a limited number of typefaces, one main choice on the news pages and perhaps another as the main choice on the feature pages, with a regular variant in use in each case.
66  The import is that consistent use of certain typefaces and type sizes add to the unique personality of a newspaper.
By unique personality here we mean those features that are so consistent with a newspaper to the extent they help to distinguish it from other newspaper titles.
In making decision as to the typeface and type size to be used consistently in the production of a given tabloid, the editor and production crew must be conversant with the philosophy of type.
By implication, the editor and the production crew should be conversant with the medium’s dominant typeface and sizes in order to decide what instruction to give the typesetters.
The major decisions to be made with reference to typography therefore border on: 1.
Typeface which are usually classified into Roman letters, text types, serifs, san serifs, italics, scripts and host of others.
According to Nwosu (1992, p.244) typefaces have different characteristics, uses, personality and look differently as well as offer varying design opportunities which the editor should know.
In addition to knowing the typefaces or designs the editor should know which of the typefaces that best suit his/her purpose for quality production.
2.
Type sizes which are usually measured in points or picas.
The editor should also be conversant with standard type sizes used in newspaper and other print productions.
The common standard sizes usually used in newspaper production are “6 points, 8 points, 10 points, 12 points, 14 points, 18 points, 24 points, 30 points, 42 points, 48 points, 60 points, 72 points and 120 points” (Nwosu, 1992, p.244).
It is important to note that: 72 points = 1inch.
12 points =1pica 6 picas = 1 inch 6 points = 1non- pareil 3.
Nature of cases which indicates whether the types are to be printed in capital letters (called upper cases) or small letters (called lower cases) or combination of the two which is upper and lower cases”.
Examples will suffice here: Upper cases = MOTHER Lower cases = mother Upper and lower cases = Mother As noted earlier the editor needs to know all these so as to be properly guided in dishing out type instruction to the typesetter and the printer.
67  3.2: Typesetting At the editing stage, the editor or the sub-editor usually indicate specific typefaces and type sizes needed to print the headlines, the by-line and the body of the story.
The editor stops at that.
The actual selection of the types so specified is usually done at the typesetting stage.
Typesetting therefore involves selecting and setting types for each word that constitute the stories.
This is done by selecting letters to form words, words that form sentences and sentences that make up the paragraphs of the stories.
According to Nwabueze (20-11, p. 80) typesetting refers to: Setting the stories in each page into the characters (type or point sizes and styles) that the readers see when they purchase... it consists of setting stories in body type-size (font size used for the body of the story) and display type-size (the font size used for headlines and captions).
This is consistent with Nwosu (1992, p.244) where he submits that typesetting refers to the first conversion of the written or typed copies (news, speeches, articles etc) into printed forms known as proofs.
The first proof that rolls out of the typesetting machine is known as the galley proofs.
Typesetting began with hand setting using the “stick”.
The stick is usually a hand-held tray where letters are placed one after the other to form the desired words.
This approach was in vogue in the 1800s until 1884 when Ottmor Mergerthaler invented linotype machine which enhanced the process of typesetting.
The linotype machine is “used in casting hot lead into a line of type as a key board operator types in the letters”(Nwabueze, 2011,p.81).
What is usually done is to:  Cast the hot lead into a line of type  Use key board to type the letters on the lead.
 Pick by hand the types and place them on page form.
 Take to typesetting room for printing of the galley proofs.
It is important to note that with the advancement in technology, other forms of typesetting have emerged over the years.
Different forms of typesetting therefore exist and these are: I.
Hand setting which is the very first attempt at setting types and which is rarely used in Nigeria today.
II.
Hot-metal typesetting (which is of two types viz: mono-type and lino-type machines).
III.
Photo-chemical typesetting.
68  IV.
Computer typesetting which can be done using compugraphic machines, laser systems or digitized cathodes ray (ORT) machines Whichever approached used, the fact remains that news copy must go through the typesetting process before the actual printing can take place.
4.0: Conclusion Typesetting is an essential aspect of newspaper production process.
Although the editor is not meant to undertake typesetting, he/she should understand the typeface, families, and sizes in order to properly instruct the typesetter or compositor on choice of types to set.
5.0: Summary This unit treated one of the essential aspects of newspaper pre-production process which is typesetting.
Precisely, typography and typesetting process were treated.
Self Assessment Examination: Write a short note on typography with emphases on the meaning, forms and sizes.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Define and explain typesetting as an essential aspect of newspaper production.
7.0: References/Further Reading.
Hodgson, F.W.
(1984) Modern Newspaper Practice; London: Heinemann.
Nwabueze, C.D.
(2011) Magazine and Newspaper Management and Production: An Introduction; Owerri: Topshelve Publisher.
Nwosu, I.E.
(1996) Effective Media Writing; Mass Media, Advertising, PR and Promotion; Enugu: E-Nok Publishers.
Nwosu, I.E (1992) “Public Relations Publication: Principles, Types, Readership, Contents, Editing and production” in I.E.
Nwosu and S.O.Idemili (eds.)
Public Relations: Speech, Media Writing and Copy, Enugu: ACENA Publishers.
69  UNIT 6: PROOF READING 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: The Meaning and Essence of proof Reading: 3.2: Doing the Proof Reading 3.3: Proof Reading: Managing Correction Cost 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction Newspaper content like any other media content is open to public scrutiny.
For this reason, the contents are usually edited thoroughly to ensure they come out with minimal errors.
So, after editing the manuscript (to expunge error of grammar, spelling, facts and other consideration including legal errors) and typesetting to produce the first printed form of the copy, this first printed copy is called the galley.
The galley is therefore checked for the final time to ensure that what the newspaper serves the audience members is to a large extent error free.
This final check is what we call proof reading.
This unit therefore discusses proof reading as an essential aspect of newspaper production process.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorial in this unit, it is expected to explain:  The meaning and essence of proof reading  How to ensure proper proof reading of galley.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: The Meaning and Essence of Proof Reading: The term ‘proof reading’ is the process of correcting or removing the errors contained in the proof reading of your original writing’ (Nwosu, 1996, p.111).
Nwosu further adds that it is similar in aims, function and practice to the editing process.
Though proof reading and editing play similar function - which involves dictation and removing or correcting errors in a copy, they differ significantly in terms of their symbols.
70  Again while editing is usually done in the body text, proof reading is usually pulled out of the body text.
However, proof reading can only be done after typesetting and the galley proof produced.
So while editing is effected on the copy, proof reading takes place on the galley proofs (that is the first printed copy).
As Nwosu (1999, p111) points out, both the copy editor and the proof reader are some kind of ‘gate keepers’ whose role it is to ensure that no unwanted material appears in the final printed job.
The proof reader is therefore the last gate keeper the galley must pass through before the newspaper is finally printed.
Any mistake which was not dictated and removed at this stage will certainly find its way in the finished job.
The essence of proof reading therefore, is to take a final thorough reading through the galley to ensure that every noticeable and or perceivable error is expunged before the actual printing of the final job.
3.2: Doing Proof Reading As we noted earlier, proof reading is the art of ensuring that the galley is to a large extent error free before final publication.
According to Akinfeleye (1982, p.62) two types of proof reading exist and these are: i.
The formal or book method; and ii.
The guideline system or informal method.
However, the common practice in most newspaper houses now is to carefully check line- by-line, of the proof against the original manuscript or copy to ensure that error corrected at the editing stage were effected in the galley.
This approach also enables the proof reader to quickly dictate and remove errors introduced to the galley by the typesetter or compositor.
As we noted earlier, proof reading is done by indicating the word, letter or punctuation marked to be added or remove from the galley using the right symbol and pulling same out for an instruction of what should be done.
Below is a typical example of editing signs and symbols culled from Nwosu (1982).
71  Note that two marks are involved here.
One is within the galley clearly indicating where errors occurred and another, a pull out either to the left or to right side of the galley indicating the corrections to be made.
Much of the proof reading corrections are now made faster with the aid of computer proof tools.
South-east Govs’ Back Economic Summit.
The South-east govs’ govs’ forum have declared declared support for the forth coming Comment [DLN1]: Capitalize g zonal economic summit which was expected to creat a better business environment, equip, Comment [DLN2]: spellout Comment [DLN3]: eliminate empower and enable the people s to participate.
Actively in the nation’s enomic arena.
Comment [DLN4]: wrong verb.
Replace with (this is a corrupt version of a lead culled from Daily Sun, Friday, August 7, 2011) has Comment [DLN5]: expunge this However, the students are advised to read up proof reading and signs in any good book on Comment [DLN6]: capitalize ‘s’ print media management and production particularly Akinfeleye (1982), Nwosu (1992) Comment [DLN7]: wrong tense.
Replce with ‘is’ and Nwabueze (2011).
Comment [DLN8]: expunge Comment [DLN9]: remove comma Comment [DLN10]: use small letter ‘a’ 3.3: Proof Reading: Managing Correction Costs Comment [DLN11]: wrong spelling, economic Many a time, newspaper publishers and printer pick quarrels over who should bear correction costs.
This is usually the case when the correction made at the proof reading 72  stage are enormous to the extent of requiring more time, energy, material and financial resources to correct.
For this reason, modern newspaper publishers have devised means of sharing the correction costs between them and the printers.
This has reduced schism between the two major business partners in newspaper production.
What is usually done therefore is to use red pen indicated errors introduction in the copy or galley by the typesetter (or compositor) and use black and blue pen (preferable blue) to indicated alterations or error made by either the editor, the sub-editor or the reporter.
This is facilitated by adopting line-by-line thorough check of the galley against the original copy given out for typesetting.
This may be tasking and highly demanding but when properly done, it worths the stress.
Nwosu (1992, p.246-247) summarises it in the following words: To avoid or reduce such cost, the author and editors...should avoid the temptations and possibilities of major corrections or additions on the proofs by being extremely careful at the writing, typing, and copyediting stages.
They should also re-read the printer’s proof corrections many times before approving them.
4.0: Conclusion It is not out of place that a surgeon can make mistakes in the theatre and that mistake causes human life or severe damage to the living.
Yet nobody notices the mistake.
Even the survivors of the dead will still pay the last dime of their bill before they could access the corpse.
A lawyer can also lose a good case out of carelessness and the client still pays for the lawyer’s carelessness or error.
But that is not the same with newspaper journalist whose product is permanent for as long as one is able to preserve the newspaper.
Any publication that out of carelessness damages one’s image may lead to the liquidation of the newspaper organisation via series of litigations.
Also, any grammar, spelling and other perceivable mistakes noticed on the pages of a newspaper easily attract wide spread condemnation among audience members.
This is why it is necessary that a proof reader must be thorough as the last gate in the gate keeping process.
5.0: Summary This unit treated proof reading as a crucial step in the process of newspaper production.
Precisely, the unit treated the meaning and essence of proof reading, practical approach to proof reading and how to manage correction costs in proof reading.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Proof reading is an essential step in the gate keeping process.
Discuss this with emphasis on the meaning, essence and process of proof reading.
73  7.0: References/Further Reading Akinfeleye, R.A (1982) Essentials of Modern African Journalism: A Premier, Lagos: Miral Press.
Nwabueze, C. D. (2011) Newspaper and Magazine Management and Production: An Introductory Text; Owerri: Topshelve Publishers Nwosu, I.E.
(1996) Effective Media Writing; Mass Media, Advertising, PR and Promotion; Enugu: E-Nok Publishers.
Nwosu, I.E (1992) “Public Relations Publication: Principles, Types, Readership, Contents, Editing and production” in I.E.
Nwosu and S.O.Idemili (eds.)
Public Relations: Speech, Media Writing and Copy, Enugu: ACENA Publishers.
74  MODULE 4: NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION As we noted earlier, a typical newspaper usually undergoes some production process before it gets to the hand of the readers.
These processes include but not limited to the conceptualization of what to report in preference to other issues demanding reporter’s attention; the actual reporting; copy editing; typesetting and the actual production of what an average reader can buy and read as newspaper.
Thus, the actual production of newspaper begins immediately after typesetting and proof reading.
So, this module will further our discussion by highlighting major production processes that take place after typesetting.
Precisely, the module will be couched in the following units: Unit 1: Getting the Page Ready: Paste Up Unit 2: Filming/Plate Making Unit 3: Printing the Newspaper Unit 4: Immediate Post Printing Activities Unit 5: Newspaper Distribution.
UNIT 1: GETTING THE PAGE READY: PASTE UP 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Paste Up 3.2: Paste-Up Tools 3.3: Doing Paste-Up 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction The process of newspaper production is a rigorous one.
After proof reading and actualization of corrections pointed out at the proof reading stages, next is the paste up stage.
This unit will therefore take a quick look at the process of paste up.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorial in this unit, you are expected to discuss:  Meaning of paste up.
 How to do paste up.
75  3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Paste Up After the final corrections on the proof have been made, clean proofs produced and certified error free by the editor, the next step in the production process is the paste up.
Paste up is usually done by experienced graphic artists.
In some newspaper organisations, “a careful media writer that has an eye for beauty and aesthetics can also paste up the pages of his publication...”(Nwosu, 1996,p.112).
Regardless of who does the paste up, there is need for us to understand the meaning of paste up.
The concept therefore entails the use of light glue to stick the proof in the page sheet in bits by bits until each page is filled up in the manner it will appear in the final production before it is filmed and printed.
According to Nwosu(1996,p.112) “paste-up involves sticking(with rubber cement or light glue, for instance) the proof on their appropriate pages and in the way they will appear in the final printed form”.
The paste-up artists are usually guided by the provisions of the planned pages or the dummies.
Remember a well planned page specifies which page a given copy will appear and the space specication it will occupy.
The job of the paste-up artist therefore, is to cut portion of the proofs and paste them on the appropriate pages using light glue or rubber cement.
3.2: Paste-Up Tools In some newspaper organizations, paste-up is done in-house.
In others, it is contracted out.
In most Nigerian newspaper organizations, paste-up is done in-house as a way of minimizing errors and ensuring consistency in in-house style.
A newspaper organization that does past-up in-house must therefore have in its stable paste-up tools which are:  Light table or drawing board for determining the exact position of exact paste-up lettering and other things to be pasted.
 T-squares and triangles to further ensure that paste-up materials are perfectly squared and pasted in the desired angle in the page.
 Razor blades or cutting knives for cutting portions of the proofs in the required length and width as well as shapes they will fit into paste-up pages.
 Blue pencils for indicating guidelines for paste-up since it does not reproduce a film when photograph of paste-up is taken.
 Rubber cement or wax (light glue) which is used to hold or paste the items on the page.
3.3 Doing the Actual Paste-up Click and Baird(1979,p.210) opine that paste-up operations start with forms, pre-printed in light blues with gridlines and columnist markers that would be helpful for positioning materials.
Before, the actual paste-up (which is often called the mechanical) therefore, the corrected galley will be pre-printed in standard form it will appear in finished product or job.
76  According to Click and Baird (1979, p.210) “any margin lines and location spots for page numbers (folios) that are sufficiently standardized should also be pre-printed”.
Note that light blue pen is also used to mark up or indicate the guidelines for paste-ups.
The reason as earlier pointed out is because of its inability to reproduce on film.
So in doing the actual paste-ups therefore, the paste artist or the experience (competent sub-editor) needs to do the following: i.
Carefully spread the acetate and or the overlay on a plain surface.
ii.
Carefully cut the proofs (one at a time) from the pre-printed galley.
iii.
Gently rub the adhesive wax (which could either be rubber or cement or light blue glue) at the reverse side of the proofs so cut.
This must be carefully done to avoid shrinking the paper.
iv.
Carefully paste the cut on the acetate paper and make necessary adjustment of the element when not properly positioned.
v. Ensure thorough check of the final paste-ups to fish out and correct undesired movements, poor positioning and angling before you certify the paste-ups camera ready.
Note that final check is very crucial as it helps the paste-up artist or the editor to fish out or correct “off angles” which often results during the movements and adjustment of elements soon after they have been positioned.
To this end, Click and Baird (1979, p.210) note: The one disturbing result of the move of paste-up preparation into staff offices has been some occasionally “off angle” work: type that runs slightly uphill or art work that is at a slight angle: such flaws are not tolerated from professional craftsmen and they cannot be permitted with staff-prepared mechanicals.
T- square, triangles, pre-printed lines and light sources behind the paste-up all serve as precaution against off-angle material.
Lining up by eye just doesn’t work.
4.0: Conclusion Paste-up is a crucial aspect of production process that requires lots of care and competence.
It should not be treated with levity since if shoddily done, it will tell terribly on the quality of the final job filmed and printed.
Students of newspaper production should as such take tutorial in this unit serious as well master the process in order to excel.
5.0: Summary This unit focused on paste-up as an essential stage in the overall process of actual newspaper production.
In line with the objectives of the unit, the meaning of paste-up, tools for effective paste-ups and practical approach to paste-up were treated in this unit.
77  6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Explain the term “paste-ups” stating clearly how to carry out successful paste-up exercise.
7.0: References/Further Reading Click, J.W.
and Baird, R.N.
(1979) Magazines Editing and Production: Brown Company Publishers.
Nwosu, I.E.
(1996) Effective Media Writing; Mass Media, Advertising, PR and Promotion; Enugu: E-Nok Publishers.
78  UNIT 2: FILMING AND PLATE MAKING 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Filming 3.2: Process of Actual Image Transference 3.3: Making the Plate 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading 1.0: Introduction After successful paste-up, the process of newspaper production advances to the next stage which is the filming stage.
This unit therefore discusses the filming stage.
We decided to treat this as separate unit because experts like Akinfeleye (1984), Nwosu (1996), Nwodu (2006) and Nwabueze agree that trainee journalists should know what goes on at every stage of newspaper production process.
Knowledge of this nature, the experts agree will enable them to appreciate good production as well as decipher when the right thing has been done.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorials in this unit the students are expected to explain:  What filming means in the context of newspaper production.
 What is involved in filming and plating?
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Filming Filming in newspaper production simply means transferring the product of successful paste-up into sensitive floppy sheets (films) by photographic means.
According to Nwabueze (2011, p. 82); filming consist of “the use of laser beams and other technological apparatus to transfer the computer forms of various pages of the publication onto thin plastic, light sensitive, floppy sheets called film”.
The emphasis here is on computer form of various pages probably because most newspaper production activities are done with computer in recent times.
However it is important to note that in some organizations, manual paste-up artist are not conversant with the use of computer or that the organization is not able to computerize its typesetting and lithograph suites.
Whether computer or manual paste-up however, the point is that film is all about taking photographs of paste-up or camera ready pages for purpose of plate making.
79  3.2: Process of Actual Image Transference Normally, when the photographs of the elements are taken, the job is not over.
Thus, the photographs taken are like the normal photographs developed into negatives using a developer called processor.
According to Click and Baird (1979, p. 2011): The negative made from camera-ready paste-ups are placed in positions in an opaque sheet of paper (a mask) large enough to hold all pages that are to print together.
The imposition for offset printing is completed when these negatives are taped to the mask.
The implication is that when the films are produced, they are usually taped together.
This taping is strictly done on the basis of pages that will be printed together.
If for instance, four different pages are to be printed together, they will be arranged and tapped together on a sensitive film using tripper – a device that allows for the transference of paste-ups onto the film upon exposure to light.
The illustration below gives a graphic picture of how to tape pages together.
Figure: A sample of taped negatives ready for plating.
Page 1 Page 31 The taping indicates that pages 1 and 31 will be printed together for a 32 paged newspaper.
So when the plate is burnt, printed and folded, each fold easily sums up to four pages.
It is important to note that the process of taping pages to be printed together is called stripping.
Stripping is therefore done in the lithographic section where the filming is done using a device called compurgraphy.
The advancement in printing technology has ushered the use of laser reader for page scanning and transference to laser writer.
According to Nwabueze (2011, p.82), the device: 80  Scans and makes negative images of the pages, with the text (written materials) appearing white while the blank spaces appear black.
The work is crosschecked to ensure it is neat and sharp so that the final printed work would be of good quality.
3.3: Making the plate In this context, a plate is a coated aluminium sheet that is sensitive to light.
Plate is the final light sensitive sheet upon which all the elements and or images contained in the film are transferred before the actual printing.
The process of preparing the plate for actual transference of the paste-ups contained in the film is called plate making.
Plate making in this context therefore is not concerned with manufacturing of plates.
Rather it relates to the process of preparing plates to accept and registered about to be printed materials in the manner they would print when the printing machine is rolled.
Plate making for newspaper differs slightly from that of magazine in terms of number of pages that are burnt at a time.
So while newspaper pages are usually burnt two pages at a time, magazines plates are burnt four pages at a go.
However, images are transferred from film to plates by: (i) Placing the taped negative film on a lighted box.
(ii) Place the light sensitive coated aluminium plate on the top of the negative.
(iii) Switch on the light box and wait for few seconds to allow ultra violet light to beam on and pierce through the elements on the negative films to the sensitive aluminium plates.
(iv) Once the light beams and completes a circle, all the elements/images on the pages of the film automatically transfer to the aluminium plate.
(v) Go through the process for each negative film page until all the pages are transferred onto their corresponding aluminium pages.
(vi) Carefully wash the plates and ensure that nothing scratches the surface of the plate because any scratch may affect the quality of the printed job.
4.0: Conclusion Filming and plating are very crucial in newspaper production processes.
They require a lot of caution, carefulness and competence as any mistake made at this level will cost the newspaper a lot.
More care is needed when done in-house since the organization will have nobody but itself to blame if anything goes wrong.
81  5.0: Summary This unit quickly dealt with one of the knotty areas in newspaper production process which is film and plate making.
In line with the goal of the unit, meaning of filming, the filming process and plate making were discussed.
Self Assessment Examination Briefly explain your understanding of plate and plating in the context of newspaper production 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Using a good illustration, explain the process of image transference from film to plate.
7.0: References/Further Reading Click, J. W. and Baird, R. N. (1979) Magazines Editing and Production: Brown Company Publishers.
Nwabueze, C. D. (2011) Magazine and Newspaper Production: An Introductory Text; Owerri: Top Shelves.
Nwosu, I. E. (1996) Effective Media Writing; Mass Media, Advertising, PR and Promotion; Enugu: E-Nok Publishers.
82  UNIT 3: PRINTING THE NEWSPAPER 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Actual Newspaper Printing 3.2: Methods of Printing 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading 1.0: Introduction.
Printing is the major final stage of newspaper production.
It is the stage in the process of production where the newspaper becomes manifest as a finished product.
In this unit- emphasis shall be on printing process and forms which students of newspaper production need to know in order to be effective.
2.0: Objectives At the end of the tutorials in this unit, you are expected to discuss:  The process of actual newspaper printing.
 Forms and methods of printing available in Nigerian print media environment.
3.0: Main Contents 3.1: Actual Newspaper Printing Printing is the process of producing the final copy of a newspaper edition.
It is the process of using machines to roll the plates on news prints in other to reproduce elements (stories, illustrations, pictures and other contents) burnt on the plates on the news prints (paper used to produce newspaper).
The actual printing is done with a massive machine called printing press, the printer or press boys gather them together and continue in that order until required number for given pages that go together are completed.
3.2: Methods of Printing Different types or methods of printing exist in Nigeria and indeed, elsewhere.
These are letter press, lithographic printing, gravure and offset printing.
We shall discuss now how each of these operates below: (A) Letter Press Letter press is “the process or technique of printing from raised letters or raised printing surface” (Akinfeleye; 1984, p.67).
In this case printing is done by applying ink on the raised letters to be printed.
Then the papers upon which the letters are to be printed are placed on top of the typeface.
So the actual printing takes place the moment the raised 83  letters are pressed on the newsprint.
According to Akinfeleye (1984, p.68), “a rubber stamp is the crudest example” of a letter press.
Letter press printing is of two kinds viz: (i) The sheet-fed Rotary Letter Press which because of its peculiar nature are hardly used to print newspapers.
On the contrary, it is usually used for printing books, magazines, calendars and sundry reference materials.
(ii) Web-Perfecting Rotary Letter Press which prints multi-colours and has the required speed for the production of newspaper in that it can “drive folded copies of the newspaper or any other production of similar specification” (Akinfeleye; 1984, P. 68).
In spite of the advantages of letter press which included relative cheapness, amenable to easy amendment after typesetting, adaptability to all forms, paper/tonal pictures and possibility of printing directly from the block or type, letter press printing has overwhelming disadvantages which Akinfeleye (1982: 68) enumerates as: 1.
It is manually operated.
2.
Slower than the off-set press (i.e.
too much time required).
3.
Rougher than off-set press.
4.
Engages more hands than the off-set press.
5.
Non-contemporary.
6.
Pictures for printing have to be brought in separately in stove-cuts.
7.
Required too many galleys.
8.
Produce few copies at a time.
9.
Cannot produce clear picture.
B. Lithographic Printing Alloys Senefelder invented lithography press in 1798.
The press then was manually or mano operated using flat-bed type.
However, in the year 1869, R. Hoe and Company invented power driven lithography press.
Overtime, this lithography press has gone through series of improvements.
According to Akinfeleye (1984, p.68) lithography is the process of “printing from a flat stone metal or plate by a method based on the repulsion between grease and water”.
He further identifies the advantages of lithography press as: 1.
Capable of printing image on the press plate photographically.
2.
Make use of a photomechanical process to transfer the image to the plate.
3.
It can be sheet-fed (i.e.
individual sheets of paper travel through the press in which the paper travels through the pass from a roll).
4.
Prints at high speed.
5.
Requires little set-up time 6.
Utilizes surface plates.
7.
Can print illustrations for about the same cost as printing type.
8.
Can produce fine jobs.
9.
Images can be transferred to many types of paper, thus allowing for reproduction on low-cost newsprint at will.
84  In spite of the overwhelming advantages of lithography printing over the letter press, the method also has some snags associated to it.
Some of such snags or disadvantages included among others: - It is expensive to operate even as it requires frequent maintenance.
- It is complex in nature and therefore requires well experienced lithographer who can cope with its complexities.
- It is difficult if not impossible to correct mistake after types had been transferred into the plate.
C. Gravure Gravure is also called intaglio.
It is the printing process that impress on the printing paper via a depressed surface.
It is a method of printing that allows the printing of images or elements on the printing paper from an ink-filled depression.
This method ensures high and speed reproduction and it has ability to produce up to 25,000 copies per hour and very effective in the production of picture.
For details about the advantages and disadvantages of gravure, see Akinfeleye (1982: 70-71).
It is important to note that the choice of which printing method to use depends on a number of factors to include: - The newspaper publisher’s interest, - Affordability, - Choice of paper, and - Nature of work to be printed.
4.0: Conclusion Printing like any other process of newspaper production demands lot of care.
This is because whatever that comes out of the press cannot be reversed.
And if any costly mistake is made, it will amount to colossal loss of money, time and energy expended in the overall gathering, processing and production of the materials.
Newspaper publishers often check the printer’s profile in relations to the quality of previous works before contracting the printer.
5.0: Summary The unit treated printing as a crucial stage in newspaper production.
The concept of printing and forms of printing are treated.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Discuss major types of printing known to you stating factors to be considered before adopting a particular printing method.
7.0: References/Further Reading Akinfeleye, R.A (1982) Essentials of Modern African Journalism: A Premier, Lagos: Miral Press.
85  Click, J.W.
and Baird, R.N.
(1979) Magazines Editing and Production: Brown Company Publishers.
Nwabueze, C. D. (2011) Newspaper and Newspaper: Management and Production.
An Introduction Text; Owerri: Top Shelves.
Nwosu, I.E.
(1996) Effective Media Writing; Mass Media, Advertising, PR and Promotion; Enugu: E-Nok Publishers.
86  Unit 4: Immediate Post Printing Press Activities 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Collation 3.2: Insertion 3.3: Wrapping 3.4: Printing Report 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading 1.0: Introduction Rolling of the paper from the printing press (machine) does not sign post the end of production processes.
It simply means that the paper has been put to bed.
And like a new born that has to undergo some cleaning before leaving the labour room, the first printed newspaper will have to undergo some processes again before leaving the press.
Some of these processes constitute what we term as immediate post printing press activities.
This unit is therefore devoted to discussing those post printing press activities.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorials in this unit, it hoped that the students would explain:  How to collate and put the newspaper together.
 Document the printing activities/finished products.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Collation The printing press is usually housed in a massive building which has sufficient space for the printing press accessories or chambers.
These chambers range from where the newsprint rims are kept before printing, where they are conveniently fixed in the printing press roller that rolls the newsprint to the actual point where the element are actually printed.
After printing therefore, the printed newsprints are rolled to the next point via conveyor belt where pages that were printed together are cut to shape and folded.
The pages that are printed and folded together constitute a signature.
So as the printing is going on, the press boys will collate and arrange the printed matters signature by signature until the printing is over.
Note that once the plates containing the signature are inserted in the machine for printing, the printing of that particular signature will continue until it is completed.
Collation here therefore, is the gathering and arrangement of the printed elements as they roll out from the machine in accordance with their respective signatures.
Collation is usually done by energetic young men who are agile and can cope with the speed of the printing machine.
87  3.2: Insertion Once all the signatures are printed, collated and arranged, the next step is insertion which requires several hands.
It requires several hands because in most newspaper concerns in Nigeria, insertion is done manually by human efforts.
As at today, machine-assisted insertion is not yet in practice in the country.
Insertion, however, means putting one or more signatures inside the other until all the signatures and or pages that make up a complete copy of the newspaper are together.
Since most national dailies in Nigeria print in millions and insertion is done manually, so many hands are usually engaged to do the insertion.
The common, practice is to pay the casual labourers who do the insertion certain agreed fees for a successfully inserted copy.
So, the amount of money one gets at the end of the exercise depends largely on the number of copies one is able to insert.
This approach however makes the casual labourers to be faster and show high concentration in the job.
Insertion requires a lot of carefulness without which the signatures may be scattered and this may confuse the readers when the newspapers finally find itself in public glare.
3.3: Wrapping Insertion is usually followed by wrapping.
After insertion the newspaper are counted to know the number of copies of the newspaper printed.
Normally after printing both the printer and the newspaper organisation’s circulation staff attached to the press must reconcile the number of copies printed for certain reasons which included: (i) To know what quantity was printed in order to know how much the newspaper organisation will pay the printer supposing the printing was is done on credit.
(ii) To ascertain the quantity of newsprint used for the printing and what is the remaining.
(iii) To know what quantity of good copies to be distributed to different areas where the newspaper circulates.
(iv) To ascertain the number of off cuts (that is the badly or poorly printed copies) which are usually sold out to petty traders for wrapping their articles or paper mill industries for recycling?
Those who do the insertion often help in the counting of the completely inserted copies.
This they do by arranging the inserted copies in sets of 100s.
This also facilitates the wrapping of the newspapers.
If the newspaper is printed in Lagos, for instance, and 4000 copies are to be sent by air to Enugu, then 40 sets of 100 copies each will be counted, wrapped, labelled and despatched to Enugu either by air by road depending on which option the organisation prefers.
The wraps must be labelled to facilitate the easy circulation after wrappings.
The labelling also facilitate the reconciliation of the number of copies printed since the number of newspaper copies inside each wrap is usually written clearly on top of the wraps with marker (preferably black, blue, green or red).
88  The illustration below clearly indicates a typical example of a wrapped newspaper ready for dispatch.
Figure 8: Newspaper wrap indicating the number of copies inside a wrap and the destination where it should be despatched 250 copies Enugu 3.4: Printing Report We noted earlier that the printed copies of newspaper are usually recorded to ascertain the number of copies printed.
The recording after the counting is often done in a clear manner the circulation manager can easily look at it and ascertain the number printed and other details at a glance.
Below is a typically example of the format for recording printing report.
Figure : A Typical Record of Printing Report Form Culled from Nwodu (2nd upcoming) Daily Mail 75/76 GLORIA AVENUE MARYLAND, AWKA Printing Fact sheet Date:.............. Sir/Madam, Report of Printing of 1st/2nd (delete as applicable) edition of Daily Mail this .......... day of the year .
.
.
.
.
Printing started: Printing ends: Number of Newspapers printed: Number of Off Cut Recorded: Number of Rims Used: Number Newspapers Distributed: Number of Complimentary copies Dispatched: Brief Comments .
............ Signature of Circulation Officer: Name of Circulation Officer: 89  The factsheet provides both the circulation manager and production manager a quick production report with reference to activities in the press.
Note that the space below ‘brief comments’ is where the circulation officer reports briefly any difficulty encountered in the press.
This report is necessary as it helps both the circulation and the production managers to ascertain the problem at the press.
It also equips them with certain information they may be ignorant of and by extension, discuss the hiccups with the printers for improvement.
4.0: Conclusion Newspaper production is not complete until the printed newspaper are properly inserted, counted and wrapped and made ready for distribution.
This is one aspect of production process which many literatures on newspaper production and management tend to miss out.
It is expected therefore that this unit will help to fill this gap.
Students are therefore encouraged to take tutorials in this unit as serious as other production processes.
5.0: Summary Tutorials in this unit focused primarily on post printing activities.
The emphasis was on what happens to the newspaper immediately after the printing.
Precisely, activities like collation, insertion, wrapping and printing report were discussed.
6.0: Tutor Marked Assignment Discuss in details and with relevant examples, the process of newspaper production with emphasis on post printing activities.
7.0: References/Further Reading.
Nwodu, L. C. (upcoming) Understanding Modern Newspaper Production Nwosu, I.E.
(1996) Effective Media Writing; Mass Media, Advertising, PR and Promotion; Enugu: E-Nok Publishers.
90  Unit 5: Newspaper Distribution 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning and Essence of Newspaper distribution 3.2: Newspaper Distribution Strategies 3.3: Taking Record of Sales 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading 1.0: Introduction Most newspaper organisations survive on advert revenue.
In this case, most newspaper organisations often cover the production cost even before going to the press.
One begins to wonder why newspaper distribution should be of concern to us in a tutorial that borders on newspaper production.
However, we deemed it wise to devote a unit in this discourse to the distribution of newspaper.
This resolved is hinged on two basic facts: 1) Production is not complete until what was produced is distributed to the target consumers (in this context, the newspaper audience).
2) Advertisers hardly place their advert on a newspaper that has limited reach.
It is against this backdrop that we shall discuss newspaper distribution in this unit.
2.0: Objectives At the end of the tutorials in this unit, it is expected that the students will discuss:  the need for effective newspaper distribution  strategic ways of distributing newspaper.
3.0: Main Content.
3.1: Meaning and Essence of Newspaper distribution In the context of marketing, distribution is the process of transporting and delivering tangible goods from the manufacturer to other chains of distributors (wholesalers and retailers) down to the end users or consumers.
Relating this to our discussion would mean that distribution is the process of transporting newspapers from the scene of production to where the readers could access and buy them.
In journalism register, the concept distribution is termed ‘circulation’.
So in the context of this discussion ‘circulation’ means the same thing as distribution and can be used interchangeably.
91  Thus, newspaper production process cannot be said to be complete until the newspaper gets to the readers.
Newspaper operators are very much aware of this obvious fact.
That is why Circulation Department remains one of the indispensable organ of any newspaper organisation.
And when newspapers are produced and widely circulated, it creates room for further production of other editions of the newspaper.
The essence of ensuring wider circulation of every edition of a newspaper immediately after production include among other things: (i) To be the first or among the earliest newspaper to bring the news to the people.
(ii) To ensure that the newspaper’s market share is not sacrificed to other competitors because of inability to reach out.
(iii) To satisfy advertisers who placed their advertisements on the newspaper in other to reach out to their targets via the newspaper.
(iv) To further boost the circulation rate of the newspaper and by extension, position it as a widely circulated and read newspaper (Nwodu, upcoming).
3.2: Newspaper Distribution Strategies The process of newspaper distribution or circulation begins at the point the wrappers count and wrap the newspaper.
This is so since wrappers do not just wrap rather they count, wrap and label in accordance with the quantity that will be distributed to a given location.
Although the wrappers receive definite instructions from the circulation officer attached to press as to what quantity to wrap and label for specific area.
However, the decision to wrap a given quantity to a specific town is guided by certain reasons.
So the more or the lesser certain quantity is sent to an area is largely dependent on a number of factors which included but not limited to:  The literacy level of the area as a newspaper is likely to record high sales in areas where people are literate enough and willing to read.
 The commercial potentials of the area as every newspaper organisation aspire to capture potential advertisers through circulation, products and services.
 Easy access which is important in getting the newspapers across to the readers with less hiccups (Nwodu, upcoming).
It is important to note that newspaper production schedule must take all these factors into consideration.
In other words the production manager and his/her crew need to factor all these in their newspaper designs so as to continue to hold the intellectual and commercial interest of the audience as well as meeting production deadline in other not to have hitch dispatching or distributing the paper.
Talking about the distribution strategies therefore, the circulation manager needs to: (i) Determine areas that require air, road or sea transport.
(ii) Understand various departure times for each of these means of transportation particularly that of air and sea which may not have option.
(iii) Keep reminding the production crew the need to hasten up in order to avoid missing flight schedule.
92  (iv) Group areas that are close and send their newspapers together via the same means.
Example, all the copies meant for Abakaliki, Enugu, Nsukka and Makurdi can be sent together via Enugu Airport.
Then the circulation officer in Enugu can now dispatch to Abakaliki, Nsukka and Makurdi via road transport.
This will help to save cost of transportation and time.
(v) Maintaining cordial relationship with airport and motor station operators in order to avoid unnecessary delay in terms of emergency.
(vi) Call out station circulation officers on regular basis to notify them in advance the quantity of newspapers sent to them and the means it was sent as well as confirming whether the copies have been received.
(vii) Keep accurate record of the copies of newspapers produced per edition and the quantity distributed to each location or area.
3.3: Taking Record of Sales Normally, when a particular quantity of printed newspaper is distributed and received in specific locations, it takes the circulation officer in each of the specific locations to further distribute the copies to major newspaper/Magazine agents in those locations.
The agents will in turn distribute copies to vendors who do the actual sales and make returns to the agents.
So when the agents and the city circulation officer reconcile their account, the circulation officer now reports back to the heads office either on daily, weekly or monthly basis depending on the policy of the organisation.
The common practice in Nigeria is for the circulating officer to remit money to the head office of the organisation on daily basis while keeping records for monthly reconciliation.
Since the unsold copies need to be reconciled alongside the copies sold, circulation managers often require the circulation officer to cut off and keep the mast head of every unsold copy.
This will certainly serve as an evidence of the exact number that were not sold.
4.0: Conclusion To appreciate newspaper production process, it is also important to understand what happens to the newspaper when produced.
This is why it is considered necessary that students of newspaper production should know certain things about newspaper distribution.
5.0: Summary This unit treated an aspect of production that is concerned with distribution.
Precisely meaning and essence of newspaper distribution, newspaper distribution strategies and taking of record of sales were discussed.
93  6.0: Tutor- Marked Assignment Discuss extensively, the journey of newspaper from the point of production to the reader in the street.
7.0: References/Further Reading Nwodu, L. C. (upcoming) Understanding Modern Newspaper Production Nwosu, I.E.
(1996) Effective Media Writing; Mass Media, Advertising, PR and Promotion; Enugu: E-Nok Publishers.
94  MODULE 5: NEWSPARER PRODUCTION IN ERA OF ICTs Information and Communication Technologies (ICTS) are revolutionalizing the way we do things in contemporary times.
Today, most things are hardly done the way they began several years back.
To this end, Nwodu (2004) submits that online activities have influenced virtual every aspect of human endeavour to the extent we have e-politics, e- banking, e-business, e-advertising, e-publishing etc.
It is important therefore, that we devote a module to ICTs and newspaper production.
Units in this module are therefore designed to treat the relevance of ICTs in newspaper production.
In line with the objective of the module, the following units shall be discussed.
UNIT 1: Meaning and Components of ICTs UNIT 2: Areas of ICTs Relevance in Newspaper Production UNIT 3: Epilogue: Elements Of Page Design Reference Nwodu, L.C.
(2004) “Technological Determinism Theory and Journalists Perception Of Cultural Influence Of ICTs On Developing Nations”, The Nigeria Journal of Mass Communication, Vol.
No.
1&2.
Unit 1: Meaning and components of ICTs.
1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of ICTs 3.2: ICTs and Global Information Flow 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: introduction According to Williams and Sawyer (2003,pp 20-21), the direction of communication development are tending towards: i. Connectivity: the ability to connect computers to one another by communication line, so as to provide online information access.
ii.
Interactivity: a live way communication, a user can respond to information he or she receives and modify the process.
iii.
Multimedia: the presentation of information in more than one medium-such as text, video, sound and animation in a single integrated communication.
The implication is that all these developments were made possible by the emergence of ICTs which according to Nwodu(2009,p.155) serves as converging point where social, cultural and scientific data and others relevant information are gathered, processed, produced and shared between and among individuals, nations and industries.
Discussion in 95  this unit therefore aims at exploring the meaning and dimension of ICTs which have altered and continue to alter the way things are done in contemporary world including the business of newspaper production.
2.0: Objectives At the end of tutorials in this unit, the students are expected to explain: - The meaning of ICTs.
- The constituents of ICTs 3.0: Meaning of ICTs The acronym, ICTs, stands for Information and Communication Technologies.
It is a generic name that encapsulates a number of communication hardware used for the dissemination or transmission of information and social values instantaneously from one corner of the world to another” (Nwodu and Fab-Ukozor; 2003, p.76).
Expatiating on this, Nwodu(2007,p.97) writes: ICTs involve much range of technologies that are grouped into two major modes.
These are the telecommunications and the computer communications.
Digital and cellular phones (like GSM telephones, fibre optics, microwaves technology, satellites communications, transistor, and computer general and internet have combined to enthrone speedy, faster and easier gathering, processing and distribution of news and information around the globe.
By implication, ICTs as Nwodu puts it easily conduce to “the marriage of telecommunications and computers.
The concept means the same as New Communication Technologies (NCTs) and connotes what is now regarded in the communication literature as ‘social media’ like Facebook, Youtube, Twitter, 2go, LinkedIn, etc) 3.2: ICTs and Global Information Flow Over 30 years ago, the call for New World Information and Communication Order (NWICO) dominated international discuss regarding international news flow.
Then, the argument was the claim by developing nation’s communication scholars and practitioners that the West (developed nations) dominates the global news flow to the determinant of the South (developing Nations).
Southern scholars further accused their western counterpart of minimally highlighting positive developments in developing nations in the Western media claiming that only when the negative happens do the Western media report the South.
Although that argument remained an unresolved issue, it is pertinent to ask: what is the direction of global information flow in the era of ICTs.
Put more succinctly, how has the introduction of new technologies affected Journalism practice with particular references to news gathering and production.
Some scholars like Hester (1985, p.17) have expressed fear that ICTs have deepened rather than acerbate the directional flow of information from the North to the South.
However, there is emerging research evidence that the gradual proliferation of ICTs in developing nations “has allowed them to diversify their sources of news and rely less on Western news agencies” (Obijiofor, 2001).
This position was reinforced by Harding(2003, p.69) where he argued that the projection of Africa to the local, national and Western media audiences has improved in the face of ICTs which according to him, have helped Africa to gain control 96  over representation of themselves and in making decision concerning what to release into the public sphere.
The implication is that ICTs are fast refocusing the direction of global information gathering, production and flow.
The technologies are fast whittling down the one-way directional flow of information from developed to developing nations.
As it is today, information flow round the world is multi-directional - flowing from West to South, South to West and from professional as well as non professional journalists to global audiences who are connected.
Today, Nigerian newspapers are read online and command fair share of space in online journalism.
The major problems associated with the use of new technologies in news gathering and production lie more on access, training and re-training (Obijiofor; 2003).
However, the problem is being surmounted as Nwodu (2009, p.163) rightly reports: Improvement in communication and information technologies as well as the adaptation of the technologies to mass communication has enhanced wide accessibility in both local and foreign organs of mass communication.
The implication is that ICTs have greatly influenced and continue to influence the pattern of news gathering, processing and dissemination as well as the pattern and process of newspaper production.
4.0: conclusion Modern newspaper operators of necessity need to understand the meaning and essence of ICTs in newspaper production.
This knowledge is necessary since knowledge and application of ICTs are very crucial in modern newspaper production.
5.0: Summary This unit focused on the meaning and components of ICTs as well as their relevance in global news and information flow.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Explains what you understand by ICTs pointing out how the technologies affect global information flow.
RFERENCES/FURTHER READING Harding, F. (2003) “Africa and the Moving Image: Television, Film and Video; Journal of African Cultural Studies; 16(1); pp.69-84.
Hester, A.
(1985) “The Communication Revolution: Dangers to 3rd World Culture?” in Hester, A. Ritchstad, J.; Agee, W. and Lule, J (eds.)
Handbook for 3rd World Journalism; Tunis: Joint Publication of Advanced Training of Journalists and Centre for International Communication Training Research.
Nwodu, L. C. (2009) “Mass Communication in an Era of ICT-Induced Globalization: The Nigerian Experience” in Okonkwo, D. E. J.
(ed.)
Mass Communication in the Emergent Information Society; Owerri: Alphabet Nigeria Publishers.
97  Nwodu, L. C. (2007) “ICTs, Globalisation and Domination of African Cultural Values: A Development Communication Perspectives” in Nwosu, I. E and Soola, E. O.
(eds.)
Communication in Global, ICTs and Ecosytem Perspectives: Insight from Nigeria; Enugu: Precision Publishers Ltd. Nwodu, L. C. And Fab-Ukozor, N (2003) “New Communication Technologies and Global Information Flow: Realities and Options for Developing Countries”; Nigeria Journal of Research and Production, Vol.2; No.5 pp.72-81.
Obijiofor, L (2001) “Singporean and Nigerian Journalists’ Perceptions of New Technologies”, Australian Journalism Review 23(1) pp.131-151.
Obijiofor, L. (2003) “New Technologies and Journalism Practice in Nigeria and Ghana” Asia Pacific Media Educator; 14 pp.
36-56.
William, B. K. and Sawyer, S. C. (2003) Using Information Technology: A Practical Introduction To Computers and Communications; Boston: McGraw-Hill Inc. 98  UNIT 2: AREAS OF ICTS APPLICATIONS IN NEWSPAPER PRODUCTION 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Key ICTs Components Need in Newspaper Production 3.2: Areas of ICTs Application in Newspaper Production 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading 1.0: Introduction As we noted in Unit 1 of this Module ICTs have changed the way so many things were done in the past.
The area of newspaper production is not left out.
This unit is therefore designed to discuss the areas of ICTs application in newspaper production.
2.0: Objectives It is hoped that tutorial in this unit will expose the students to: - Relevant ICTs components in newspaper production - Sphere of ICTs uses in newspaper production.
3.0: Main Content 3.1.
Key ICTs Components Needed in Newspaper Production In Unit 1 of this Module, we conceptualize ICTs as a generic name for the marriage of telecommunications and computer communications.
Grandy (1989) aptly submits that “the marriage of computers and telecommunications is the material force in the new technology of communication”.
By implications, ICTs are broadly categorized into: - All gamut of telecommunication hard wares.
- A computer hardware and software.
These broad categories presuppose that each of them has other technologies that sum it up.
It is not out of place therefore to think that out of the lot, there are some that may be more relevant in newspaper production than others.
The essence of this segment therefore is to identity those ICTs components that are considered most relevant in modern newspaper production.
Thus, Anaeto, Solo-Anaeto and Tejumaiye (2009, pp.133-134) isolate six communication technologies that impact most on newspaper production process as: 1.
Computers – which are used for encoding news stories and other copies, storing and sharing information within the organization as well as typesetting, designing and creating illustrations using packages like CorelDraw, page maker and Adobe Photoshop etc.
2.
Mobile phones like Global System of Mobil communication (GSM) which facilitates simple, direct, personal and immediate communication.
99  3.
Fax/Facsimile - used to scan and send messages in the form of electronic signals over telephone lines from one location to another as well as printing out documents and images at the receiving end.
4.
Internet - a worldwide connection of computers which enhances access to, sharing and receiving of information as well as facilitating online publication of newspapers and magazines.
5.
Electronic Mail (e-mail) which enables journalists to send in their reports(text, pictures and other illustrations) from distant locations to a newspaper’s headquarters for publication.
6.
Satellite Technology - a space station that transmits information in form of radio waves from earth-based station which facilitates the distribution or retrieval of news and information from any part of the world via microwaves.
3.2: Areas of ICTs Application in Newspaper Production It is obvious from the above segment that ICTs play significant role in modern newspaper production right from the news gathering stage through editing and production to distribution stages.
To be specific, we shall use the five nuggets enunciated by Anaeto, Solo-Anaeto and Tejumaiye(2009, pp.135-1360 as frame for discussing the major areas of ICTs application in newspaper production here: 1.
News Gathering and Writing: ICTs have literally facilitated collapse geographical boundaries in information sharing and business transactions to the extent one does not need to travel some distance to access information.
As such, modern reporter taps from the benefits of ICTs (like GSM, Internet and e-mail) in gathering authentic information as well as background information.
The technology has also facilitated news writing as most journalists now use computers to type their stories rather than writing with long hand.
2.
Editing: With the computerisation of most news rooms in Nigeria, editing process has been made easy as sub-editors and editors receive and edit news copies through their computers as well as moving the edited copies to the next level.
3.
Proof Reading: With the introduction of Desktop Publishing, the use of galley and bromide proofs has given way to computer typesetting and proof reading.
4.
Design and Production: Page designs, makeup and planning including text formatting are now made flexible, easy and faster on computer.
5.
Distribution and Circulation: ICTs facilitate the speedy distribution and circulation of newspapers by offering opportunities for online subscription for the 100  publication; searching for effective outlets for sales and display online advert of the newspaper.
It is obvious that virtually every aspect of newspaper production (ranging from news gathering, news writing to editing, typesetting, proof reading, copyediting, etc) is done on the computer.
Comparing the improvements ICTs brought to newspaper production to the old approach, Okoye (2000, pp.188-189) writes: In the old system, manuscripts were typed on text composer or compugraphics system.
From here, a galley (long continuous sheets of typesets material or text is produced.
Once set, the galley are cut to the paper lengths and manually posted on already cut to size cardboard which is called a page.
To effect corrections on the page is to cut in pieces and the corrections pasted again.
Secondly, perhaps, the most limiting aspect of this system was its lack of flexibility.
It was not easy to manipulate a page into another design; headlines had to be calculated to the least point to fit in the pages pictures had to be cropped properly without any possibility of mistake.
Again, it was expensive considering the potentials of wastage of material during the production of newspaper...Desk Top Publishing (DTP) provide the means of publishing at your tip.
Just as the name suggests, a publisher can stay on his desk and finish the entire process of production of a publication.
Okoye has said it all.
Suffice it to say that ICTs impact positively on newspaper production by enhancing:  Writing of text.
 Editing to form, content and length.
 Typesetting the manuscript.
 Laying of the page or art work with pictures and graphics  Producing the negative (using linotronics); or printing the document or producing the special multiple copies.
 Simplifying the operations of publishing.
 Flexibility  Time saving  Easy of operations  Net inexpensiveness  Cleanliness (Uwakwe; 2004, pp110-110).
4.0: CONCLUSION The relevance of ICTs in newspaper production cannot be overemphasised.
They enhance, news gathering, processing, packaging, production and distribution it is important that students should therefore, be conversant with the areas of ICTs application to newspaper production.
5.0: SUMMARY The emphasis on this unit is on the use of ICTs in facilitating newspaper production.
Specific issues like ICTS components that are mostly used in newspaper production and areas of ICTs application in newspaper production were discussed.
101  6.0: TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Using Nigerian media landscape, discuss the areas of ICTs application in newspaper production.
7.0: REFRENCES/FURTHER READING Anaeto, S. G.; Solo-Anaeto, M. And Tejumaiye, J.
A.
(2009) Newspaper and Magazine Management, Production and Marketing; Ibadan: Stirling- Horden Publishers Ltd. Okoye, I (2000) Newspaper Editing and Production in Computer Age; Lagos: Mbeyi & Associates.
Uwakwe, O.
(2004) “Newspapering in the High-Tec Age” in O. Uwakwe (ed.)
Media Technology: Issues and Trends; Owerri: Afrika Link Books.
102  UNIT 3: EPILOGUE: ELEMENTS OF PAGE DESIGN 1.0: Introduction 2.0: Objectives 3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Design 3.2: Elements of Design 3.3: Principles of Newspaper Layout 4.0: Conclusion 5.0: Summary 6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0: References/Further Reading.
1.0: Introduction Newspaper page would look drab and unattractive if not properly designed.
Page design therefore is one of the critical decisions the editor has to make while planning the page.
However, we deliberately decided to discuss the elements of design here since most of the designs in modern newspaper production are done with computer.
This unit will therefore offer a quick insight into the elements of page design in modern newspaper production.
2.0: Objectives At the end of the tutorial in the unit, the students would be able to discuss: - The meaning of design in newspaper production.
- Factors considered in page design.
3.0: Main Content 3.1: Meaning of Design According to Stovall (2005, p. 304): Design is a visual process with content as the chief factor.
Design is a way of presenting a reader with information and a way of communicating to the reader something about that information.
The implication is beyond and or beside the text, designs help to tell the story in addition to enhancing the overall aesthetics of the newspaper page.
The page designs help to tell and establish the unique personality of a newspaper medium: Editors are therefore continuously concerned about the appearance of their newspapers before the readers.
Stovall (2005, p. 304) is therefore right where he writes: Most people spend time grooming themselves and selecting what they wear because they know that their appearance send a message to others about who they are.
Publications are the same way....Everything on a web site or a newspaper page or a magazine layout is the product of a decision that someone has to make.
It is important to note that the person who has to make this decision is either the editor or sub-editor or both.
Regardless of who makes the decision, it is important that students of 103  newspaper production are exposed to the factors or elements often considered while making the decisions.
3.2: Elements of Page Design According to Hodgson (1984, p. 90); Once the plan of a newspaper is agreed, the presentation of the contents becomes an exercise in design by which the contents are communicated to the reader.
It is a process akin to packaging and, as with most forms of packaging; the visual display is rooted in psychology.
Stovall (2005, p.305) reinforces this in the following words: Design refers to the overall appearance of publication... Design takes in not only the way the elements are laid out on any page but also how different sections of a publication relate to each other with body type, headline, the way pictures are cropped, the position of advertisements and the types of designs and shapes used in standing heads and logos.
The import as earlier started is that design of publication provides the general guidelines for the layout and overall outlook of the publications.
Newspaper page design is therefore premised on what experts call the “visual logic”.
The visual logic tries to explain why we look at things the way we do.
As Stovall (2005, p.305) explains it, “the eye, directed by the brain, tends to look at certain things first and other things next”.
Expanding, Stovall (2005, pp.305 – 306) observes and rightly too that people see big things first and small things next.
Read materials most of the time from top to bottom, also read things from left to right; and easily attracted from dark to the light.
The scholar illustrates these principles of visual logic as indicated below: Large Small Top Bottom Left Right Dark Light Reproduced from Stovall (2005: 305).
104  Stovall (2005, p.306) concludes that though not immutable, a publication design can use these principles to send messages to the reader or interrupt the principles to emphasize a point.
However, there are basic elements of design which the designer can conveniently manipulate to achieve aesthetic effects.
These are: (a) Type which requires variation in size, leading (space between lines) and kerning (space between letters) to achieve specific effect.
Whichever decision the designer makes about type, size, leading or kerning, he/she must ensure types must be legible and easy to read.
To this end Stovall (2005, p.308 – 309) advises designers to: - Use serif type for body copy, sans serif for headlines.
- Avoid lines of all capitals; they are hard to read.
Using small caps sometimes provide a good alternative to all caps.
If you want to emphasize something, use bold face.
- Italics are harder to read than roman; avoid blocks of copy in italics.
- Don’t overuse boldface particularly in body copy; bold fonts are used well in headlines.
- A reverse (using white or light type on a dark background) is a good way to set off type, but don’t overuse it.
Generally, sans serif rather than serif should be used for reverse.
- Mixing type fonts should be done carefully; too many type fonts on a page is distracting.
Newspapers as a rule use three – one for body copy, one for headlines, cutline, pullouts, and so on, and one for all other uses such as refers flags and logos.
(b) Illustrations: Illustration can reinforce the content of the body text.
It can tell story on its own.
Illustration could be anything outside the textual content of the newspaper.
It could be map, graph, symbol, logos, icons, charts, drawings, pictures, tables, ding baths and so on.
Illustration should be used in such a way that provides the page visual variety and eye comfort rather than making the page boring.
(c) White Space: This is very important element of newspaper design in that it helps to make the page appear airy and by so doing, save headlines and body type from jamming with each other.
In spite of its aesthetic impact, too much of it can make the page appear tattered hence it should be used with caution.
105  3.3: Principles of Newspaper Layout The cardinal objectives of page design according to Hodgson (1984, p. 91) are: 1.
To attract the eye of a potential reader.
2.
To signpost the various items and signal their relative importance.
3.
To give a newspaper a recognizable visual character.
Once a unique, consistent design or graphic personality has been developed, editors usually stick to it in their subsequent productions.
However, Stovall (2005, p.312) cautions that: In laying out each page according to the rules the publication has set, editors must consider the five major aspects of the newspaper layout: proportion, balance, focus, dynamics and unity.
Earlier, Akinfeleye (1982, pp.53 – 54) had identified these principles of layout design as: balance, contrast, unity, rhythm, proportion and harmony.
We shall briefly explain these principles here: (i) Proportion: This emphasizes that news items should be proportionally spread in the news page with none unnecessarily dominating others.
To ensure proportionate spread of the stories in newspaper layout; Stovall (2005, p.312) recommends that most pleasing shapes as 3 x 4, 5 x 7 and 10 x 8.
(ii) Balance: The emphasis here is on ensuring that no particular layout becomes unnecessarily heavy.
Heaviness here refers to over concentration of pictures and headlines in a particular page.
To achieve balance therefore, editors need to ensure even distribution of pictures, illustrations and headlines in such a manner they will not be crowded within a given position of the page layout.
(iii) Unity which means that every page of the newspaper must agree with each and should appear as “a unit rather than as a set of typographical elements” (Stovall; 2005, p.313).
(iv) Rhythm which refer “to the pleasant flow of different matter in the pages of the newspaper” (Akinfeleye, 1984, p.53).
The emphasis is on optical display or eye comfort which Stovall (2005, p.313) refers to as “focusing”.
(v) Harmony which emphasizes compartmentalization of content items.
For instance, sports related items should go to sports page, feminine issues in women’s page, economic matters on business and economy, etc.
4.0: Conclusion Good newspaper design helps to make newspapers appear homely, orderly, and appealing.
Good design therefore robs positively on both the aesthetics and importance of the news even as it helps to establish the unique personality of the newspaper.
It should therefore be done with seriousness it deserves.
106  5.0: Summary This unit discussed design as essential factor in newspaper production including web production.
Specifically issues relating to the meaning of design in the context of newspaper production; elements of design and principles of newspaper design were discussed.
Self-Assessment Examination Using contrasting illustrations, discuss the elements of design known to you.
6.0: Tutor-Marked Assignment Define and explain what you understand by newspaper design pointing out the principles of modern newspaper design.
7.0: References/Further Reading Akinfeleye, R. A.
(1982) Essentials of Modern African Journalism: A Premier; Lagos: Miral Printing Press.
Hodgson, F. W. (1984) Modern Newspaper Practice; London: Heinemann.
Stovall, J. G. (2005) Journalism: Who, What, When, Where, Why and How; Boston: Pearson.
107
