 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 331 COURSE TITLE: ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN PLANNING AND EXECUTION 1  COURSE GUIDE MAC 331 ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN PLANNING AND EXECUTION Course Team Course Writer: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com Content Editor: Dr. Ben Nwanne Delta State University, Abraka.
08033038431 bennwanne@yahoo.com Course Coordinator: Dr. Ademuyiwa Simbiat National Open University of Nigeria 08035149744 simbiatolanrewaju@yahoo.com Programme Leader: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com 2  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE CONTENT Module 1 Imperative of Planning and Processes of Advertising------------ Unit 1 Meaning and Need for Planning in Advertising------------------- Unit 2 Processes of Advertising--------------------------------------------- Unit 3 Research in Advertising-------------------------------------------- Unit 4 Advertising Tripod---------------------------------------------------- Unit 5 4 Ps Marketing---------------------------------------------------------- Module 2 Organizational Structure of the Advertising Industry-------------- Unit 1 Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) --------- Unit 2 Association of Advertising Agency of Nigeria (AAAN) --------- Unit 3 Advertising Association of Nigeria (ADVAN) -------------------- Unit 4 Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria (NPAN) ---------- Unit 5 Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigerria (OAAN) ----------- Unit 6 Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON) --------------------- Unit 7 Media Independent Practitioners Association of Nigeria (MIPAN) ---------------------------------------------------------------- Module 3 Media of Advertising in Nigeria ------------------------------------- Unit 1 The Print Media Sector ----------------------------------------------- Unit 2 Newspapers as Platforms for Advertising -------------------------- Unit 3 Magazines as For a for Advertising ---------------------------------- Unit 4 Billboards as Advertising Instruments ------------------------------ Unit 5 The Broadcasting Media Sector ------------------------------------- Unit 6 Radio as a Platform for Advertising -------------------------------- Unit 7 Television as a Special Advertising Tool -------------------------- Unit 8 Advertising Through Cinema/Film/Home Videos----------------- Unit 9 Internet and Social Media as Advertising Channels -------------- Module 4 Advertising Campaign Execution ---------------------------------- Unit 1 Pre-Execution Proper------------------------------------------------- Unit 2 Campaign Execution Proper --------------------------------------- Unit 3 Post-execution Activity: Evaluation ------------------------------ Module 5 The Imperative of Advertising Regulation ------------------------- Unit 1 APCON as a Regulatory Agency ---------------------------------- 4 Unit 2 Regulating Advertising: Tools at APCONs Disposal ------------- Unit 3 Regulating Advertising: Areas Requiring Special Attention ---- INTRODUCTION MAC 331: Advertising Campaign Planning and Execution You are welcome.
Here we are on MAC 331: Advertising Campaign Planning and Execution.
It is a 3-Credit unit course.
It is devised to enhance undergraduate student’s knowledge of the application of advertising, with special focus on the desirability of adequate planning arrangements before the implementation of an advertising programme or campaign.
To this end, students are exposed to such critical components like need for planning, process and the role of research in advertising planning.
The organization structure of the industry is further exposed, with special attention on the regulatory agency, the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) and the relevant stakeholders/sectoral bodies.
The country’s advertising media environment are further appraised, in addition to the examination of all advertising campaign execution entails.
The necessity for effective regulation of the industry is also advocated.
The embodied self-assessment exercises are meant to act as rehearsal to the Tutor- Marked Assignment (TMA), which go with every unit of the 5-module material.
Course Aims The course aims at enabling students to realize and appreciate the need to deviate from the past when advertising campaigns were executed without planning.
Rather than hinging such advertising decisions on relevant data, they were based on hinches and intuitions.
At the end of the course, therefore, students are better prepared to handle any advertising campaign in an effective way that will safeguard the clients’ aspiration and as well protect the professional integrity and reputation of the practitioners.
Course Objectives At the end of the course, you should, therefore, be able to: (i) Discuss the imperative of planning before advertising execution; (ii) Identify the various processes of advertising; (iii) Explain the central role of research in advertising; (iv) Analyze the interconnectedness of the Nigerian advertising industry, with APCON as the hub; 5 (v) Classify the inherent strengths and weakness of the individual components of Nigerian advertising medium.
(vi) Explain what it takes to effectively execute an advertising programme; (vii) Discuss in detail why and how the industry can be properly regulated.
Working Through this Course To maximize your attainable goals in this course, you are advised to first study carefully the course guide.
It will give you the focus and how to properly handle the course material.
Handle each module and unit sequentially, taking notes of salient points.
Do also take seriously the self-assessment exercises as preparatory ground for handling the Tutor-marked Assignments, (TMA).
Equally, for broadened view of the course, make effective use of the referenced materials.
All these will assist you with your written assignments as well as the final examination.
Course Materials The Crucial items you require for this course are: (i) Course guide.
(ii) Study modules as presented in the units.
(iii) Assignments file.
(iv) Text books Presentation Schedule Study Units This course is designed into five modules and made up of a total of 27 units, as shown below: Module 1 Imperative of Planning and Processes of Advertising Unit 1 Meaning and Need for Planning in Advertising Unit 2 Processes of Advertising Unit 3 Research in Advertising 6 Unit 4 Advertising Tripod Unit 5 4 Ps Marketing Module 2 Organizational Structure of the Advertising Industry Unit 1 Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) Unit 2 Association of Advertising Agency of Nigeria (AAAN) Unit 3 Advertising Association of Nigeria (ADVAN) Unit 4 Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria (NPAN) Unit 5 Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigerria (OAAN) Unit 6 Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON) Unit 7 Media Independent Practitioners Association of Nigeria (MIPAN) Module 3 Media of Advertising in Nigeria Unit 1 The Print Media Sector Unit 2 Newspapers as Platforms for Advertising Unit 3 Magazines as Tool for Advertising Unit 4 Billboards as Advertising Instruments Unit 5 The Broadcasting Media Sector Unit 6 Radio as a Platform for Advertising Unit 7 Television as a Special Advertising Tool Unit 8 Advertising Through Cinema/Film/Home Videos Unit 9 Internet and Social Media as Advertising Channels Module 4 Advertising Campaign Execution Unit 1 Pre-Execution Stage Unit 2 Campaign Execution Proper Unit 3 Post-execution Activity: Evaluation Module 5 The Imperative of Advertising Regulation Unit 1 APCON as a Regulatory Agency Unit 2 Regulating Advertising: Tools at APCONs Disposal Unit 3 Regulating Advertising: Areas Requiring Special Attention Textbooks and References 7 Each unit is ended with a list of relevant text books.
On your own as a student, you are expected to widen your search for helpful reading materials.
This is a way of enhancing your scope and world view, not only of the course, but also mass communication.
Assessment File You will be given an assessment file and a marking scheme.
It spells out details of the work you will submit for your tutor for making.
They involve the tutor-marked assignments and the written examination.
The marks from the two areas will constitute your final marks.
Accordingly, ensure you submit your assignments for assessment.
TUTOR MARKED ASSSIGNMENTS (TMAs) You will have to submit about 30 TMAs.
This means one TMA for each of the Units of the entire Course Structure.
You are also required to attempt all the questions, and you will be assessed on all of them, but the best six performances from the (TMAs) will be used for your 30% grading.
This means each will amount to about 5% or returned to 5% after grading.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a Tutor Marked Assignment form, to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the lifeline for submissions.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor with a valid explanation on why you need an extension.
Failure to do this may result in an unpleasant and avoidable situations.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING Since this is a two-unit course, the final examination will be a test of two hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
It is in your own interest to read the entire units all over again before your written examination.
As earlier mentioned, the final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
This should not be taken for granted.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflects the kinds of SAEs and TMAs you have previously dealt with in the course.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME 8 You are expected to do four TMAs out of which the best three will be recorded for you.
The sum of the TMAs will account for 30% of the overall total marks for the course as shown below.
S/N ASSESSMENT MARKS 1.
TMA 1 10 marks 2.
TMA 2 10marks 3.
TMA 3 10 marks 4.
TMA 4 10 marks 5.
Total for TMAs 30% 6.
Final Written Examination 70% 7.
Overall Total 100% COURSE OVERVIEW Module Unit Title Of Module Weeks Assessment Activity ONE 1-5 Imperative of Planning and Processes Weeks 1 1-4 of Advertising and 2 Unit 1 Meaning and Need for Planning in Advertising Week 1 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Processes of Advertising Week 1 Assignment 2 Unit 3 Research in Advertising Week 2 Assignment 3 Unit 4 Advertising Tripod Week 2 Assignment 4 Unit 5 4 Ps Marketing Week 2 Assignment 4 TWO 1-7 Organizational Structure of the Advertising Industry Unit 1 Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria Week 3 Assignment 1 (APCON) Unit 2 Association of Advertising Agency of Nigeria Week 3 Assignment 2 (AAAN) Unit 3 Advertising Association of Nigeria (ADVAN) Week 3 Assignment 3 Unit 4 Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria Week 4 Assignment 4 (NPAN) Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigerria Week 4 Assignment 5 (OAAN) Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON) Week 5 Assignment 6 Media Independent Practitioners Association of Week 5 Assignment 7 Nigeria (MIPAN) THREE 1-9 Media of Advertising in Nigeria 9  Unit 1 The Print Media Sector Week 6 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Newspapers as Platforms for Advertising Week 6 Assignment 2 Unit 3 Magazines as For a for Advertising Week 6 Assignment 3 Unit 4 Billboards as Advertising Instruments Week 7 Assignment 4 Unit 5 The Broadcasting Media Sector Week 7 Assignment 5 Unit 6 Radio as a Platform for Advertising Week 7 Assignment 6 Unit 7 Television as a Special Advertising Tool Week 8 Assignment 7 Unit 8 Advertising Through Cinema/Film/Home Week 8 Assignment 8 Videos Unit 9 Internet and Social Media as Advertising Week 8 Assignment 9 Channels FOUR 1-3 Advertising Campaign Execution Unit 1 Pre-Execution Proper Week 9 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Campaign Execution Proper Week 9 Assignment 2 Unit 3 Post-execution Activity: Evaluation Week 9 Assignment 3 FIVE 1-5 The Imperative of Advertising Regulation Unit 1 APCON as a Regulatory Agency Week 10 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Regulating Advertising: Tools at APCONs Week 10 Assignment 3 Disposal Unit 3 Regulating Advertising: Areas Requiring Week 11 Assignment 4 Special Attention Unit 5 Reporting Crime, Accidents and the Courts Week 11 Assignment 5 SEVEN 1-4 THE REPORTER, THE LAW AND ETHICAL ISSUES Unit 1 Press Freedom Week 12 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Basic Press Laws Week 13 Assignment 2 Unit 3 Ethical Issues in Media Practice Week 14 Assignment 3 Revision 1 week Written Examination 1 Week Total Weeks 16 Wks HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE The Open University system is a unique system whereby the study units replace the traditional university lectures.
You will, therefore, be required to study the units on your own.
However, you may arrange to meet with your assigned tutor for tutorials on an optional basis at the study centre.
You can also locate likeminded course mates and have interactive sessions with them.
You will have assignments at the end of every Module and Units.
This is not different from the traditional university system where a Lecturer might give you some reading to do.
The study units will tell you where to read, and which are 10 your text materials or recommended books.
You have been given enough in this course so none of you will have any excuse not to do well in this course.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives will help you assess your comprehension of the unit per time.
They are also meant to guide your study so as to give you an all round learning experience.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your recommended books or from a particular reading section.
In summary, this structure is designed to bring out the best in a distance learner.
However, you may still want to interact with a tutor over controversial, confusing or any other topic or issue you are finding difficult to comprehend yourself.
NOUN has made adequate arrangement to see that this is resolved in the interest of the student.
This is the major reason why you must patronize the Study Centres.
FACILITATORS/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS NOUN Headquarters will provide you with information relating to the Tutor and tutorials at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close academic watch on your progress as well as assist you resolve any difficulties you might encounter from time to time.
You must, therefore, take your TMAs to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days before the expiration of the lifeline).
The TMAs will be marked by your Tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
In the NOUN guidelines, you are expected to contact your tutor if you need help over the following issues: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings; • You have difficulty with the exercises and assignments; • You have a question or a problem with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
• You have a question or problem with any part of the Course Structure which you think has not been adequately discussed in this Course Guide.
At NOUN, it is also expected (in your own interest) to make concerted efforts to attend tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask pending and pertinent questions which are answered immediately.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study during the 11 tutorial sessions.
To gain the maximum benefit from the course tutorials, it is advised you prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from being an active participant in the discussions at the Study Centres or during tutorial sessions.
BLURB Advertising Campaign Planning and Execution is an undergraduate course for students of mass communication.
If aims at emphasing the imperative of adequate planning before advertising implementation.
Accordingly, it focuses on advertising process, planning and the structural organization of advertising environment in course focuses on the media of advertising and the advertising environment in Nigeria; the requirement for effective advertising, as well as the need for advertising regulation.
SUMMARY The course guide is generally an overview of what you should expect in the entirety of the course.
Advertising Campaign Planning and Execution as a course is designed to train students to become acquainted with all the vital skills and expertise required for proper and effective planning and implementation of any advertising programme on campaign.
These involved advertising research, its analysis and interpretation; media selection, budgeting; copywriting; recruitment of talents; production; placement and scheduling; monitoring and supervision and evaluation.
Besides, a close look is made on some relevant organs and bodies in the Nigerian advertising industry.
Also examine are such pertinent topics like advertising regulation; the regulatory body and other adjunct and sectoral organsations with the profession and industry.
All these are expected to assist in building that practitioner, who will be useful and contributory to making advertising a tool for national development, a practitioner we will be proud of, and that is yours We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find the learning experience captivating, interesting, useful and worth your time.
12  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 331 COURSE TITLE: 13 ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN PLANNING AND EXECUTION MAIN COURSE MAC 331 ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN PLANNING AND EXECUTION Course Team Course Writer: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com Content Editor: Dr. Ben Nwanne Delta State University, Abraka.
08033038431 bennwanne@yahoo.com Course Coordinator: Dr. Ademuyiwa Simbiat National Open University of Nigeria 08035149744 simbiatolanrewaju@yahoo.com Programme Leader: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede 14  National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com CONTENT Module 1 Necessity for Planning and Processes of Advertising--------- Unit 1 Meaning and Need for Planning in Advertising------------------- Unit 2 Processes of Advertising---------------------------------------------- Unit 3 Research in Advertising----------------------------------------------- Unit 4 Advertising Tripod----------------------------------------------------- Unit 5 4 Ps of Marketing------------------------------------------------------- Module 2 Organizational Structure of the Advertising Industry------- Unit 1 Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) --------- Unit 2 Association of Advertising Agencies of Nigeria (AAAN) ------ Unit 3 Advertising Association of Nigeria (ADVAN) ------------------- Unit 4 Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria (NPAN) --------- Unit 5 Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigeria (OAAN) ----------- Unit 6 Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON) --------------------- Unit 7 Media Independent Practitioners Association of Nigeria (MIPAN) ----------------------------------------------------------------- Module 3 Media of Advertising in Nigeria ----------------------------------- Unit 1 The Print Media Sector ----------------------------------------------- Unit 2 Newspapers as Platforms for Advertising -------------------------- Unit 3 Magazines as Platforms for Advertising ---------------------------- Unit 4 Billboards as Advertising Instruments ------------------------------ Unit 5 The Broadcasting Media Sector ------------------------------------- Unit 6 Radio as a Platform for Advertising -------------------------------- Unit 7 Television as a Special Advertising Tool -------------------------- Unit 8 Advertising Through Cinema/Film/Home Videos----------------- Unit 9 Internet and Social Media as Advertising Channels -------------- Module 4 Advertising Campaign Execution --------------------------------- Unit 1 Pre-Execution Arrangement------------------------------------------- Unit 2 Campaign Execution Proper ------------------------------------------ 15 Unit 3 Post-Advertising Campaign Execution Activity: Evaluation ---- Module 5 The Imperative of Advertising Regulation ---------------------- Unit 1 APCON as a Regulatory Agency ------------------------------------ Unit 2 Regulating Advertising: Tools at APCON’s Disposal ------------ Unit 3 Regulating Advertising: Areas Requiring Special Attention ---- Appendix One: Advertising Practitioners (Registration, Etc.)
Decree No 55 of 1988 Appendix Two: A code of Advertising Ethics, APCON 2003.
16  MAC 331 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 NECESSITY FOR PLANNING AND PROCESSES OF ADVERTISING Unit 1 Meaning and Need for Planning in Advertising Unit 2 Processes of Advertising Unit 3 Research in Advertising Unit 4 Advertising Tripod Unit 5 4 Ps of Marketing Unit 1 MEANING AND NEED FOR PLANNING IN ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Meaning of Planning in Advertising 4.1 Why Advertising is Planned 4.2 Reasons for the Failure of Some Advertising Campaigns 4.3 Challenges Facing Today’s Advertising Practitioners 4.4 Benefits of Planned Advertising.
4.0 Conclusion 6.0 Summary 7.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The task of providing sufficient and reliable information about goods and services, persuading potential consumers to patronize them and constantly reminding them of their existence is not an easy one.
These goals are only achievable if the necessary steps are taken right from the stage of conceptualizing the advertising programme.
Most crucial of all those steps and processes is planning.
Without adequate and effective planning, no advertising campaign or programme can succeed.
Planning is literally laying the foundation on which the advertisement will stand.
17 The position of planning emphasizes its importance in any advertising campaign programme.
Consequently, this unit clearly underscores planning as a fundamental and indispensable stage that must be carefully handled in order to attain the goal of successfully and profitably marketing the advertised product.
2.0 OBJECTIVES • At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Explain planning as a segment of the advertising process • Understand why advertising should be planned • Identify some factors that lead to advertising campaign failures • Appreciate the challenges facing today’s advertising practitioners • Understand the benefits derivable from planned advertising 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 4.0 Meaning of Planning in Advertising Planning is a preliminary necessity in advertising.
It can be literally linked to the arrangements, scheming, designing, drawing, sketching or plotting which take place before laying a formidable foundation.
It is no wonder Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006: 115) see planning, irrespective of wherever it is applied, as a “guide and guardian”.
It includes the versatility of critical decisions which must be taken and effectively implemented, if all the resources expended in the advertising programme will not go down the drain.
A vital requirement of many undertakings and human endeavours, especially if they involve management, planning is central and pivotal to effective advertising.
To Anyacho (2007:128), it “proposes strategies for targeting the audience, presenting the advertising message and implementing media”, planning, therefore, provides the needed focus, bearing and direction crucial for developing the right communication messages, selecting the suitable media and professionally disseminating the advertising messages to the targeted market.
As well, it provides the platform for these decisions and arrangements that will enable, in the words of Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006:115), systematic approach to the advertising programme, in addition to informed, rational and 18 responsible manner of handling every stage of the process involved, from the beginning to evaluation.
4.1 Why Advertising is Planned Several factors justify the insistence that every advertising campaign should be planned before its execution.
Among the reasons are: (a) Safeguarding the investment of the advertiser The cost of the advertisement is borne by the client who finances the programme.
Planning is imperative in order to package a campaign that will lead to successful marketing of his goods or services.
Only this will ensure meeting his profit expectations.
(b) Meeting the challenge of competition Every advertising agency faces a stiff competition occasioned by rival agencies, numerous media of communication and new information and communication technologies in today’s globalized world.
To excel, planning is an essential ingredient for packaging qualitative advertisements that can withstand the competition.
(c) Satisfying consumers In this age of enlightenment, information and social media, today’s consumer with his improved education is no more gullible.
He is wise and can make informed choices, moreso as he has options, alternatives and substitutes.
The advertising practitioner must, therefore, as Aliede (2005:114) puts it, be able to convince the consumer that the product is capable of meeting his needs.
(d) High cost of Advertising The cost of producing advertising campaign messages has continued to rise steadily.
Expectedly no investor, after providing such funds, would want his resource to be unproductive.
Effective planning is one way of averting such a disaster.
(e) Protecting the corporate image of the agency While handling an advertising programme, the image and reputation of the agency is at stake.
This is also true of the advertising practitioners involved, as they must prove their worth or have their professional 19 integrity tarnished.
One way of avoiding this is looking before leaping or planning before implementing the advertising programme.
Every available measure that will enable the practitioners to succeed must be fully exploited and applied.
This, on the other hand, is only tenable if enough planning is done.
4.2 Reasons for the Failure of Some Advertising Campaigns Notwithstanding its pivotal position as an important component of effective advertising, it must be stressed that it is not planning only that ensures the profitable marketing of goods and services.
Advertising involves several stages and each of them is as important as every joint of a jewellery or a chain.
All these stages must, apart from being well planned, be provided for, well produced, packaged and executed.
In addition to planning, enormous resources are needed in packaging and producing an advertisement.
These range from manpower, finance, materials, logistics, infrastructure and technology.
All these have to be in place in their right quantities.
For some advertising practitioners, in a bid to grab some accounts, beat deadlines or to maximize profits, compromise a number of vital stages or inputs, thereby producing low quality advertisements which cannot stand the test of time.
This must be watched and avoided.
On the other hand, planning, which includes research, is the answer to enable the agency to collect the required data.
4.3 Challenges Facing Today’s Advertising Practitioner As a social agent in a globalized world, advertising is faced with numerous challenges.
This it must overcome in order to make the right impact on a society that expects much from it.
Although it is not doubtful if advertising has made its mark in contributing to our socio-economic and political development, Aliede (2005:105), yet, the same society very often casts aspersions on advertising.
Most of these criticisms are usually centred on ethical and social responsibility considerations.
Shimp (2000:70-72), O’Guinn, et al (1998:80-91) and Belch and Belch (1995:678-702) give these as some of the accusations against advertising: 1.
Advertising is untruthful, dishonest and deceptive, often using subliminal stimulations.
2.
Advertising is manipulative.
3.
Advertising is offensive and in bad taste, causing irritation and distastes, 20  for instance, advertisements of condom, abortion and contraceptive to pro- life activists.
4.
Advertising promotes sexual appeals through pornography and nudity.
5.
Advertising creates and perpetuates stereotypes.
6.
Advertising is sometimes superficial.
7.
Advertising leads to wastage and extravagance.
8.
Advertising promotes materialism 9 Advertising makes people buy things they do not really need.
10.
Advertising plays on people’s fears, anxieties and insecurity 11.
Advertising is often insensitive to the plight of vulnerable groups like children, women and minority ethnic groups.
12.
Advertising bastardizes and uses vulgar language.
13.
Advertising intensifies competition and increases cost of production later shifted to the consumer.
14.
Advertising presents fewer choices to consumers.
15.
Advertising negatively influences media contents and programming.
The need to overcome these criticisms further underscores the imperative of well planned advertising undertaking.
Planning entails meticulous preparation and arrangements, which then block the loopholes from where the attacks emanate, leading to more qualitative services to consumers.
4.4 Benefits of Planned Advertising When effectively and professionally planned, advertising is better placed to meet the needs of its customers, consumers and stakeholders.
First, it enables, other things being equal, successful execution, culminating in the profitable marketing of the advertised product.
Too, it meets the socio- economic needs of consumers, whose standard of living is enhanced, economically empowered and presented with better choices.
Still, it provides bulk of the funds required to finance vibrant, functional and efficient media, above all; when well planned, the conditions for successful advertising are put in place.
These, according to Bovee and Arens (1992) include: 1.
The product must be qualitative.
2.
The advertisement efforts must go beyond the threshold 3.
The product must have enough distinguishing features (USPs) 4.
The price must be moderate and commensurate with the quality and quantity of the product.
5.
A uniform standard of quality must be maintained 21 6.
The advertisement must reach the target market 7.
The advertisement objectives must be measurable 8.
It must be realistic.
9.
It must have a given time frame 10.
The nature and expectations of the target audience/market must be understood.
Planning provides the advertising practitioner the opportunity to have the above leverages.
Their prevalence, undoubtedly, means that the particular advertising message creates the necessary awareness, leads to comprehension, is convincing enough, stimulates the desire and acceptance of the credibility and efficacies of the product and as well motivates its patronage.
(Aliede, 2005:104-105).
Indeed, planning is the root of a well executed advertising campaign programme.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Show why planning is relevant in advertising 2.
Explain the causes of the failure of some advertisements 3.
With critical arguments, support or refute attacks on advertising.
4.
How can planning be used to overcome advertising criticisms?
5.
Distinguish between planning in advertising and other professions.
5.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed the concept of planning as an imperative segment of advertising.
It enables us to contend that planning must take place before the execution of any advertising programme.
It is also a necessity if the avalanche of condemnations against the profession and industry must be contained.
That way, advertising will be able to serve the society and sustain its enviable social status and act as agent of change and development.
6.0 SUMMARY The unit handles the meaning, needs, reasons and gains of planned advertising.
It equally tackles the challenges facing the industry and how they can be solved.
5.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Explain planning as an integral necessity of successful advertising.
b.
Show how prepared Nigerian advertising practitioners are in withstanding 22  the challenges of today’s competitive industry.
c. Compare the level of planning today and twenty years ago in the Nigerian advertising industry.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, J.E.
(2005).
“The Challenge of Professional Advertising in Nigeria”, in Nwosu, I.E, et al (Ed) Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets Limited.
Anyacho, R.C.(2007).
Advertising: Principles and Practice – the Nigerian perspective.
Lagos: Teejay Enterprises.
Belch, G.E.
and Belch, M.A.
(1995).
Introduction to Advertising and Promotion: An IMC Perspective, Third Edition, Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Bovee, C.L.
and Arens, W.F.
(1992).
Contemporary Advertising, Fourth Edition.
Boston: Richard D. Irwin Inc. Nwosu.
I.E.
and Nkamnbe, A.D. (2006).
Triple-P Advertisings Principles, Processes, Practics Aba: Afri-Towers Ltd. Shimp, T.A.
(2000).
Advertising and Promotion, Fifth Edition.
Philadelphia: The Dryden Press.s 23 MAC 331 MODULE 1 Unit 2 PROCESSES OF ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Processes of Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Advertising is a process, a profession and an industry.
This is a quality which often distinguishes it from other fields, just as it is an art and science.
As a scientific undertaking, it undergoes some laid down procedures.
It, therefore, follows systematic steps.
This ensures the involvement of all necessary stages to guarantee the success of an advertising campaign.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the various stages of advertising • explain the steps and their relevance.
• discuss the inputs required to carry out advertising 4.0 MAIN CONTENT 4.1 Processes of Advertising A fundamental knowledge every advertising practitioner must have is that of the process of advertising.
It is crucial as otherwise could lead to the misapplication of resources, hence wastage of often scarce resources and the eventual failure of the campaign.
Although no two advertising programmes may require the same steps to be strictly followed, their knowledge, nonetheless is very essential for all 24 professional practitioners (Nwosu and Nkamnebe 2006:115), John-Kamen (2006) and Anyacho (2007).
The following are the processes of advertising: 1.
Conceptualization At this very first step, what is involved is some mental exercise during which the mental picture of the product is formed.
Also called ideation, it takes the form of visualizing the structural and physical outlook of the production and stages of the advertisement.
2.
Advertising Brief.
Here, the source of the product, the client on advertiser, who may be the producer, manufacturer or marketer of the goods and services, provides all available information on the product.
These may include: target market and their demographic and psychographic features; raw materials; production processes; attributes and qualities; competitive environment; pricing policy; promotional exercises; distribution, among others.
3.
Research Only in rare cases will the brief from the client be sufficient.
This suffices this vital stage, where through investigations and data collection, the advertising agency sources sufficient information with which the product would be advertised.
4.
Planning This is the stage where all the critical managerial decisions pertaining to the effective and professional advertising and marketing of the product are made.
It encompasses a number of these sub-stages, including: • Budgeting: Based on the information got from the collected data, fund is appropriated to various stages of the advertising campaign • Copywriting: This involves the scripting and visualizing of the advertising message, whether it is to be channeled through the print or electronic media (jingles or commercials).
• Recruitment: At this step, talents to feature in the production of the advertising message are selected and engaged.
It could be actors, 25 footballers, musicians or celebrities, who train, rehearse and finally perform as personas of the advertisement.
• Media Selection: From the numerous media available to the advertising agency handling the campaign, decisions are made based on sound judgment on the most suitable channels of disseminating the advertising messages.
5.
Production: The advertisement is finally produced.
This entails, for instance, in the case of a television commercial, shooting, coverage, editing and packaging of the commercial.
For others like jingles, print adverts (billboards newspapers, magazines or posters), the actual production takes place at this stage 6.
Placement and Scheduling: Arrangements are made and agreements reached between the agency and the chosen media on the timing, spaces, frequency and costs of publishing the advertising messages.
7.
Monitoring and Supervision Agencies do not make payments to media organization and go home to relax.
Dutiful supervision is done to ensure that the advertisements are carried as and when scheduled and according to specifications.
In the event of any mistake are error, reports are made for possible re-runs.
8.
Evaluation This is the stage of stocktaking.
Agencies here appraise, review and assess the level of success or failure of the entire campaign programme.
The outcome of this analysis determines the future actions of the agency.
Each of these stages is cardinal to the attainment of the goal of the advertising campaign and must, therefore, be strictly adhered to.
Already, it is during planning that managerial inputs into the campaign are made, hence underlining its importance.
26 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE X-ray each segment of the advertising process, pointing out the relevance of each stage to the success of any advertising campaign.
5.0 CONCLUSION Good knowledge of these stages of advertising is very crucial to every practitioner in this field.
This informed the length this unit went into highlighting the stages and their roles to the achievement of the advertising objectives Students are, therefore, expected to understand them for their own subsequent application of the knowledge.
6.0 SUMMARY The unit discusses the stages an advertisement undergoes from conceptualization to completion.
Efforts are made to outline their meanings and functions, which students must acquaint themselves with for their informed practice in the field.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
With a named hypothetical product, show how the advertisement can be carried on national dailies while applying the processes.
8.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING John-Kamen, A. U.
(2006).
Advertising: Genesis, Evolution, Principles, and Practice.
Enugu: Snaap Press Limited.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Nkamnebe, A.D. (2006).
Triple-P Advertising: Principles, Processes, Practices.
Aba: Afri-Towers Ltd. 27 MAC 331 MODULE 1 Unit 3 RESEARCH IN ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Research in Advertising 3.2 Advertising Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Advertising involves a lot of inputs and resources some of which may not always be at the disposal of an advertising agency.
The data or information needed to successfully execute a campaign of a given product may not be available to the agency at the outset of the business engagement.
At the same time, the client may not be in position to supply such facts and figures.
This scenario emphasizes the place of research as the source of the statistics the agency will require to carry out professional advertising.
This requires a thorough exploration that will expose students to the full appreciation of research as a vital ingredient of advertising, as well as evaluation as a platform for assessing the level of success after every advertising campaign.
2.0 OBJECTIVES.
At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • discuss the role of research in advertising.
• explain why any practitioner who ignores research will fail in his campaign.
• justify the need for evaluation after every campaign 28 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Research In Advertising Advertising is a management and behavioural function, as well as a social science.
This confirms an umbilical interface between it and research.
As in the views of Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006:145), it is both hard and impossible to successfully implement an advertising programme in this information age without research.
In the same vein, it is Aliede’s (2005:317) position that “to meet acceptable standards today, communicators (advertising practitioners) adopt and apply modern research methods.
Research as a management principle provides the data on which reliable decisions are based.
At every level of advertising processes, sensitive decisions some of which involve enormous resources must be made.
And to safeguard investors’ hard-earned finances, such resolutions and judgments should as a matter of necessity, be anchored on empirical evidence.
In today’s competitive world, guesses, hunches, intuitions, even experience, are no more adequate and reliable.
Multiplicities of research methods, designs and techniques are available to today’s advertising practitioner.
These, when effectively applied in collecting data and statistics, yield data, which if scientifically processed, analysed and interpreted, provide the dependable information with which credible decisions can be based on.
Instances of such methods, Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006:145), Anyacho (2007:24) and Aliede (2005) are: • Diagnostic Research • Focus Group Discussion • Projective Test Techniques • Public Opinion Polling • Content Analysis • Experimental • Observation • Strategic • Creative Development • Exploratory • Rating Scales • Historical • Questionnaire 29 • Interviews When their application is combined with information technologies, advertising is significantly aided.
Wilcox, et al (1997:125-128) cite some of them as online databases, networks, Internet and world-wide-web (www).
As Aliede (2005:324) sums up, these instruments “provide cheaper, speedier, more convenient, reliable and detailed avenues for sourcing information and data for the purpose of packaging dependable, impactful and professionally oriented communication programmes”.
The importance and utility of research to advertising can further be appreciated if it is understood that no planning can take place without data, as vital materials are sourced through research.
Similarly, the high cost of advertising today and the need to satisfy the client also make research a necessity.
Equally, with the high level of competition among agencies within and outside our borders as a result of globalization and information and communication technologies, have all pushed the place of research in advertising to the front burner.
It must be mentioned that research methods, techniques and designs are as many as the multiplicity of advertising dimensions.
However, the application tool at any given case and time, depends on the nature of the particular advertisement, its sophistication and available resources.
3.2 Advertising Evaluation Evaluation is another significant segment of advertising.
We look at it here so as to expose its similarities and differences with research.
Although it may often connote research, it is not realistically research.
Its need arises since the extent of achievement, of advertising goals must be measured after expending an investor’s resources.
It, consequently, concerns the scientific analysis and assessment of tenable gains after an advertising programme.
According to Anyacho (2007:233-234) and Nwosu (152:156), advertising evaluation covers such areas as: media research; cost benefit; awareness; recall; attitude; purchase; usage; intent sales data; feedback and recognition.
Perhaps another means of distinguishing research from evaluation is to regard the former as a pre-event and the latter as post-event.
In all, both are 30 inevitable tools for ensuring effective advertising, moreso, in this information-driven age and in a competitive industry.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define research in relation to advertising 2.
Underscore the role of research in advertising 3.
Differentiate research from evaluation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Research has come to stay as a vital part of any advertising programme.
Practitioners risk failure should they attempt to bypass data for dependable decision making.
As well, evaluation is important, in order to determine the extent of performance in a given advertising campaign programme.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit examines the role of research in modern advertising.
It is the conclusion that research is a must for success in an advertising campaign.
Evaluation, too, is explored as shown as a complementary tool for judging the extent of performance in an advertising programme.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Research is the life wire of advertising.
Discussion 2.
Research and evaluation are inseparable twins in the advertising process.
Comment.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, J.E.
(2005), “Research as a Critical Element of Contemporary Communication”, in Nwosu, I.E., Aliede, J. E. and Nsude, I (ed) Mass Communication: One Course, Many Professions.
Enugu: Prime Targets Ltd Anyacho, R.C.
(2007), Advertising: Principles and Practice-Nigerian Perspectives.
Lagos: Teejay Enterprises.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Nkamnebe (2006).
Triple-P Advertising: Principles,Processes, Practices.
Aba: Afri-Towers Ltd. Wilcox D. L, Ault P.H., and Ages W.K.
(1997).
Public Relations: Strategies and Tactics.
New York: Longman.
31 MAC 331 MODULE 1 Unit 4 THE ADVERTISING TRIPOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Functions 3.2 Structural Interface 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Advertising tripod is one of the structural components from which advertising can be looked at.
A concept involving a tripodal or triangular outlook, it is made up of the three cardinal components or elements whose full participation determines the functioning and success of advertising.
Their key roles and cohesive relations end in the actualization of the advertising process.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • identify the components of the tripod.
• explain their individual roles in advertising 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Functions The tripod is made up of three key elements.
These include the client, agency and the media.
Students of this course deserve its knowledge as it is made up of the main institutional framework which enables advertising to take place.
For advertising to fully and successfully take place, the three have to effectively play their roles.
32 • Client The client is the originator of the advertised product.
A manufacture, producer or marketer, the client takes his product to the agency.
This is the case for the product which, through professional touch, must gain public acceptance and patronage.
To advertise the product in order to meet his business ambition, the client or advertiser finances the undertaking.
Therefore, the advertising problem is solved on his payment of fees or commission.
Funding the entire processes of advertising explains the strategic role and position of the client.
Besides funding, the client performs other supportive roles like furnishing the agencies with the information with which the advertising communication messages are formulated and produced.
This is also revered to as “briefing”, as previously discussed.
• Agency This is an embodiment of professional advertising practitioners.
Together as a business team, they render advertising services to clients.
With their wide knowledge, expertise, skills and experience of its constituent members, they collectively work to render such professional services that would enable the client to market his products profitably • Media The media are the third link in this chain.
Among their components are radio, television, cinema, Internet, newspapers, magazines and billboards.
They are the vehicles for conveying the advertising messages.
Depending on the product and the target market, the message produced are packaged by professionals in the agency and are disseminated through the appropriate media • Structural Interface The tripod is an interdependent arrangement of those sensitive components whose roles are central to the actualization of the goal of advertising.
Their 33 functions, though individualistic, must integratedly blend to lead to the deserved results, (Anyacho, 2007:14).
This is illustrated below: Client Agency Media The Advertising Tripod From the beginning of the business partnership to its conclusion, there must be consistent linkage, cooperation, collaboration and synergy between and among the three.
Any lapse or snag anywhere causes disruption in the system and ultimately failure of the campaign.
In the words of Ozoh (1998:31), “This independence does not however obviate their general interdependence”.
It is, therefore, a union that must be sustained through active and mutual functioning.
The advertiser pays the bill and provides needed information.
The agency researches for more information, plans and executes the advertisement in conjunction with the media.
The media provides popular avenues, programmes, space or sites with sufficient public accessibility and visibility.
All these coupled with requisite managerial skills; result in the success of the advertisement, to the profit of the advertiser, credibility of the agency and satisfaction of the media.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Explain the functional linkage between the three components of advertising tripod.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Advertising tripod is made up of triplets who must coexist and function for advertising to flourish.
Often we see quacks and charlatans who bypass one or more of this tripod in presenting to the public certain advertisements.
34 But the consequences are obvious.
It can hardly succeed, however, if it does, the level will be minimal.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit looks at the individual nature and roles the advertisers, agency and media must jointly play to succeed in implementing and advertising campaign.
It exposes their inherent potentials and how they can be harnessed in order to attain advertising objectives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Show how the three elements of the tripod must work for an advertising programme to succeed.
2.What level of success is achievable if one of these three items is ignored?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyacho, R.C.
(2007), Advertising: Principles and Practice-Nigerian Perspectives.
Lagos: Teejay Enterprises.
Ozoh, H. C. (1998).
Principles and Practices of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON.
35 MAC 331 MODULE 1 Unit 5 4PS OF MARKETING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 4Ps of Marketing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Advertisement 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This concept yet addresses another angle of the several essential elements, steps or actions that must be in place for advertising to be successfully executed.
It illustrates some sensitive and pertinent decisions and actions that must come within the ambit of the close relationship between the agency, the media and the client.
They are policy issues that must be addressed during the planning stage of the advertisement.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Discuss the four components of the concept.
• Appreciate their pivotal roles in the marketing of products.
5.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 4Ps of Marketing The coinage, “4Ps of marketing” clearly emphasizes the obvious affinity between advertising and marketing.
Also called Marketing Mix, they pertain to marketing decisions jointly taken by the Account Executive of the agency and the Marketing Manager of the client organization.
How well they are professionally handled goes a long way in determining the extent of recordable success in marketing of the advertised goods and services.
To Belch and Belch (1995:6) these elements must be combined “ …into a marketing programme to facilitate the potential for exchange with 36 consumers in the market place ….. (through) an effective marketing programme.” The four elements in the mix include: Product The first P stands for product.
It stipulates the variety and intensity of the measures which should be taken to ensure that the product is sustainably qualitative.
Right from the stage of its conceptualization, every step must be made to translate into high quality product, which must meet the needs and desires of consumers.
Everything: size, shape, taste, texture, aroma, assortment, model, economy, durability, standard, all must measure up to the aspirations of the consumer of the product.
It is, no doubt, a critical aspect of the mix; perhaps, the most important.
Price Decision on the price of the product must be based on sound judgments.
Multiplicity of factors should be put into consideration, among which should include the quantity and quality of the goods.
The price should be commensurate with those factors so as not to scare away customers, who have other choices and substitutes.
Others are prevailing economic circumstance, potential consumers’ purchasing ability, competitive environment and existing control mechanisms.
Promotion This generally represents all efforts geared to informing, reminding and persuading potential consumers of the product.
It, therefore, encompasses advertising, public relations, publicity, promotions, advertorials, exhibitions, trade fairs.
Others are plant tours, personnel and direct selling, launching, public presentation, among others.
Place Place, the fourth P stands for distribution.
It advocates that the product should be distributed so efficiently to enable consumers get it conveniently at no extra costs.
37 Efficient distribution is one of the secrets of many successful corporate organizations.
A typical and local example is the Nigerian Bottling Company, producers of Coco Cola products.
The direct result is that its products are household names.
Some analysts advocate for a fifth P they call people.
It is the contention that to succeed in carrying out the policy goals of the 4Ps, people must play major roles.
It is further argued that right from the very first process of visualizing the product, it is the task of some personnel, ranging from skilled, non-skilled, technical, managerial and out of organization staff.
For optimal performance at all these levels, they should be well cared for in such areas like working environment, welfare, remuneration, recreation, including retirement.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.Discuss the linkage between the 4Ps in a successful advertising and marketing of a product.
4.0 CONCLUSION The 4Ps of Marketing Mix is a vital aspect of the advertising and marketing processes.
Knowledge of them is essential to the would-be practitioner who must know all strings he must pull to achieve the goal of product communication and marketing success.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit discusses the four elements which aid both advertising and marketing.
It would have assisted our appreciation of their importance and also positioned us to be able to make such decisions when the need arises.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIDNMENT 1.
Name and explain the components of the Marketing Mix.
2.
Show how the 4Ps can be applied to the successful advertising and of marketing a new baby food.
38  7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Belch, G.E.
and Belch M.A.
(1995).
Introduction to Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communications Perspective.
Third Edition.
Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Nwosu, I. E and Nkamnebe, A.C. (2006).
Triple-P Advertising: Principles, Processes and Practices.
Aba: Afri-Towers Ltd. 39  MAC 331 MODULE 2 MODULE 2 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE NIGERIAN ADVERTISING INDUSTRY Unit 1 Adverting Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) Unit 2 Association of Advertising Agencies of Nigeria (AAAN) Unit 3 Advertisers Association of Nigeria (ADVAN) Unit 4 Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria (NPAN) Unit 5 Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigeria (OAAN) Unit 6 Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON) Unit 7 Media Independent Practitioners Association of Nigeria (MIPAN) UNIT 1 ADVERTISING PRACTITIONERS COUNCIL OF NIGERIA (APCON) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 APCON: Figure Head of the Nigerian Advertising Industry 5.1 Need for and Functions of APCON 3.3 Organizational Structure of APCON 3.4 APCON: Challenges and Prospects 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The advertising industry has come a long way in terms of age, achievements and challenges.
All these have played out to its advantage, as reflected in its robust outlook, notwithstanding some inherent challenges.
40 Although the very first means of formal advertising in the country dates back to Iwe Irohin, the Abeokuta located bilingual newspaper founded in1859; modern advertising debuted with the establishment of West African Publicity Limited, later called Afromedia Nigeria Limited, by the United African Company (UAC), on August 31, 1928.
This pioneering role by the private sector continued and later saw the involvement of other conglomerates like Kingsway Stores, Nigeria Tobacco.
Company Limited, Guinness Nigeria Limited, Nigeria Breweries Limited and Lever Brothers (Ajayi, 2005:14).
With time, the scenario in the industry turned ugly due to the unwholesome activities of quacks and interlopers.
This forced self-mirroring by agencies themselves.
Their anxiety and concerns culminated in their subsequent quest for the incorporation and chartering of the industry.
This was championed by the then Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN), now Association of Advertising Agencies of Nigeria (AAAN).
The result was the establishment of APCON in 1988.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • appreciate the statutory responsibilities of the body.
• explain the organizational structure • identify the strengths and weaknesses of APCON 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 APCON: Figure Head of the Advertising Industry.
Advertising is a very sensitive, pervasive and delicate arm and kind of communication.
Often intrusive and volatile, especially if subjected to misuse, it requires careful and systemic guide and mediation.
Practitioners under the umbrella of AAPN noticed this on time and clamoured for a formidable organ to provide such security and leadership in the industry.
This became necessary in order to shield the field from the nefarious hand of irresponsible and unqualified practitioners.
It is under this condition that advertising could fulfill its social responsibilities and as well contribute to national development.
41  This goal was attained with the promulgation of Act No.
55 of 1988, as amended and charged with the obligation of superintending over the practice of advertising in the country, APCON (2003:33), Anyacho (2007:86) and Ozoh 1998:2009).
The Act confers on APCON the duty of determining practitioners, standards and also the power to melt out sanctions to defaulting practitioners.
Accordingly, as the accredited supervisor of all arms, segments and sectors of advertising in the country, the formulation and execution of any major policy decision about the profession and industry in Nigeria falls on the council, including policing the entire industry.
3.2 Need for and Functions of APCON In today’s information-driven society, advertising as a social agent is a key player.
In countries where it has attained its rightful status, advertising is a major factor in the socio-economic and political well being and development of such areas.
Such condition, no doubt, is obtainable only if advertising is professionally, responsibly, rationally and reasonably practiced by these charged with such responsibilities.
To be able to fulfill this mandate, APCON is given some specific roles as contained in the legislation that gave birth to it.
In clear terms, these functions, according to Anyacho (2007:86) empowers the Council to use advertising as an instrument for positive development, besides ensuring its practice is in a sanitized manner.
The functions include: 1.
Determine who are advertising practitioners; 2.
Setting the standards of knowledge required for registration as members of the advertising profession and reviewing them from time to time; 3.
Compiling and maintaining a register of practitioners; 4.
Regulating and controlling the practice of advertising in all its aspects and ramifications; 5.
Conducting examinations in the profession and awarding certificates, and 6.
Performing other functions in pursuit of the above functions.
3.3 Organizational Structure of APCON 42 APCON has a Governing Council.
It is its top most policy making organ.
It is headed by a chairman and has 19 other members, with the Registrar as the secretary.
Ten of these members, according Anyacho (2007:86), are selected from the statutory sectoral arms of the industry, while the remaining come from relevant organs of the society, like Ministry of Health, Manufacturers Association of Nigeria, National Council of Women Society and Consumer Protection Council.
The Council is made up of committees, which include: • Advertising Practitioners Investigating Panel.
It probes into reports, cases and complaints brought against advertising practitioners.
• Advertising Practitioners Disciplinary Committee.
It decides the level of sanctions appropriate for members of APCON found guilty of offences.
• Advertising Standards Panel.
This committee ensures adherence to standards by practitioners.
• Membership and Privileges Committee.
It determines and registers new members and prescribes rewards.
• Education and Training Committee.
It is incharge of training and retraining of members, including organizing seminars, certificate and diploma programmes.
• Administration and Finance Committee.
Performs such functions as employment, promotions, among other administrative duties (Anyacho 2007:88).
The secretariat of the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) is organized and structured to leverage its complementary roles of the committees of the Council.
It is headed by a Registrar/Chief Executive Officer.
It has the following departments/sections: • Office of the Registrar • Research, Planning and Statistics • Administration and Finance • Registration and Career Matters • Regulation, Monitoring and Enforcement.
43  APCON has membership categories that range from Students to Associates, Full, Honourary Fellow and Fellow.
3.4 APCON: Challenges and Prospects.
Like any other organ operating in the society, APCON is not immune from the challenges which face similar corporate organizations.
They include the following: 1.
Acting as an effective regulatory authority capable of covering all nooks and crannies of this vast nation.
2.
Flushing out quacks whose activities are dent the image of the industry and profession.
3.
Setting and ensuring improved standards of advertising practice in the country.
4.
Enhanced educational opportunities for members through capacity building and exchange programmes with similar bodies elsewhere.
5.
Extending of its presence to other parts of the country through the establishment of more zonal offices.
6.
Formulation of impactful corporate social responsibility policies with which the Council would be endeared to the hearts of current and intending members.
7.
Focusing more on programmes that will portray the profession as a more responsible and people oriented corporate entity committedly geared to national development.
8.
Accrediting institutions offering advertising and similar courses.
The foregoing task notwithstanding, APCON has made its mark, especially in discharging its duties.
Its efforts in sanitizing the industry manifest in its ongoing arrests and prosecution of practicing non-members, and the establishment of zonal offices at Kano, Enugu, Owerii and Port Harcourt, among others.
Expectedly, the Council will do and achieve more if better equipped with requisite resources.
Similarly, its members can also assist the council by practicing more responsibly, cooperatively and ethically.
44 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Attempt a presentation of the history of advertising in Nigeria.
2.
Show APCON as either a strong or weak organ.
4.0 CONCLUSION The emergence of modern advertising in Nigeria was a natural improvement to the prevailing state of proceeds advertising in its rudimentary form, before the arrival of westernization and modernity.
Since then, it has gone through series of revolutionary changes that have boosted the industry and its contribution to national development.
APCON, the advertising regulatory body again brought to its wake the needed sanity and developments.
Still, more can at its inception be done to further position the profession as an agent of change and development.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit provides students with vital insights with which to appreciate the genesis of the emergency, development, contributions, impediments and future of APCON in the country.
You are, therefore, better positioned to do an objective assessment of its impact in the country, as well as add to how it can be improved to enhance its services to the people.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT a) Analyze the level of the capacity of APCON as a true agent of social engineering.
b) Critically examine the statutory responsibilities of APCON with a view to pointing out its strengths and weaknesses.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, B.O (2005).
Understanding Outdoor Advertising.
Lagos: Fem Publicity Limited.
Anyacho, R.C (2007.
Advertising: Principles and Practices – the Nigerian.
Perspectives Lagos: Teejay Enterprises.
APCON (2003).
Advertising Annual, Vol.
IV.
Lagos: APCON.
Ozoh, H.C. (1988).
Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON 45 MAC 331 MODULE 2 UNIT 2 ASSOCIATION OF ADVERTISING AGENCIES OF NIGERIA (AAAN) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Areas of Operation of AAAN 3.2 Organs and Members of AAAN 3.2 Structure of an Advertising Agency 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Association of Advertising Agencies of Nigeria (AAAN), formally Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN) is a foremost sectoral organ of the industry.
It is made up of all registered advertising agencies in the country.
Its members fought hard and pioneered the bid to institutionise and professionalize the industry.
Today it is still a formidable and a major player in using advertising to enhance Nigeria’s socio-economic and political development.
2.
0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the nature and functions AAAN • explain the organizational composition AAAN 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Areas of Operation of AAAN Only advertising agencies and not individuals are members of this association.
Applicants must meet certain basic requirements in the areas of capital, staffing, accounts and infrastructure, Ozoh (1998:44).
A vehement 46 protector of the interests of the industry over the years, AAAN has a secretariat, with its members spread across the country (APCON, 2003:102).
The body affords its teeming members opportunity for mutually beneficial relationship that often extends beyond its confines.
Its numerous functions (Anyacho, 2007:66-67) centre on enhancing, promoting and consolidating advertising practice and professionalism through strict insistence on responsible practice.
The agency organ is organized in such a manner it has adequate supervisory power over its members.
It has, as Anyacho (2007:66) has noted, a patron, vice patrons, president, vice-president, treasurer and other executive positions.
Its members who must also belong to APCON, the regulatory agency of the industry, are classified as full and associate members.
They mandatorily must adhere to the code of the association; ensure high standards and responsible practice.
3.3 Structure of Advertising Agencies Advertisers and clients rely on advertising agencies to realize their advertising dreams.
Composed of professional and seasoned practitioners, an agency renders services to clients by advising customers, planning, preparing and scheduling their communication messages in the media and other related functions.
To achieve the goal of effective services to their diverse clients, advertising agencies are departmentally structured.
Each department is headed by a director or personnel of that rank and is answerable to the Chief Executive Officer of each of the advertising organizations.
The following arethe departments of advertising agencies according to (Ozoh, 1998:3) and (Anaycho, 2007:27) Client Services or Account Department The department coordinates controls and handles all business relationships between the agency and the clients, among other responsibilities.
It is the link between the agency and the client and directly handles the specific 47 execution of client’s direct products or brands, to ensure harmonious and profitable outcomes Media Department Among others, it plans, selects and liaises with the media.
At the same time it schedules, places, monitors/supervisors the execution of the advertising campaign.
Creative Department The work of the department includes visualization, copywriting, graphic arts strategizing and others.
Production Apartment Handles the production of approved advertising materials to specifications, timely and in tune with clients’ expectations.
Finance Department This is incharge of the agency’s financial undertakings, including receipts of income, payments and purchases, salaries, wages, pensions, gratuities, among others.
Administration Department Handles the day-to-day affairs of the agency, including recruitment, discipline, promotions, retirement and rewards.
Research It is its duty to, through inquires and investigations, collect data with which customers’ services are rendered effectively and credibly.
It often works closely with the creative department.
It is worthy to note that an agency does not have definite number of departments.
What each has primarily depends on its financial endowments, focus, among other factors.
Some can ever afford to have a department of public relations.
Others may situate it in the CEO’s office in the Administration Department.
Meanwhile, advertising agencies can be divided into two categories.
One is full service agencies.
This is so fully endowed with operational resources to 48 virtually meet all cliental demands, Bovee and Arens (1986), Ozoh (1998:34) and Anyacho (2007:26).
On the other hand, non-full services agencies do not do the same.
They rather specialize in some specific areas.
Examples are creative boutiques, media planning, research, media buying, strategic planning and hostsops.
Glaring instance are the now rampart media independents, who concentrate and specialize in specific service areas.
4.0 Conclusion The agency is a life wire of the advertising industry in any country.
This explains the coveted position of the Association of Advertising Agencies of Nigeria.
It has not only championed, but also assiduously worked for the professionalization of the dynamic industry.
To perform such roles agencies are uniquely and functionally structured.
That way AAAN has played key roles in Nigeria’s economic, social and political development.
5.0 Summary This unit prepares the ground for the student to understand the nature, organization and functions of advertising agencies, particularly their umbrella body, the Association of Advertising Agencies of Nigeria (AAAN).
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Trace the up-to-date history of AAAN 2.
What is the structure and functions of AAAN?
3.
How do the departments in an agency assist it perform its functions?
7.0 References/Further Reading Bovee, C.L.
and Arens, W.F (1986).
Contemporary Advertising Boston: Richard D. Irwin Inc. Anyacho, K.C (2007).
Advertising: Principles and Practice.
The Nigerian Perspective.
Lagos: Teejay Enterprises.
APCON (2003) Advertising Annual, Vol.
IV.
Lagos: APCON.
Ozoh, H.C (1998).
Principles and Practice of Advertising Lagos: APCON.
MAC 331 MODULE 2 49 UNIT 3 ADVERTISING ASSOCIATION OF NIGERIA (ADVAN) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Formation of ADVAN 3.2 Organs of ADVAN 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Advertising Association of Nigeria (ADVAN) is made up business and other corporate bodies which make use of advertisements in promoting their businesses.
To be able to have influence in the decision process of the advertising industry, they came together.
Some of its members include the big names in Nigerian manufacturing and service industries.
It is a sectoral arm of the advertising industry.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain the members of ADVAN • discuss their roles and functions in the industry 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Formation of ADVAN ADVAN is a child of circumstance.
In the 1990’s, as Anyacho (2007:60), notes multinational corporations which spend much money in their promotional activities felt the need to be on their own.
They consequently established this body.
The formation asserted their position as key financiers of both agencies and the media.
It also enabled them to cut down their expenditures.
They also bypassed the big boss postures of some advertising agencies, and “seek to protect the collective interests of advertisers”, (Ozoh, 1998:30).
50 Some of its members include Guinness Nigeria Plc, Uniliver Plc, Cadbury Nigeria Plc, UAC Foods, NICON Insurance Plc, Coca Cola Nigeria Plc, Nestle Foods Plc, big banks like First Bank Nigeria Plc, Union Bank Plc, UBA Plc, among so many others.
One can guess the level of their annual investment in both agencies and the media.
They are thereby able to assert their overwhelming influence being the key financiers of the industry and directly and indirectly, the national economy.
3.2 Organs of ADVAN The Advertising Association of Nigeria (ADVAN) is structurally tailored to its other counterparts in the advertising industry.
It is made up of the General Meeting, Executive Council and Trustees.
ADVAN’S administrative and policy making fall within these structures, with constitutions to back up their powers.
(Anyacho, 2007:61).
This way, the body is a formidable force, represented in APCON and exerting influence on agencies, the media and the entire Nigeria advertising industry.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss the structure and membership of ADVAN.
4.0 CONCLUSION ADVAN, is therefore, an important arm of the Nigerian advertising industry, having made its mark.
It is a sector every practitioner must know and recognize.
Such knowledge leads to one’s eventual understanding of the executive involvement of many powerful companies in the affairs of the entire industry.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit, therefore, has made some insightful presentation of the organization.
It includes how it came into being and its organizational structure.
7.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What were the circumstances which prompted the formation of ADVAN?
2.
Has the association lived up to its billing?
51 7.0 References /Further Reading Anyacho, R.C (2007).
Advertising: Principles and Practice-The Nigerian.
Perspective.
Lagos Teejay Enterprises.
Ozoh, H.C (1998).
Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON 52 MAC 331 MODULE 2 UNIT 4 NEWSPAPER PROPRIETORS ASSOCIATION OF NIGERIA (NPAN) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1Brief History of NPAN 3.2 Organs of NPAN 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is another prominent sectoral organ of the country’s advertising industry.
It comprises the main newspaper and magazine publishing organizations in the country.
Its newspaper segment pioneered modern advertisement in Nigeria, via the first newspaper in the country, Iwe Irohin, which was founded in 1859.
With longevity of over 150 years, the print media has come a long way.
Therefore, fortified with expertise, resources, technical know-how and experience, the sector, is no push over in product promotion.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • explain the background of the print industry in Nigeria • discuss it organs and contributions to the economy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Brief History of NPAN To broaden, harmonise, articulate and formalize their contributions to the advertising industry, proprietors of newspapers and magazine in Nigeria formed this body.
The entity, NPAN is positioned to protect and champion the cause of its members within the advertising industry.
53 It started in 1962 with an initial membership of eight.
With members in all states of the federation, NPAN is today a force to reckon with in the advertising sector.
With the association, an umbrella is in place for these print media owners through which to air their views on issues of national importance.
Newspapers and magazines are endowed with features of documentability, retrievability, colour presentation, flexibility, among others, NPAN is therefore bound to continue to occupy a privileged place among the stakeholders of this vital industry.
3.2 Organs of NPAN The association, according to Anyacho (2007:76) is made of these components: Board of Trustees, Executive Council, secretariat and committee.
These strategic structures are effectively harnessed, along side its dynamism, resourcefulness and experience, to consolidate and enhance its enviable position in the industry.
This is in addition to its collaborative sss industry.
4.0 CONCLUSION The story of Nigerian industrial and business sectors cannot successfully be told without a special place for NPAN.
As a sector that modestly commenced its long journey, the print sector today is the toast of its rivals in terms of achievements, resources and prospects.
It is, no doubt, more poised to continue to play useful roles towards the growth and development of the industry and country.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit shows the features, strengths and prospects of NPAN.
Knowledge of NPAN further provides information on the managerial skills and dexterity that has continued to sustain the sector from as far as the colonial period.
It is a treasure to future print media practitioners and owners.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.Trace the history of the origin of NPAN.
2.Compare the organizational structure of NPAN and at least one similar body.
54 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Anyacho, R.C (2007).
Advertising: Principles and Practice-The Nigeria Perspective.
Lagos: Teejay Enterprises.
55 MAC 331 MODULE 2 UNITS 5 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING ASSOCIATION OF NIGERIA (OAAN) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Formation of OAAN 3.2 Organs of OAAN 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Advertising in its modern organized form in Nigeria began under this sector.
That was West African Publicity in 1928.
Owned by UAC, it advertised in form of outdoor and ordinary/conclusion methods, which mustered seeds have grown into a sectoral organ powerful enough and playing outstanding roles in the Nigerian advertising scene.
The uniqueness of its advertising tools has visibly underlined the position of OAAN in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • distinguish the peculiar role of OAAN • explain its structural outlook 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Goals of OAAN Ozoh (1998:71) says, among others, that the association aims at safeguarding the business and other interests of its continent members, the industry and the profession.
Anyacho (2007:78-79) aggress with him and goes on to include other goals such as: standardizing outdoor advertising practice, regulating the sector, protection from harsh laws, promotion of beneficial legislations and collaborative efforts with governments and others in order to improve the well being of the sector.
56 OAAN pursues these aims through its code of conduct formulated to ensure healthier relationship between and among its members.
This is important in the face of the prevailing avalanche of human, natural and legislative factors affecting the practice of outdoor advertising at all levels of government.
The approach has, however, paid off as the body has been able to pursue its statutory social and professional responsibilities notwithstanding the hurdles.
Still, challenges persist, in the opinion of Anyacho (2007:51).
These include excruciating legal, extra-judicial measures, over taxation by government and non-conformity to rules by members.
3.2 Organs of OAAN The body is made of a secretariat, an executive and nine other committees.
Those committees are: membership, billboards monitoring, guidelines enforcement, government relations,.
Others are: business relations, corporate and disciplinary publicity and education, research and development, and finance and administration.
The sector has gone through a number of changes since 1928, from West African Publicity to Lintas and Afromedia, to four other private sector members: NTC Ltd, Nigeria Breweries Ltd, Lever Brothers Ltd and Guinness Nigeria Ltd, who jointly formed the Outdoor Advertising Contractors Association of Nigeria (OACAN).
As its membership greatly increased in the 1980s and 1990s so did its challenges.
These include hostile government measures, members’ self- inflicted repressions through offensive billboard messages among others.
Still, the association continued to weather the storm, adopt collective approach to solving some of the problems.
In 1984, it removed from its name the word “contractors”, and remained with Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigeria (OAAN).
It has, like others, made its mark in using the advertising industry to uplift the country (Ajayi, 2005:18).
57 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss the peculiar circumstances OAAN has faced since inception and how it overcome them.
4.0 CONCLUSION Outdoor advertising has its unique attributes.
Such peculiarities tend to emphasize the challenges facing OAAN.
It has, however, used its evolutionary experience to tackle some of these.
Though some challenges still exist, the sectoral body has not allowed them to derail its focus, but has continued to assist in Nigeria’s development.
5.0 SUMMARY OAAN has come a long way.
Its long experience has also been very useful in tackling its numerous challenges.
It has shown it will continue to adjust with time.
Future practitioners should follow these trends of events in this sector of the industry.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Trace the brief but eventful history of OAAN 2.
Show how its structure of organization has aided its resilience.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER STUDY Ajayi, B.O (2005), Understanding Outdoor Advertising.
Lagos: Fem Publicity Limited.
Anyacho, R.C.
(2007).
Advertising: Principles and Practice-The Nigeria Perspective.
Lagos Ozoh, H.C (1998), Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON.
58 MAC 33 MODULE 2 UNIT 6 BROADCASTING ORGANIZATION OF NIGERIA (BON) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Background of BON 3.2 Organs of BON 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Before the inception of BON, there was no central body under which broadcast houses would speak with one voice.
However, Chief executives of federal and state-owned broadcast houses, radio and television stations met occasionally as the need arose.
Anyacho (2007:83), but such meetings were not a sufficient forum with which the needed goals would be achieved.
The need for such a formidable organization such as BON then became imperative.
Stakeholders in the sector continued to yearn for a day such a dream would come through.
Eventually it did in 1988, through the instrumentality of the then Minister of Information, Prince Tony Momoh.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able: • narrate the historical background of BON • explain the functions of BON • discuss its structural outlook 59 3.0 MAIN CONTENTs 3.1 Background of BON An earlier attempt to form this kind of body failed in 1973.
At a meeting of all the broadcasting stations in the country to discuss how best to collectively cover the All African Games, for cost effectiveness and efficiency, which Nigeria hosted that year.
The meeting resulted in the formation of the Broadcasting Organizations of Nigeria (BON).
Nigeria was to later in 1977 host another international event, FESTAC.
The experiment, however, ended after the execution of the immediate programme.
In 1988, Tony Momoh resurrected the idea during a meeting of broadcasting stations’ managers.
This time the idea came to fruition as BON was formed.
BON purses such goals as providing forum for discussion, advising government on broadcasting issues, avenue for cooperation among stations, embarking on training and research, setting standards for and superintending the activities of its members.
(Anyacho, 2007:83) On the deregulation of the broadcast sector in 1992, through Decree No.
32, private broadcast stations came on stream.
They joined BON, hence it is no more the exclusive preserve of government owned radio and televisions stations.
3.2 Organs of BON The Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON) has the following organizational structure: 1.
General Assembly 2.
Central Working Committee 3.
Sub-committees 4.
Technical a.
Finance b.
News and Programme c. Legal d. Commercial 4.
Zonal Groups (A-F) The membership of BON is on institutional basis and not individual.
The organization provides its members the opportunity to work as a group and collectively handle any challenges facing the broadcasting industry.
It also 60 affords a forum for tackling one of BON’s problems: advertising agencies indebtedness to member stations (Oroh, 1998:68) BON is a no mean force in the Nigerian advertising industry and consequently occupies an enviable place in APCON.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What goals informed the formation of BON?
2.
Explain its organizational structure?
4.0 CONCLUSION The formation of BON though late, meets an important goal of providing a forum for the interaction and policy formulation of a major arm of the advertising industry i.e.
broadcasting.
With its occupation of this rightful place, now, in conjunction with similar sectoral organs, it assists APCON in stipulating standards, controlling and regulating practice in order for it to be a vehicle for national development and transformation.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit affords the student the chance of understanding the need for the emergence of BON, its goals functions and organizational structure.
It, therefore, adds to the wealth of Knowledge you need to have as a potential practitioner in a very sensitive industry like advertising.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Show how Nigeria hosting of an event in 1973 eventually lead to the formulation of BON?
2.
What is the organizational structure of BON?
3.
To what extent has the organization attained the goals it set for itself?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyacho R.C.
(2007).
Advertising: Principles and Practice the Nigeria Perspective.
Lagos: Teejay Enterprises.
Ozoh H.C (1998), Principle and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos APCON 61 MAC 331 MODULE 2 UNIT 7 MEDIA INDEPENDENT PRACTITIONERS ASSOCIATION OF NIGERIA (MIPAN) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Emergence of MIPAN 3.2 Composition of the Association 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION With time it became clear that the various groups of the media and their adjuncts working under the advertising industry can hardly come into the same sectoral umbrella, for various reasons.
For one, some young and upcoming agencies could hardly meet some of the stringent conditions some of the existing sectoral bodies set.
Too often, the job definitions of some of the emerging professionals were difficult to classify them into some specific sectoral unit.
These among some other circumstances ultimately led to the need for an independent umbrella body that would take care of the interests of these professionals.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the reasons why MIPAN was established.
• discuss the structure of the association.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Emergence of MIPAN An atmosphere of distrust, alienation and hostility, so to say, therefore, prevailed between the big agencies in the various sectors and some 62 ungrouped production organizations.
This scenario of unhealthy relationship eventually led to the formation of Media Independent Agencies in Nigeria.
This did not immediately end the suspicion between the major practitioners and the new body.
However, as Anyacho (2007:71) notes, time healed the wound.
Finally, the new body transformed into MIPAN.
The Media Independent Practitioners Association of Nigeria have three broad aims: contributing to the improvement of the quality of service delivery of the industry; empowerment of its membership and enhancing the operational environment for the association.
(Anyacho, 2007:71).
3.1 COMPOSITION OF MIPAN The membership of MIPAN is on institutional basis.
It has two membership categories: associate and full member.
MIPAN has a Board of Trustees and an Executive Council as its organs.
To ensure the attainment of the new dawn it is anticipatesdreaming, MIPAN places high premium on strict adherence to ethical and social responsibility by members.
Towards its realization, Anyacho (2007:73) notes, that some specific key ethical issues were stressed.
These include: integrity, fairness, independence, objectivity, confidentiality and avoidance of misrepresentation.
Members of this body occupy important places in the advertising industry.
They are involved in the production of media materials the big agencies may not care for, either because of the low cost or it is not within their scope.
Consequently, they that only occupy relevant organizational positions, but also cover seemingly arid areas, which lapses can cause disruption in the industry.
Their outputs bridge these gaps that would have existed in the absence of small agencies like MIPAN membership.
Their skillful, creative and innovative expertise have been of immense value in packaging the commercials, jingles and other communication messages that keep some small and medium media houses going financially.
It is, therefore, a vital segment one of the sectoral bodies that constitute important component of the Nigeria advertising industry.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 63 1.
What are the factors that propelled the formation of MIPAN?
2.
Discuss the structure of MIPAN 4.0 CONCLUSION This organization is a child of industrial squabble.
Yet through their effective organizational ability, MIPAN has been able to put such policy framework into place with which it has contributed to the growth of the advertising industry and profession.
With the present understanding existing between it and other sectoral bodies of the industry, the stage is set for MIPAN’s more contributions towards the upliftment of the industry.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has further illuminated an outstanding sectoral arm of the industry.
A unique sector, MIPAN further provides yet an avenue for the ventilation of those bottled talents, skills, creativity and artistic endowments embodied in some practitioners who have no opportunity for expressing their endowments in the big agencies.
These and more are justifications why every student desires knowledge of the content of this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
MIPAN has proved by its antecedents to be a critical sectoral organ of the Nigerian advertising industry.
Discuss.
2.
What qualities and attributes have aided the contributions MIPAN has made in the advertising industry?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyacho, R.C.
(2007).
Advertising; Principles and Practice - The Nigeria Perspective, Lagos: Teejay Enterprises.
APCON (2003).
Advertising Annual, Vol.
IV.
Lagos : APCON.
Ozoh, H.C. (1998).
Principles and Practice of Advertising, Lagos; APCON.
64  MAC 331 MODULE 3 MODULE 3 MEDIA OF ADVERTISING Unit 1 The Print Media Sector Unit 2 Newspapers as Platform for Advertising Unit 3 Magazines as Fora for Advertising Unit 4 Billboards as Advertising Instruments Unit 5 The Broadcasting Media Sector Unit 6 Radio as a Platform for Advertising Unit 7 Television as a Special Advertising Tool Unit 8 Advertising Through Cinema/Film/Home Video Unit 9 Internet and Social Media as Advertising Channels UNIT 1 THE PRINT MEDIA SECTOR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Brief History of the Nigerian Print Media 3.2 Potentials of the Print Media 3.3 The Future of the Print Media.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Advertising is aimed at providing information to potential consumers about products, reminding consumers of their continued availability and using persuasion to convince them to patronize such products and services.
These are the broad goals of advertising which is the dissemination of messages of goods and services through the media, usually paid for by an identified sponsor, persuasive in nature to a deliberately targeted audience (Bovee and Arens, 1992).
65 A close look at the Nigerian media scene and environment shows their robust, vibrant and energetic potential as tools of advertising.
All facets of the industry have since their respective inceptions proved committed and relentless enterprising partners in the business of promoting and publicizing goods and services.
The print media (newspapers, magazines, billboards, posters, bulletins, handbills, books, journals and the electronic media (radio, television, cinema/film/motion picture/home video, internet and now the social media, all have combined, right from their formative stages and times of challenge, to give professional services to Nigerian industrial, business and other organizations.
This has resulted in benefits, which have ensured the sustenance of the media economically, better business performance to their clients and improved socio-economic well-being of consumers.
Indeed the Nigerian media have been for long willing and ready tools for the placement of advertisement.
This way, they remarkably changed the country’s economic, educational, political, health, agricultural, cultural, religious and infrastructural fortunes.
Their diversity, dynamism and resilience are some of the factors that aided those achievements.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • have a broad picture of the Nigerian media scene • understand the evolutionary changes in the industry • appreciate the contribution of the Nigeria print media to Nigeria’s development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Brief History of the Nigerian Print Media The Nigeria print media are rich and flamboyant.
Parts of their secret have been their diversity, focus and sense of mission.
It began as a missionary enterprise in Abeokuta, with Rev.
Henry Townsend’s Iwe Irohin in 1859, followed by the Anglo-African in 1862.
The era regarded as the time of the early press, was followed about 1880 with the emergence of fairly modern newspapers like Ernest Ikolis African Massenger in 19, Aliede (2003:19).
66 That second era was a harbinger to another set of political and nationalist newspapers, championed by Ziks’ Group of Newspapers, Herbert Maucaulay’s Daily Service, among others.
Other chains of papers followed: Awolowos’ Daily Sketch and later the Daily Times, which had the privilege of external financing.
Another period was the pre-independence (1947 to 1960).
It saw the colonial authorities overt and covert attempts to contain the caustic nationalist papers.
After independence the Federal Government even attempted an experimentation of newspaper ownership the Daily Mirror and a magazine, the Citizen.
The regional governments had theirs: North, Gaskiya Tafi Kwabo and New Nigerian Newspaper; the East and the West, Daily Sketch and Eastern Outlook A period that began with the 1966 military intervention eventually led to the take over of the Daily Times and the New Nigerian Newspaper.
By then, the Daily Times had diversified, also publishing magazines like Drum, Flamingo, Home Studie,which provided invaluable assistance and guidance to students preparing for the WAEC examination.. Another period of enhanced private print media ownership trailed the oil boom of the 1970s.
Vibrant papers and magazines emerged, such as National Concord, The Guardian, Champion, Vanguard, Punch, Newbreed, Newswatch, Tell, The News, TSM, Source, among others.
Industrial growth, diversification and oil revenue, in addition to democratisation saw the entrance of more papers like Thisday, The Nation, and Daily Independent and others.
Earlier, state government owned newspapers flourished.
They included Daily Star, Observes, Tide, Chronicle, Statesman, Herald,Triumph, Light, Ambassador, Voice, Democrat, Nigerian Patriot, among othes.
Till date, these dailies and weeklies have been potent forces for the energisation of the Nigeria socio-economic empowerment, growth and development through advertising, Aliede (2003).
Their national outlooks, massive accessibility, popularity, independent treatment of issues, credibility social responsibility and wide coverage made them ready vehicles for 67 channeling communication messages of household, consumer products, commercial, industrial, agricultural, corporate products, institutional communication and publicity to relevant audiences.
3.2 Potentials of the Print Media The print media have numerous characteristics which place them in vantage position as channels of advertisements.
In Nigeria, for instance, it has colourful diversity, longevity, wealth of experience, technical knowledge, manpower, expertise and fertile operational environment.
These positive omens, in addition to the media’s attributes like flexibility, documentability, retrievability, variety, colour and illustrative displays, have aided newspaper, magazines, billboards, posters, books, journals, periodicals and others to be key players as organs of advertisement in the country.
On daily and weekly basis street newsstands are inundated with avalanche displays of all manners of dailies and weeklies, with shouting and screaming attractive headlines and illustrative features.
In fact, emerging industries, businesses and other corporate organizations have not only immensely benefited from the Nigerian print media sector, but also have brought to bear spectacle features that distinguish them today.
The country’s financial institutions (banks, mortgage houses and insurance companies) and the booming communication service providers sector are typical examples of them.
Unimaginably, front and back covers of newspapers are adorned with flamboyant colourful illustrations of their messages, besides the use of supplements, pullouts, insertions and bills.
These creative and innovative techniques have added to known traditional principles and skills of newspaper, magazine and other print media production and packaging and therefore better placed them as unique and attractive means of conveying advertising messages, to the joy of patronisers.
3.3 POTENTIALS OF THE PRINT MEDIA The print media have come to stay as an unshakable industry at the forefront for product advertisements.
This is so due to a number of factors, among them: increasing level of education and enlightenment of the press (for 68 instance, the newly enacted Freedom of Information Act, deepening of democracy, improved communication and deregulation.
The vastness and large population of the country present yet additional opportunities.
These and gains of globalization, for instance , professional and technical exchange and training faculties, all make the industry ever ready to continue to act as effective tool of advertising.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Give the historical background of the Nigeria print media industry.
2.
Show those attributes that have endured it for ever 150 years.
3.
Is Nigeria’s print media’s future bright or bleak?
4.0 CONCLUSION More than any other institution, the country’s print media industry has contributed to the improvement of her chequered history.
It has sunk and swum with the citizen in their quest for nationalism, economic emancipation and democratization.
The story is the same on the social, industrial and business fronts.
It, however, has benefited from its hard work and labour, as it has financed itself from the revenue generated in the process, especially through advertising.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit is a sketchy but a graphic presentation of the background of the print media industry in Nigeria.
It also x-rays its strengths and a prospect, summing up that it has and will continue to live up to its customers’ readerships and stakeholders expectations.
6.0 TUTOR-MAKED ASSIGNMENT Nigeria’s political history cannot be complete without mentioning the role of the print media.
Discuss.
1.
Enumerate the features that have assisted the print industry to make its name.
2.
Show how the background of the print industry has aided to guarantee its future.
69 7.0 REFERENCES/FUTHER READING Aliede, J. E (2003).
“Media and Politics in Nigeria: A Historical and Contemporary Overview,” in Nwosu, I. E. (ed) Polimedia: Media and Politics in Nigeria.” Enugu: Prime Target Ltd. Bovee, C.L.
and Arens, W.F.
(1992).
Contemporary Advertising.
Fouth Edition.
Boston: Richard D. Irwin Inc. 70 MAC 331 MODULE 3 UNIT 2 NEWSPAPERS AS PLATFORM FOR ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Inroduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Strengths as a Tools of Advertising 3.2 Weaknesses as means of Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Newspapers qualities like massive readership, popularity, attractiveness, reliability and documentability combine to make them veritable tools for advertising.
No wonder its longevity has not negatively affected its utility and credibility.
Yet, it still has some inherent weaknesses.
They are negative variables students of advertising and journalism must be acquainted with.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • point out the positive features of newspaper as vehicle for advertising.
• note their weaknesses as tools of advertising.
• observe areas newspaper can be improved to enhance their operational capacity.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 STRENGHTS AS A TOOL OF ADVERTISING As a medium of advertising, newspaper has some advantages.
These include: a) Variety of Advertisement.
Newspapers have capacity to accommodate different kinds of advertisements including display, classified, public notices, advertorials, 71 products, supplements and inserts.
Ozoh (1998:48-49) and Anyacho (2007:41).
b) Massive outreach Newspapers are widely read and in a vast country like Nigeria, the readership can be staggering, especially if the level of literacy rate is high.
c) Daily and weekly appearance With i ts daily frequency of appearance, newspapers repeatedly carry advertisements or fresh ones as is the case in aggressive campaigns, thereby acquainting the audience with the advertising message.
d) Flexibility The medium can easily adjust to change that may occur in the process of advertising a given product.
This enables it to meet the demands of the time and still satisfy the aspiration of the client.
e) Newspaper is transferable A single copy can be read by so many people, thereby exposing them to the advertisements contained.
f) Provides more detailed information When an advertisement occupies a full page of a newspaper, chances of using it to provide exhaustive message of the product is there.
h) Permanency Advertisements on newspapers can be stored and documented for future retrieval.
i) Application of colour This enables advertisements to be often flamboyantly and saesthetically illustrated making them more attractive and appealing to the target audience.
3.2 Weaknesses as a Means of Advertising Its numerous merits notwithstanding, newspapers have some disadvantages as a tool of advertising.
To Aliede (2003:17-30), they include: 72  a) Elitism In order to satisfy their educated audience, newspapers often concentrate on contents that do not appeal to or serve the interest of the other classes.
The audience is accordingly and unduly segmented.
b) Linguistic barrier Since it is only the educated who can read newspapers, this further limits the audience.
c) Visual quality only It does not have audio quality like the electronic media and excludes the blind.
d) Absence of musical value Music and melody complement and enhance the efficacy of advertising as seen in commercials and jingles.
Newspapers lack this feature, which is intrinsic obtainable in the electronic media.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Discuss the way newspapers attract their audience.
2.
Show how the medium can enhance its readership and advertising audience.
4.0 CONCLUSION Some attributes make newspaper outstanding as a medium of advertising.
These features have for ages presented the medium as a beautiful bride to corporate organizations, which use them for promoting and publicizing their goods and services.
As well, they have some disadvantages, which their operators still overcome in order to enhance the medium effectiveness as a tool for advertising.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit provides students with two sides of the coin.
It is an area you must understand as a necessary guide in advertising practitioner’s choice of advertising media.
73  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGMENT 1.
What are those qualities that distinguish newspapers as media of advertising?
2.
Show the inherent disadvantages and how they can be overcome.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURHTER READING Aliede, J. E (2003).
“Media and Politics in Nigeria: A Historical and Contemporary Overview,” in Nwosu, I. E. (ed) Polimedia: Media and Politics in Nigeria.” Enugu: Prime Target Ltd. Anyacho, R. C. (2007).
Advertising: Principles and Practice The Nigerian Perspective.
Lagos.
Teejay Enterprises.
Ozoh, H.C. (1998).
Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos:APCON.
74  MAC 331 MODULE 3 UNIT 3 MAGAZINES AS FORA FOR ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Strengths of Magazines as a Tool of Advertising 3.2 Weakness of Magazines 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Magazines are the most prestigious of all the publication in the print industry.
This has given it some outstanding position and elegance which make it the toast of advertisers.
This is besides the fact that at the same time it has most of the qualities of newspaper.
The medium is a class of its own with room for divergent genre which serve the interest of different groups of its large audience.
Its colourful and entertaining nature, too, has endeared magazine to so many readers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • distinguish the peculiar difference between magazines and other print media • discuss the strengths of magazine as a medium of advertising.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Strenghts of Magazine as a Tool for Advertising Ozoh (1998:64) and Anyacho (2007:42) have these as the merits of magazine as a tool of advertising: 75 a) Documentation The packaging of magazines makes them easily storable.
That increases its potential as a tool of advertising.
b) Colouration Magazines lavishly use colour for illustration and embellishment.
This makes them attractive and appealing to a wide spectrum of audiences; young, old, and different genders.
It also engenders the mediums elegance and high profile that places magazine higher than other print media.
c) Serves many purposes Magazines serve such purposes of information, education and entertainment.
These place them in a position to appeal to different classes of people for advertising variety of products: consumer, business, industrial, trade, agriculture, professional and institutional.
d) Transferable As a result of the appeal, copies of magazines are read and transferred to other readers, over and over, thereby enhancing the advertising capacity.
e) Specialization audience Several classes of readers crave for magazine.
Hence, there are professional magazines, fashion, motoring, entertainment, housekeeping, gardening, among others.
All these present opportunities for advertising different kinds of goods and services on these genres.
3.2 WEAKNENESES OF MAGAZINE a) Very expensive The high cost of production heightens the cost of placement of advertisements on magazines.
b) Lack of flexibility This is the case and therefore limits both the advertising patronage and the audience.
76  c) Lower circulation As a result of the lower patronage, compared to newspaper, vendors are often very reluctant to circulate some magazine.
SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Distinguish magazine from newspaper as a media of advertising 2.
How do the qualities of magazines affect their patronage?
4.0 CONCLUSION Magazine is clearly an outstanding medium.
Its classic qualities endow it with numerous advantages which make it a darling of advertisers.
As modern technologies pave way for the production of more qualitative magazines, the more advertising message sponsors will see it as a means of reaching their various customers and consumers.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit x-rays the advantages and disadvantages peculiar to magazines.
Students are, therefore, presented with those reasons why advertisers go for magazine either in preference to, or in combination with other available media.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT 1.
Name and explain the advantages which make magazines the toast of advertisers?
2.
What makes magazine outstanding as a print medium?
3.
What disadvantages are inherent in magazine as a tool of advertising?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyacho, R.C.
(2007).
Advertising:Principles and Practice - The Nigerian Perspertives.
Lagos.
Teejay Enterprises Ozoh, H. R. (1998).
Principles and Practices of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON.
77  MAC 331 MODULE 3 UNIT 4 BILLBOARD AS AN INSTRUMENT OF ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Merits of Billboard as an Instrument for Advertising 3.2 Demerits of Billboards 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Outdoor advertisements or billboards have very unique variables which differentiate them from others.
These characteristics also determine their profile as well spell out the advertising functions they perform in their service to clients.
These clear distinctive features are discussed in this unit.
As well the disadvantages involved in the medium are worthy of note as they guide advertisers and practitioners in their choice of advertising media.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end this unit, you should be able to: • identify the special features of outdoor advertising • explain the merits and demerits of the medium 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Merits of Billboard as an Instrument of Advertising Certain features differentiate this medium from others.
These, according to Ajayi (2005: 69-70), include: versatility and flexibility, corporate impact, 78 colour and wide coverage.
These attributes also translate to its advantages, Anyacho (2007:51-52) and Ozoh (1998:69), among them: a) Strategic positioning Its nature allows for strategic site selection to enable it inescapably target at the audiences.
Their locations in city centres, corners; markets and similar places are guided by this factor and lead to maximized exposure and accessibility.
b) Colouration Billboards use colour adroitly to provide background, illustration, aesthetic goals, beauty and highlight unique images, among others.
These make the medium very attractive and lively.
c) Larger than life The sizes of billboards are often as much as 300x30 inches and therefore able to present images larger than reality.
This multiplies the visibility of the advertised product even from far distances.
d) Environmental beautification They add beauty and aesthetics to the environment.
e) Lower cost It has been adjudged to be relatively cheaper than other media like television, radio or newspaper, when valued from the point of view of viewers per thousand.
f) Steadiness The permanence of the position billboard occupy adds to its advantage.
This is opposed to the transient nature of some other media messages like radio, television and motion picture.
g) Apt message presentation Its message is apt, precise, and concise and to the point, as it serves people who are often in motion.
It talks less.
79 3.2 Demerits of Billboard a) Exposure to hazardous weather conditions Rain, sunshine, harmatan, storms, hurricanes and floods are parts of the unfriendly atmospheric problems billboards face.
Others are fire from bush burning; defacing, demolition and damages from miscreants.
b) Poor exposure The message may not be discernible if a passer-by cannot clearly read it.
For instance, a billboard on the high way may give motorists meaningful information of the advertised product.
c) Restrictions Certain areas, according to Ajayi (2005:73) may be prevented from the erection of billboards.
Often governments do this for environmental, security or traffic reasons.
d) Destruction by governments This is rampant in major towns of the country, like Lagos and Port Harcourt and constitutes a major concern to the sectoral agency, OAAN.
e) Operational cost The area is becoming more sophisticated, along side the materials and construction of the boards.
This, therefore, escalates the cost of their operation.
This has continued to lessen the size of patronage of the medium by advertisers who will go far other substitutes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What are the peculiarities of billboards as means of advertising?
2.
Compare the merits of billboards with those of magazines.
5.0 CONCLUSION Outdoor advertising occupies a special place in the advertising industry.
This is so in terms of the advantages, which are however almost overshadowed buy some existing disadvantages.
These challenges must be grappled with by the sectoral agency of the area, Outdoor Advertising Association of 80 Nigeria (OAAN).
Still, the bountiful contributions of the sector to the growth of the advertising industry in Nigeria are not in doubt.
6.0 SUMMARY Insights are provided in the unit on the special place of the outdoor sector in the growing advertising industry.
It also encompassed the advantages and disadvantages of the area.
It is of interest to students.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the special features of the outdoor adertsing?
2.
Refute the argument that its disadvantages outweigh the advantages.
3.
Make a comparative analysis of the merits of outdoor and magazine advertising.
8.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, B.O.
(2005).
Understanding Outdoor Advertising.
Lagos: Fem Publicity Ltd. Anyacho, R.C.
(2007).
Advertising: Principles and Practices-the Nigeria Perperstive.
Lagos: TeejayEnterprises s Ozoh, H. C. (1998).
Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON.
81 MAC 331 MODULE 3 UNIT 5 THE BROADCASTINGMEDIA SECTOR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Background of the Broadcast Sector 3.2 Potentials of the Broadcast Sector 3.3 Prospects of the Broadcasting Sector 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Broadcasting started at a rudimentary level in Nigeria 80 years ago.
Since then, it has gone through numerous revolutionary changes, at the same time being a key player in Nigeria’s governance, politics and development First established by the colonial authorities in 1932, it has subsisted through several democratic dispensations, military rules, both at peace and crises moments.
Through federal, regional to state governments, radio, television and the electronic media have been relevant partners in progress in all facets of the country life and advertising in particular.
The sector from inception was an exclusive privilege of the government.
This lasted till 1992, when it was deregulated.
Today, so to speak, it is an all comers field with the federal, state, individuals and corporate institutions operating the broadcasting media, even at community levels.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • narrate the genesis of the broadcast sector.
• explain its role in Nigeria’s development.
• discuss its potentials as a tool of advertising.
82 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Background of the Broadcast Industry The sector started in Nigeria as a wired mechanism called Radio Diffusion Service.
Information was relayed through to subscribers, first in Lagos, and later some other towns in the country.
It was later transformed into Nigerian Broadcasting Service.
Another change made it Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation, and later in 1976 it became Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria (FRCN).
Meanwhile, from three regions to the current 36 states, each state sees the establishment of radio as a necessity, Aliede (2003:30-35).
In 1992, individual were authorized to own radio and television, thus Ray Power, the first private station in Nigeria, went on air in 1994.
Television started in Ibadan by Chief Obafemi Awolowo, following a disagreement over the application of the NBC.
That was in 1959, the first in black Africa.
Other governments followed and today we have television stations in every state capital.
Broadcasting has grown from regions to states, now to private stations, including community and training stations, for example, in educational institutions like UNILAG, Madonna, Caritas, among other universities.
Another aspect of the electronic media which was very popular in the 1960s was cinema.
Also called motion picture or film, cinema is fastly losing its steam, perhaps as a result of home video and now other interactive and personalized social media.
It was then an exciting and vibrant means of mobilization and advertising.
Internet is another prominent entrant into the broadcast media industry.
Full of innovation, followership, opportunities and dynamism, the internet has taken the world by storm and making tremendous inroads into other areas due to its diverse features.
It, therefore, portends a lot for the advertising industry when all it represents are fully harnessed.
3.2 Potentials of the Broadcast Sector Apart from their dynamism and diversity, the broadcast media have numerous potentials which accord them enormous respect as tools of 83 advertising.
Their demonstration ability, education, information and entertainment functions place the sector in vantage positions too.
Besides, the media’s audio (radio) and audio-visual qualities (television, cinema and internet) make the sector enticing, attractive and hot cake as means of projecting goods and services to buyers.
In the same vein, the reach is massive and tremendous, unequalled by other contending media.
This gives them an edge.
Their global reception and appeal rank the electronic media high.
Similarly, their quality of linguistic barrier breakage is yet another outstanding distinction.
Their programmes and contents can be tailored to reach any segment of their audience in any language.
This offers unimaginable boost to their teeming audience.
Indeed, the audience of the media can only be guessed and estimated.
It cuts across diverse socio-cultural, religo-political spectrum broadcast media mangers can only speculate.
In addition, by its nature, the electronic media are invisible penetretors whose effects and influence are intrusive, persuasive and hardly checkable.
They are electronically transmitted through the air waves and receivable anywhere, any time.
This apparent “barrierless” feature clearly places the broadcast media as the toast of discerning advertisers who want to take full advantage of this merit and reach their diverse audiences wherever they are, irrespective of their background and status.
3.3 Prospects of the Broadcasting Sector The inherent qualities of this sector, going by their number and impact, speak volumes of the future of the sector in the scheme of advertising and other areas they are needed as platforms for human, societal and national development.
They are the media of the future.
This unique position of the broadcasting media partly stem from their direct link to science and technology.
Numerous breakthroughs in the two areas in past century have brought enormous leverages, innovations and positive changes to broadcast media application, use and utility into diverse spheres: communication, education, health, agriculture, military, to name but a few.
This is not expected to abate, but rather multiple to the benefit of broadcast operators, advertisers and the end users, consumers.
84  In fact, the fear in some quarters, though still controversial, is that the broadcast media will overshadow the print media sector.
However, this turns out to be, for now both sectors are playing symbiotic and synergistic and complementary roles towards societal development, advertisers’ satisfaction and improvement of the conditions of the consumer.
Hence, the future is bright, as the media strive and improve their capacity of giving the consumer the opportunity for informed, wise and rational choices.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Show the broadcast media as partners in progress with the print in their quest for customer satisfaction and national development.
2.
What potentials distinguish the broadcast sector from others?
3.
Is the future of the broadcast media bright or bleak?
4.0 CONCLUSION The broadcast sector has a lot of promises, just as it has delivered much to the advantage of the advertising industry.
In Nigeria, it has a rich history often tainted with political intrigues, maneuvering and horse-trading, especially during the chequered years of nationalism and military dictatorship.
All these, in addition to recent developments like improved economy, democratization, freedom of the press, role of new information and communication technologies, have added to provide rejuvenated ground for the sector to continue to serve its publics and stakeholders better.
The sector had always weathered the storm of the past and expectedly will survive any challenge in this age of diversity.
Perhaps needed is persistent affinity between the sector and the authorities of the advertising industry.
This will pave the way for their more beneficial relationship, for instance, in the area of the contentious advertising indebtedness burden unsolved for long now.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit presents an exciting insight into the background, potentials and future of the broadcasting media sector.
No doubt, it is a source of the knowledge the student needs to be able to effectively feature in the field.
It also provides a background to the inevitable relationship, often adversarial, 85 between the media and the government, usually resolved to the benefit of the parties and the public/consumers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Show how the history of the broadcast media is closely tied to the country’s political development 2.
The unique qualities of the broadcast media sector prepares it for the special position it today occupies in the society.
Discuss.
3.
Support the argument that the future of broadcasting as a medium of advertising is as bright as a star.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, J. E. (2003).
“Media and Potitics in Nigeria: A Historical and Contemporary Overview”, in Nwosu, I. E.
(ed.)
Polimedia:Media and Politics in Nigeria.
Enugu.
Prime Target Ltd. 86 MAC 331 MODULE 3 UNIT 6 RADIO AS A PLATFORM FOR ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Strengths of Radio 3.2 Weaknesses of Radio 3.3 The Future of Radio 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Radio pioneered electronic mass communication debuting in Nigeria in 1932.
It has, therefore, over the years made remarkable progress in terms of achievements, consolidation and improvements.
We are here afforded the opportunity of exploring all these and particularly the advantages and disadvantages of the medium as advertising instrument.
Businesses, industrial establishments, corporate bodies and individuals have extensively utilized radio as a means of reaching their target audiences.
The medium is aided by its various qualities and merits in handling those tasks.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you will be able to: • discuss the attendant qualities of radio.
• explain the different areas radio differs from television 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Strengths of Radio As a tool of advertising, radio has the following advantages, Aliede (2003:32) 87 a) Massive Outreach Radio has massive audience that spans to the illiterate and cuts across divergent socio-cultural and economic spectrum, hence a boast to advertising.
b) Minute Technical operation Radio can easily be used by virtually anyone.
It does not involve much technical or electricity operation and so does not require much technical knowledge to use.
It is also cheaper than most other media.
c) Linguistic barrier breakage With the medium large and diverse audience can be reached in their specific language.
This adds to its advertising advantage.
d) Non-elitist Radio is more users-friendly than any other medium.
Hence, the illiterate Fulani cattle rearer is in turn with his portable transistor radio wherever he is.
e) Portable Radio sets have been so miniaturized to the size of match boxes and hand sets.
That makes it usable anywhere since it is easily carried about and partly accounts for its large audience.
f) Cost effectiveness Ozoh (1998:67) adds that radio advertising is “comparatively inexpensive and less tedious to produce.
Given its reach, it is thus a most cost effective medium.
g) Variety of advertising programmes With efficient programming, radio offers the chance for numerous advertising platforms: musical, drama, magazine, discussion, news and current affairs, among others.
3.2 Weaknesses of Radio a) A transient medium Because its advertisements come and go, Anyacho (2007:47), contends that it may require repetition.
88  b) Audio only Radio has no visual quality and therefore appeals to hearing only.
3.3 The Future of Radio With its various advantages, the future of radio as an instrument of advertising is bright.
For now, it is not expected that any other medium can take its place.
They can only complement it.
The prospects of using radio as a medium of advertising are promising.
This is, moreso in developing countries, for instance Nigeria, where a greater percentage of its market has not been sufficiently reached in terms of suitable programmes.
No wonder some experts advocate for community broadcasting in order to provide radio accessibility to the rural majority, which is an unexploited potential market for advertising.
However, a foreseeable challenge is the aggressive inroad of the social media, whose target, any way, is the youth.
Needed to overcome its onslaught is professionally and creatively packaged variety of programmes that would appeal to diverse facets of the listening audience.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Examine the similarities between radio and television 2.
Explain five qualities of radio.
4.0 CONCLUSION An expose of the qualities, merits and demerits of radio is presented here.
It shows the rich background of a foremost broadcast medium, whose usage and application make it an all time choice of the advertiser.
Radio is a traditional medium in terms of its excitement and attraction, especially to the masses.
To ensure the lasting of its enduring legacies, their managers should design and device more beneficial programmes that would appeal to its audience on a sustainable basis.
That way, more of the vast unreached rural people would be reached to the benefit of advertising.
89 5.0 SUMMARY The student, through this unit, is afforded the opportunity of clearly understanding the characteristics which make radio a mass appeal medium.
Those are, too, the factors advertising practitioners weigh while selecting from available media channels for disseminating their products messages.
As the existing demerits can be overcome, the future of the medium is encouraging.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Show how the qualities of radio put it in a vantage position as a medium of advertising in a developing country like Nigeria.
2.
Explain the demerits of radio as a tool of advertising 3.
What future awaits radio as an instrument of advertising?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, J.E.
(2003).
“Media and Politics in Nigeria:A Historical and Contemporary Overview,” Nwosu I. E.
(ed.)
Polimedia:Media and Politics in Nigeria.
Enugu: Prime Target Ltd. Anyocho, R.C.
(2007), Advertising: Principle and Practice - The Nigeria Perspective.
Lagos: Teejay Enterprise.
Ozoh, H.C. (1998).
Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON.
90 MAC 331 MODULE 3 UNIT 7 TELEVISION AS A SPECIAL ADVERTISING TOOL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Advantages of Television 3.2 Disadvantages of Television 3.3 Prospects of Television 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Television as a tool of communication is an improvement on radio.
It has the special additional quality of visual appeal.
This feature elevates the medium to an enviable height and hence its status as a means of conveying advertising message.
Though not without some inherent negative chracteristics, television especially in advanced societies has proved to be an effective tool for reaching consumers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Identify those special attributes that distinguish television as an instrument of advertising.
• Explain some of its disadvantages and prospects.
3.0 CONTENT 3.1 Advantages of Television Advertising As a means of disseminating commercial and other messages, television has the following advantages: 91 a) Audio-visual qualities This is perhaps the greatest endowment television has.
With it, it literally dwarfs rival media as channel of advertising.
It provides its audience the chance of hearing and the same time watching/seeing aspects of the communication messages.
b) Colour quality This makes television programmes and presentations aesthetic, exciting, dramatic and appealing to the audience more than other media.
c) Massive audience It reaches very wide audience of diverse capacities, thereby enabling the message to reach the desire target.
d) Linguistic barrier breakage Local languages can be used to reach different people with different languages for a wide reach.
For instance, in Nigeria, vernacular and Pidgin English are also used.
e) Audience involvement The visual value of television forces on the audience some level of involvement, emotion and empathy and therefore more influential and effective.
f) Product use demonstration This makes it very easy and practical to elicit audience empathy.
Convincing the audience is the next natural thing to follow.
g) Entertainment value Television’s musical, drama, cultural, documentary, sports and other programmes with, which advertising and commercial messages and sponsored use entertainment to enhance their appeals.
h) Cost of sponsorship This would have been high, ordinarily; belt is lowered by the massive audience, who watch television.
92  i) Instant effect Television shows live broadcasts, like sports tournaments, festivals and political rallies.
All these are avenues for advertising to a large audience.
3.2 Disadvantages of Television Advertising a) It is transient.
Television content and programmes are transient.
As a result, it warrants repeatedly showing an advertisement for viewers to see and make their purchasing decisions.
b) It is elitist Often, its programmes alienate the less privileged and serve only the interests of the upper class.
c) Lacks portability It is not movable like some other media.
This limits its audience.
d) Electricity requirement It requires the use of electricity as an input.
As a result of its scarcity and unavailability, the audience is further reduced.
For example, most rural dwellers are counted out of its accessibility e) High cost Advertising through television is costlier; hence affordability and greater patronage are impaired f) Quality of production In some countries quality of production and transmission is low and it affects advertising.
3.3 Prospects of Television The medium with its colour presentation, massive outreach and audio-visual quality is the medium to beat, as long as those qualities subsist.
However, emerging communication technologies seem to be posing some challenges.
With the invention of gadgets with similar or even better features, television 93 is under threat.
For now, a lot of measures must be taken to tackle such challenges in view of their competitive implication.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Discuss and compare the characteristics of television and radio.
2.
Explain the future of television as a tool of advertising.
4.0 CONCLUSION Television has features that make it to appeal to diverse groups of people.
With that all categories of goods and services can be advertised through television for optimum results.
For long, advertisers have courted the medium as the ultimate conveyor of their commercials.
It is, therefore, the hope that managers of the mediun evolve means of shielding it from the consequences of the challenges being posed by the social media.
This is pertinent, if not now, certainly in the future and very necessary for securing the future of television.
5.0 SUMMARY Students’ knowledge of the edge of television over other advertising media is very important.
This unit attempts to highlight it.
It also does the same with the demerits.
Their knowledge guides their choice of the media for advertising when in practice.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Although seemingly elitist, television is a medium of choice in advertising.
Discuss.
2.
Compare the future of television with that of radio as media of advertising.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, J.E.
(2003).
“Media and Politics in Nigeria:A Historical and Contemporary Overview,” Nwosu I. E.
(ed.)
Polimedia:Media and Politics in Nigeria.
Enugu: Prime 94 MAC 331 MODULE 3 UNIT 8 CINEMA/FILM/MOTION PICTURE AND HOME VIDEO CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Merits of Cinema and Home Video 3.2 Demerits Cinema and Home Video 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Cinema, film or motion picture is another medium of advertising, but has its fortunes waning as a result of the entrance of modern communication technologies and other competitive media.
It was a popular medium in the 1960s and early1970s when it was used for advertising household products, cigarettes, beverages, beer and other products by agents of UAC, Lever Brothers, Leventis, Nigeria Tobacco Company, Nigerian Breweries, among other corporations and companies.
Cinema penetrates rural communities, market places, village squares and primary school premises for the evening shows usually earlier announced and publicized by pickup vans with loudspeakers on them.
It used to be exciting and trilling moments, with the young and the old in attendance.
Other media and home video seem to have taken its place.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • give a brief history of cinema • explain its roles and merits as a tool of advertising • explain its existing disadvantages 95 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Merits of Cinema and Home Video Like other media of communication, cinema came into Nigeria through colonial masters.
It is an effective tool for social mobilization, social marketing, development and behaviourial change communication, like other mass media; Aliede (2003:32).
Therefore, at a time television and radio were luxury and newspapers and magazines the exclusive presence of the top government official or few men of affluence, cinema was the means of reaching the masses.
With time, the business, commercial and industrial sectors saw its utility and embraced it as a means of reaching out to the semi-urban and rural communities to advertise their goods and services.
It turned out to be effective and reliable, as it afforded the opportunity for interaction between the cinema presenters and the audience, (crowd) who are often offered free samples of the advertised products.
A rare phenomenon, the audience would take home both the advertising messages and the free samples or low-priced products purchased in the process and perhaps wait for weeks or months before the coming of another team.
The advantages of cinema/film or motion picture according to Aliede (2003:30-36) include: a) Audio-visual quality This affords the audience empathy, emotion and involvement as they both hear and watch.
b) Colour presentation Colour beautifies and illustrates the presentation, thereby boosting emotional attachment.
c) Elicits audience participation The crowd which constitutes the audience would lively jump, clap or shout in reaction to an episode of the film.
This is followed by a sort of question and answer session follow up, if need be, during and after the film show.
d) Leads to extended information 96 Participating audience take home the message thereby spreading it to non-participants.
e) Product demonstration The use of new or improved products is practically acted to the education and entertainment of the audience.
f) Entertainment value The accompanying music, drama and the like make the message memorable and entertaining.
a) Larger-than-life images The large screen of the cinema make the projected footages larger than real and therefore very existing, emotional and joyous.
3.2 Demerits of Cinema and Home Videos a) Unimpressive audience The audience would only be sizeable as it is only people within the vicinity that would partake in the show.
b) Too technical The technicality involved only allows a team to make the presentation.
It is cumbersome while the result may not tally with the efforts.
c) Distorted conveyed message The message conveyed home by the watchers may be subject to distortion and misinterpretation.
The result would then be negative.
d) Need for power supply Showing cinema will require electricity which may not be available.
This limits its application.
e) Limited subject handling The production of a variety of products advertisements may be challenging, time consuming, costly and may not be worth the gains.
97 Home video seems to have taken over the place of cinema, whose fortunes have been fastly eroded in the past few decades.
With almost all the features of television, home video, however, are like customized or personalized cinema.
The operator selects his desired DVC and slot for watching at a given time.
The footages are intermittently followed by product advertisements.
Among others, there is the difficulty of segmenting the audience since the purchasers of the video may not be known.
In that case, the message is presented to a wrong audience.
It also has a very limited viewership.
Whatever is the case, home videos and television have effectively taken over the place of cinema.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Trace the story of cinema and its role in mobilization.
2.
Any prospect of revival of the medium to its past glory?
4.0 CONCLUSION Cinema as a medium of communication and advertising, no doubt, seems to have out-lined its usefulness.
Although it was a veritable tool in the hands of implementers of government programmes that required mobilization and advertisers then, it has been overtaken by some more personalized new media, and from the look of things its resuscitation is bound to be tasking if not impossible.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit shows what cinema stood for, for the early governments and multinational companies.
It is now seems to be moribund and it stands to be seen if anyone may attempt its revival.
Yet, it has played its role and effectively too at the time.
Students should note this.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Show the coveted role of cinema, in the absence of radio and television in mobilization and advertising in Nigeria.
2.
What is responsible for the problem of cinema?
98 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Aliede, J. E (2003), “Media and Politics in Nigeria: Historical and Contemporary Overview” in Nwosu, I. E.
(ed.)
Polimedia: Media and Politics in Nigeria.
Enugu: Prime Target Ltd. 99 MAC 331 MODULE 3 UNIT 9 INTERNET AND SOCIAL MEDIA AS TOOLS OF ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The World Awaited Medium 3.2 Where Internet May be Taking us to 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUTION Internet is one of the new entrants among the existing channels of advertising and offers immeasurable advertising opportunities to advertisers.
If any sector has benefited from the boom in the information and communication technology industry, at the forefront is advertising/marketing.
And this is not surprising, after all to Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006:275) advertising “is a communication function as well as marketing function, two areas in the new economy where ICT revolution seems to have registered its greatest impact.” More interestingly too, the internet is an amalgam of the already existing media.
Anyacho (2007:52) puts it this way: “Internet advertising today has become more of a convergence of traditional advertising, e.g.
television, radio, print advertising, with direct response marketing.
Expectedly, with this synergy and integration, internet is bound to be more effective, for reach, impact and influence, as a vehicle for advertising 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • appreciate the interface between the internet and advertising.
100 • explain the versatile avenues existing in the internet for advertising.
• understand the merits and demerits of internet as a tool of advertising.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The World Awaited Medium As a communication effort, effective advertising highly relies on the number of people the advertising message can be conveyed to.
The same is the case whether the channel is radio, television, cinema, internet, newspaper, magazine, billboards or posters.
This explains the rejuvenation, so to speak, which occurred as a result of the emergence of internet as a mode of communication.
It, therefore, brought unimaginable revolution to the advertising industry.
Although the gains are yet to be fully known, or tapped, especially in the developing world, yet, the medium is the long awaited tool and the industry will never be the same.
Having combined the features of existing media, it presents spectacular and innovative advertising platforms ever seen.
And with the globalized structure, the internet clearly stands out as a means of mass communication only comparable to Marshall Mcluhan’s global village.
Internet offers incredible and irresistible advertising outlets advertisers are gainfully exploiting today.
In the process the goal of heightening the profiles of their goods, services, ideas, ideologies, values, corporate and institutional images is receiving a boost.
Nwosu and Nkammebe (2006:231-289), list some of such outlets to include: • E-multimedia • Listserv • Usenet • E-sponsorship • Classified e-advertisements • Internet chat rooms • Video conferencing • Internet telephone • Web sites • Virtual mail • E-exhibition 101 • E-coupons • E-event marketing • E-public relations • E-printing • E-publication • Virtual library 3.2 Where Internet May be Taking us to Although the internet is already celebrated as the best thing that can happen to the communication world, and by extension advertising, it has not done yet with these industries and professions.
This is because, it is the way advancement in science and technology brings change into available and applicative technological inputs, so does it effect the communication and advertising industry.
Indeed, its dynamism is more real than imagined.
In that vein, the futures of the internet as a source of advertising channels are not only open-ended, but limitless.
This is even moreso with the teeming group who are the most adent users of the internet: the youth.
Adventurous and inquisitive this class, who equally make up of potential market, constitute unquenchable and insatiable societal segment the internet will never find a wanting partner.
It suffices to mention some of the advantages derivable from using the internet as a tool of advertising.
They include, according to Anyacho (2007: 54-55) a) Target efficiency b) Interactivity c) Tracking d) Message delivery e) Flexibility.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Discuss the revolutionary influence of the internet in the advertising industry.
2.
Explain some of the existing avenues for advertising in the internet.
102 4.0 CONCLUSION The various openings the internet has through which advertising can take place give it a special position as the media of today and the future.
This is moreso as it combines the quantities obtainable in both the print and electronic media.
Internet is further aided by endless emergence of new technological tools through which it can be accessed.
For instance, handset or cellular phone today is means of accessing the net and web and therefore, adds another dimension of flexibility.
It is portable, easy to operate, relatively cheap, massive in outreach, amorphous and interactive in nature.
Advertising, therefore, has never had such opportunity of numerous outlets.
It is, to say the least, record breaking to the advantage of advertising, as well as a tool of research.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has made it possible for the student to have an insight of the limitless opportunities internet provides as an instrument of advertising.
As an information and communication technology, it presents advertising opportunities more than any other.
Its gains are unimaginable as they are numerous.
Pertinent is the early evolvement of mechanisms for its regulation, control and management to ensure the projection of only the positive aspects of its benefits.
The negative aspects, like its use for pornography and criminal activities, must be checked.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Make a comparative analysis between then internet and either television or radio.
2.
Enumerate and explain in detail the various advertising avenues the intenet offers to advertisers and marketers.
3.
Show the advantages of advertising in the internet 4.
Any demerit associated with advertising in the internet?
103 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyacho.
R.C.(2007).
Advertising: Principles and Practice-The Nigeria.
Perspective.
Lagos, Teejay Enterprises 104 MACC 331 MODULE 4 MODULE 4 ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN EXCUTION Unit 1 Pre-Advertising Campaign Execution Arrangements.
Unit 2 Advertising Campaign Execution Proper Unit 3 Post-Advertising Campaign Execution Activity: Evaluation.
UNIT 1 PRE-ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN EXECUTION ARRANGEMENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Critical Preparatory Arrangements 3.2 Multiple Approaches, One Goal 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The execution stage of an advertising campaign or programme is a crucial point which finally determines the outcome of the entire processes of the enterprise.
It is, therefore, a serious business or undertaking.
The stage involves the actual implementation of the advertising programme and requires the injection of all necessary inputs and resources to ensure a successful conclusion of the campaign.
For the advertising agency to affectively carry out the programme, there must have been an adequate preparatory arrangement.
Hence, a successfully executed campaign has direct relationship with a well planned advertising programme.
The foundation must be formidably laid, by ensuring that every step is carefully taken providing the investment of costly inputs, including expertise and professionalism.
105 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify what proper execution of an advertising campaign entails.
• explain the vital inputs required at this stage of advertising.
• discuss the interface between proper planning and execution of advertising campaign programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Critical Preparatory Arrangements The application of such strong military term as ‘campaign’, perhaps, further stresses the seriousness of advertising.
Others are strategies, tactics, techniques, planning, execution and intelligence (Nwosu and Nkamnebe 2006:167) and (John-Kamen 2006:126).
It is seen as a war and to Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006:167), “Like war, it has to do with winning the battles as well as the war….This is why advertising campaigns are planned and executed like wars.” Advertising entails various measures and efforts involving scheming, manoeuvering and formulating, all geared to surpassing, outwitting and the outshining opponents and rivals in winning the hearts and convincing potential consumers to patronize the advertised goods and services.
The campaign execution stage is the procedure during which all the earlier efforts at the planning process are put to use in order to finalize the programme.
All available machinery are put into use as the advertising media, through effective management, in liaison with the agency, coordinates, controls and harnesses the resources at their disposal for the attainment of the advertising objectives.
Often, this is tackled in such a serious and, aggressive approach in a way to quicken the realization of the set goals.
However, the ability of the implementers to ginger consumers to act according to the intents of the advertisers is highly contingent on the adequacy of the planning stage arrangements.
Consequently, the requisite earlier activities like advertising brief, research and planning should have been meticulously handled.
106 We should also note that the sensitive processes involved at the planning stage are what, to a very large extent, determine the efficiency of the implementation stage, (Aliede, 2007:125-126).
These include budgeting, copywriting, and recruitment of talents, media selection, scheduling and placement.
Every stage of the entire exercise should be allocated sufficient financial resources for their proper execution.
Also, quality and suitable messages should be written by professional copywriters to ensure they are informative, convincing and persuasive as to trigger the right reactions and responses from the targeted audience.
In case of jingles and commercials, qualified talents are contacted so that after training, rehearsals and production, the output are good enough to deliver the intended messages to the audience.
In the same vein, the knowledge of the consumer, his nature; (demographic and psychographic variables) and his needs guide the choice of the media through which the advertising messages are channeled.
Such selection must be based on information from relevant data, as well as sound judgment of the advertising practitioner.
When every input is ready, the agency arranges with the chosen media the most suitable time, place and space for sending the messages to the segmented audience.
This is called placement and scheduling.
3.2 Multiple Appraoches, One Goal Advertising involves meticulous process all of which must be handled alongside crucial components without which a particular campaign will fail.
They then must work harmoniously and in synchronization if the set objectives are to be attained.
It is to be likened to the proverbal black and white keys of the piano, which work in synergy in order to achieve the intended melodious result the player hopes to get.
Bringing in mind the concept of advertising tripod, synergy takes off from the client who supplies the advertising brief and finances the advertisement.
Budgeting, recruitment, copywriting, media selection, placement and scheduling are done by the agency.
107 On the other hand, the media are at the centre of the campaign execution or implementation.
After placement and scheduling, in conjunction with the agency, the media ensure the targeted listeners, viewers or readers are reached with the advertising message, in such form, time and mood the right impact and reactions are elicited.
Efforts geared towards advertising campaign execution clearly underscore advertising as a management philosophy.
Apart from research and planning, two crucial management elements, other components it encompasses include controlling, directing, coordinating, monitoring, supervising, delegating and evaluation.
In all, these diverse approaches and processes aim at the achieving one goal: communicating impactful and convincing advertising messages capable of propelling the targeted potential consumer to patronize the advertised product.
All the investments: finance, manpower, materials, logistics, infrastructure and technology, are geared to the realization of this singular goal, which eventually translates to the materialization of the profit motive of the advertisers 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit aims at stressing the importance of adequate preparation before the execution of any advertising campaign.
Similarly, all the diverse measures aimed at realizing the advertising goals must be coordinated, if there must be effectiveness.
Equally, all the sectors involved: advertisers, agency and media, must work cooperatively, collectively and collaboratively to ensure success and avoid dissipation of scare resources.
These are some of the principles that must guide professionally packaged and executed advertisements.
5.0 SUMMARY You are here presented with sequential illumination of various segments involved in a successfully executed advertising programme.
Whether the advertisement is that of household product, beverage, alcohol, tobacco, food, industrial or institutional, the various steps should be carefully and effectively coordinated.
That is the only guarantee of successful conclusion.
108 7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Justify the insistence that all advertising processes must be coordinated.
2.
Of what importance is adequate planning before executing an advertising programme?
3.
Show the interface between advertising and management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, J. E. (2007).
“Advertising and Public Relations Campaign Planning and Execution,” in Nwosu, I.E.
(ed) Public Relations-Insights From Nigeria, NIPR Public Relation Management and Practice Series, No.1.
Enugu: Ezu Books Ltd. John.
Kamen (2006).
Advertising: Genesis, Evolution, Principles and Practice.
Enugu: Snaap Press Ltd. Nwosu, I. E and Namnebe, A. D. (2006).
Triple-P Advertising: Principles, Processes, Practices.
Aba: Afri-Towers Ltd. MACC 331 MODULE 4 UNIT 2 ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN EXCUTION PROPER CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Implementing the Campaign: Putting the Tools to Work 4.0 Conclusion 109 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Even if all needed resources, financial, to technological are put in place, they are not enough to ensure positive results until the campaign is executed.
Its effective execution is the key to profitable investment in the advertising industry.
The climax of all the diverse efforts and measures aimed at publicizing and promoting the product, advertising campaign execution is the nerve-centre the advertising practitioner must take special care of.
When proper planning is carried out, what remains is effective implementation: professional dissemination of the advertising messages to the intended consumers.
The success on it of any advertising programme does not depend on the amount expended.
Rather, it is contingent on the effectiveness and efficiency of the implementation.
This justifies the importance of this particular stage and why it is taken seriously.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • appreciate the importance and centrality of advertising campaign execution to the success of any programme.
• discuss the measures that must taken for any advertising campaign to be fruitful.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Implementing the Campaign: Putting the Tools to Work With skillful management, all the various tools assembled for the campaign are now put into use.
Although this stage centres on the media which are the channels for the information and message dissemination to the consumers, the advertising agency, nonetheless, plays key role of ensuring the right things are done at the right time.
110  To Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006:172), “At this stage in the advertising campaign, we roll out our plans, tactics, strategies, the advertisements and the entire “war machine” into the dynamic market.
The most important thing at this stage is to ensure that the right targets are hit, that unexpected environmental problems or factors are contained and that the “war” moves according to plan”.
Indeed, it is, literally executing a war.
Resources, inputs, skills, ingenuity, expertise, experience, innovation, creativity, professionalism, ethical orientation and social responsibility are some of the essential ingredients required of the practitioners involved to successfully carry out the programme.
In Aliede’s (2007:126) view, “It is the actual carrying out of the campaign exercise.
Depending on the events deemed suitable for solving the existing problem, some specific tools must have been chosen as veritable means for the attainment of the set goal.” It could be jingle for radio; commercials for television, billboards, newspaper, magazines or posters for the print media, the personnel of these media while sticking to agreed schedule and specifications convey the messages to the targeted audience.
During placement and scheduling, contractual arrangements are made between the agency and the media.
These are strictly adhered to in the process of the advertising campaign execution.
The agency, being the link between the advertiser and the media has to make sure this is the case.
This the agency does through strict monitoring and supervision.
Monitoring is important and is done at all levels of advertising processes, right from the stage of planning.
It means close watch over the way every step is carried out to ensure it is in accordance with the plan and set objectives.
However, at this stage, it goes beyond that.
Here it involves the second to second viewing, listening and reading of the advertising message to ensure it is done in compliance with the terms of contract reached during the placement and scheduling.
It is the close supervision or keeping watch of every stage and segment of the implementation process in order to dictate any apparent lapses, mistakes, omissions and the like.
This singular action keeps the media on their toes, as it compels them to be more serious, committed and dutiful to their 111 obligations and contractual responsibilities.
The audience or target markets’ getting the right or wrong advertising messages, to a large extent, depends on what is done or not done here.
It is, therefore, a very sensitive stage of advertising.
All sorts of managerial activities and actions like superintending, controlling, guidance and surveillance are put into use in order to achieve results here.
In his contribution, Ozoh (1998:186) says “the bulk of the tasks will normally be handled or coordinated by the account management team of the agency.
With regards to due exposure of the advertisement, it delves on the account management team and the media department to monitor continuously the exposure of the advertisement”.
He goes on to add that part of this is periodic studies that should yield data with which the progress of the campaign can be measured and discussed as “regular situation analysis” during meetings between the agency and the client.
Dedicated engagement towards the achievement of the advertising goals is very pertinent for number of resources.
For one, the client’s profit aspiration after his huge investment must be met and not betrayed.
At the same time, the agency’s professional reputation and integrity, as well as its corporate image, are at stake and must be protected.
The only way of doing these two things, is by succeeding in the advertising campaign and in turn proper execution through team work between the agency and the media is one of the means of their realization.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.What are the major activities of this stage of advertising?
2.Who and who must work as a team for advertising campaign execution to succeed?
4.0 CONCLUSION A central nervous stage of advertising, campaign execution must be handled carefully, with all the key stakeholders involved.
Succeeding here is not based on the amount spent, but on the managerial skills brought to bear on this sensitive segment.
112 It is this stage that presents a clear picture of attainable goals of any campaign.
However, proper planning is a first step.
With adequate planning and other arrangements, chances are that effective and professional implementation will lead to good results.
That is the ultimate aim as no agency can afford to disappoint a client who has invested in the advertising campaign.
5.0 SUMMARY This, no doubt, has provided insights to the crucial nature of this stage of advertising.
It is where the success or failure of the entire exercise manifests.
Careful assimilation of the demands of handling the section very well is a necessity for every student of advertising.
High cost of advertising, globalization and competition are some of the factors that make this very essential.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.With detailed discussion, show the importance of advertising campaign planning to the overall success of an advertising programme 2.Of what importance is the agency and the media working closely together at this stage of advertising?
3.Pick a particular product and create an advertising scenario of how you can handle it at its execution stage, 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, J. E. (2007).
“Advertising and Public Relations Campaign Planning and Execution,” in Nwosu, I.E.
(ED) Public Relations-Insights From Nigeria, NIPR Public Relations Management and Practice Series, No.1.
Enugu: Ezu Books Ltd. Nwosu, I. E and Nkamnebe, A. D. (2006).
Triple-P Advertising: Principles, Processes, Practices.
Aba: Afri-Towers Ltd Ozoh, H. C. (1998), Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON.
MAC 331 MODULE 4 113 UNIT 3 POST-ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN EXECUTION ACTIVITY: EVALUATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Advertising Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The conclusive stage of advertising is evaluation.
Regarded as the stage for stocktaking after the implementation of an advertising programme, it is yet another essential process.
It provides an opportunity for examining the far gone in realizing the advertising goals and objectives.
Evaluation is important in advertising as it is in any other human endeavor.
It is naturally vital that after expending resources in a programme, some post-motem is carried out in order to determine the level of success or failure.
That is what evaluation does and achieves.
This exercise is even more crucial in advertising, considering the enormity of resources usually involved in carrying out a single campaign programme evaluation.
It provides the road map for further navigation in the murky and competitive waters of advertising.
The data it provides yield information with which corrections, adjustments and other decisions are made.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • appreciate the role of evaluation in advertising • identify the significance of this stage in the advertising process.
114 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Advertising Evaluation.
Evaluation as the very last stage of advertising provides a platform for situation analysis in order to fully understand the probable impediments to the realization of advertising campaign goals, as well as appreciating he level of success after the campaign.
Here, therefore, lies its significance.
Agreeing with this notion, Aliede (2007:126), notes: “Finally, the entire exercise is reviewed, appraised and analyzed.
The assessment enables a clear picture of the level of success or failure in the campaign execution.
The outcome leads to going back to the drawing board to refocus, retarget, reposition or smile to the bank, if the goals are achieved.” Although Ozoh (1998:188) refers to it as a kind of research, evaluation aims at ascertaining the level of the attainment of the goals of the advertising campaign.
On their part, Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2007:172) opine that evaluation assesses how effective or ineffective the part of the campaign as well as the entire campaign has been.” Consequently, evaluation is very significant for the following reasons: • It provides the data and information for the assessment of the extent of success or failure of an advertising campaign.
• It gives room for that situation analysis that enables the client to personally assess the level of progress made in the campaign.
• It enables the measurement of the objectives or benchmarks set for the advertising campaign.
• It curtails wastages as the information it provides can deter further investments in the event of massive failure of the campaign.
• It provides useful data that can be of value in future campaigns.
• Its nature and output make evaluation a logical conclusion of an advertising campaign.
4.0 CONCLUSION The knowledge of this concept is a must for every practitioner in an industry that is daily becoming more complex, diverse and dynamic.
With the opportunity it provides for the review of the progress in the advertising 115 campaign, evaluation is a critical and conclusive step of the advertising campaign programme.
Although it is given various kinds of names, including research, evaluation basically affords the opportunity for the review of achievements or failures after a campaign.
It has come to stay as a vital component of the advertising process.
5.0 SUMMARY No single activity of advertising can be said to be unnecessary.
Yet, if any of them is crucial to the overall realization of advertising goals, evaluation is one of them.
Students are, therefore, expected to accord it priority, by attaching importance to its knowledge and understanding.
It is though the last of the advertising process, but that does not limit is significance and vital roles in a successful advertising.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify and discuss the importance of evaluation as a process of advertising 2.
Differentiate between research and evaluation.
3.
Of what benefits is evaluation to the advertiser?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, J. E. (2007).
“Advertising and Public Relations Campaign Planning and Execution,” in Nwosu, I.E.
(ed) Public Relations- Insights From Nigeria, NIPR Public Relations Management and Practice Series, No.1.
Enugu: Ezu Books Ltd Nwosu, I. E and Namnebe, A. D. (2006).
Triple-P Advertising: Principles, Processes, Practices.
Aba: Afri-Towers Ltd. Ozoh, H. C. (1998), Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON 116 MAC 331 MODULE 5 MODULE 5 THE IMPERATIVE OF ADVERTISING REGULATION Unit 1 APCON as a Regulatory Agency Unit 2 Regulating Advertising: Tools at APCON’s Disposal Unit 3 Regulating Advertising: Areas Requiring Special Attention.
UNIT 1 APCON AS A REGULATORY AGENCY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Establishment of APCON 3.2 Strengths From the Supporting Sectors 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The beauty of the civilized world is the prevalent orderliness in the society, respect for others’ rights and liberty, decency and decorum as people go about their businesses.
This scenario is everyone’s expectation in every segment or facet of the society.
Advertising, a social agent, undoubtedly, is one of the areas the above rosy picture must be put in place.
As a social agent, advertising has enormous powers which if allowed to be applied negatively, will spell doom for, not just the audience and consumers, but also the entire society.
This pertinently raises the issues of supervision, monitoring, coordination and control in the industry.
In a nutshell, to prevent adverse implications to consumers and anarchy to the entire society, there is the urgent need for advertising regulation.
And attaining the goal is no mean task.
Yet, it must be done, hence the establishment of an agency with the necessary authority to carry that out.
117 That body is APCON The Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) was brought to life through Decree 55 of 1988.
This law charters and professionalizes the practice of advertising in Nigeria, (Aliede, 2000:104-105).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • have a clearer background of APCON • discuss the important mandates given to the agency.
• identify the sectoral and complementary organs with which APCON is carrying out its responsibilities.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Establishment of APCON The Decree establishing APCON, No.
55 of 1988 was later amended as Act 93 of 1992.
With it, a legal framework is in place for the management of the dynamic and influential industry that must be part of social agents committed to societal growth and development.
That is a sketchy picture of society’s expectation from advertising.
Advertising is both an arm of and a communication process.
Following its years of influence on the society and interactive relationship that often turned controversial, a definite and resolute understanding emerged between man and communication.
And that is: its agents must be held in trust for the society.
This metamorphosed into the concept of social responsibility.
It simply insists that as those organs pursue their goals, including that of profit making, it must not be at the expense of the society; rather the society, particularly the clients, customers, consumers, publics and stakeholders should be made to benefit from its gains, through their rational, reasonable and responsible activities.
But, unfortunately, not all arms of communication are expected to willingly submit to such tenets.
This further underscores the need for a regulatory authority whose duty would be to ensure that rules are obeyed to the mutual interests of all the parties involved in the obviously a social contract, 118 Before the creation of APCON, a number of organizations and associations existed, representing most of the sectors of the advertising industry.
With their evolved rules and regulations, they guided the activities of the practitioners in every sector.
At the same time, they individually and collectively pursued the goal of professionalizing the industry.
Most vigorous in this crusade was the then Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN), now Association of Advertising Agencies of Nigeria (AAAN).
To be part of the vanguard for nurturing the society, advertising must strictly conform to certain norms.
Ozoh (1998: 196) is in support of this when he says that one of such areas is being accountable to the people.
To him, “Perhaps the greatest manifestation of the accountability is the professional ethic that every advertisement shall be honest, legal, decent and truthful”.
And there must be an existing policy framework with which to engender its compliance.
APCON, therefore, was created to do just that.
Anyacho (2007:254) alludes to this when he contends that there must be means of ensuring that “the remedy chosen to avert, or redress market failures is the best that can be designed”.
Such failure arises when advertising messages become “misleading, deceptive or offensive”, hence regulation is imperative, citing derivable benefits of regulation to include: “to maintain and promote consumer confidence in advertising, promote and facilitate consumer protection., encourage brand competition on level playing grounds; build goodwill and respect for the profession; promote advertising practitioners as core professionals”.
This is done through the application of measures that may be statutory, self-regulatory or both.
Already, there are some existing mass media laws which also relate to advertising.
Nwosu and Nkamnebe (2006:180) note that practitioners in both industries take cognizance of them as part of the measures to ensure acceptable advertising practices.
To them, these include defamation (libel and slander), copyright infringement, contempt and privacy.
These are in addition to the moral philosophy or ethics practitioners should voluntarily subscribe to as means of self-regulation.
To robustly pursue its statutory obligations, APCON, besides the law establishing it, went on to formulate a code of ethics to guide, control and regulate the practice of advertising in the country.
In the opinion of Ozoh 119 (1998:195), this is in furtherance of the dictates of Decree No.
55 of 1988, which enjoined the agency to “regulate and control the practice of advertising in all its aspects and ramifications”, and other related existing laws.
Therefore, in pursuance of its statutory responsibilities, APCON has sufficient weapons at his disposal.
There are, as Anyacho (2007:255) points out: • Advertising Practitioners Regulation, Etc Act 55 of 1988 as Amended in Act 93 of 1992.
• Code of Advertising Ethics, Act 1993.
• Banks and other Financial Institutions Act 1991, Section 40.
• Constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria (Promulgation) Act 1999 (LFN) Cap.63, Fourth Schedule, Part 1.
• Federal Highways Act 1990, LFN, Cap.Section1 (5)(d) Section 27(1)(d), Section 28 (4).
• Consumer Protection Act, No.
66 of 1992.
• Federal Environmental Protection Agency Act, 1990 LFN, Cap.131, Section 4 (d) and (e), Section 17, Section 20 (1) and (5) Section 38 Interpretation.
• National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC) (a) Food Production (Advertisement) Regulations 1996 and (b) Cosmetic and Medical Devices (Advertisement) Regulations, 1996.
• Copyright Act, 1990, etc • The Land Use Act, 1990 (LFN).
• Tobacco Smoking (Control) Act, 1990 120 • Trespass to Land • Nuisance • Public Criminal Offence, Ref.
Penal Code, Section 192 and 194, Criminal Code, Section 234.
• Private Nuisance • Negligence • A Proclamation on Registration to Practice Advertising in Nigeria, Public Notice No.
3 of 1997.
• Advertising Practitioners Disciplinary Committee Rules, Government Notice No.
42 0f 1999 • Decisions on the Advertising of Tobacco Products and Alcoholic Beverages.
All these statutes, laws, rules and regulations form bulk of the instruments at the beck and call of APCON for the discharge of its functions.
However, certainly as it is, the agency can hardly go it alone.
As a matter of necessity, APCON needs constant collaboration with related agencies in order to operate smoothly.
This is unavoidably so even as some areas of overlapses can be noticed in the functions of APCON and those of some other regulatory agencies, for instance NAFDAC, Standards Organization of Nigeria, NDLEA, Consumer Protection Agency, National Broadcasting Commission (NBC) and National Communications Commission (NCC).
3.1 Strengths from the Supporting Sectors To achieve its assigned responsibilities, APCON requires a lot of support.
The enormity of its tasks, the vastness of the country, the sensitivity of the profession and the dearth of expertise, all combined to heighten the challenges before the agency.
However, APCON is surrounded by able and professional hands whose efforts and support have made the agency to see 121 the light of the day, in the first instance.
Among them are the professional sectoral bodies, which include: 1.
Association of Advertising Agencies of Nigeria (AAAN) 2.
Advertising Association of Nigeria (ADVAN) 3.
Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria (NPAN) 4.
Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigeria (OAAN) 5.
Broadcasting Organisation of Nigeria (BON).
6.
Media Independent Practitioners Association of Nigeria (MIPAN).
7.
Independent Television Producers Association of Nigeria (ITPAN Apart from subjecting themselves, members and corporate institutions to the dictates of advertising regulation and control as stipulated by APCON, these organizations additionally subject themselves to more self-regulatory measures.
Each has its own code of ethics, and other rules and regulations, to ensure that the members practice according to the demands of the profession.
What a thorough arrangement.
In addition, the regulating body itself is so structured to give the subsisting components needed leverages with which to play supportive and complementary roles to the attainment of the corporate objectives.
In this direction, there are the following structures: a) Advertising Practitioners Investigating Panel (APIP) b) Advertising Standards Panels(ASP) c) Advertising Practitioners Disciplinary Committee d) Membership and Privileges Committee e) Education and Training Committee f) Administration and Finance Committee 122 The secretarial has this structural organization to complement and assist the council: The departments are: • Office of the Registrar • Research, Planning and Statistics • Administration and Finance • Registration and Career Matters • Regulation, Monitoring and Enforcement.
All these work together towards the achievement of the assigned responsibilities of APCON.
To further assist it administratively and in its rules enforcement, APCON has established some zonal offices.
These are at Abuja, Kano, Owerri, Enugu, Kaduna, Jos and Port-Harcourt.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE • Give the historical background of APCON • Discuss the supportive sectors APCON needs to succeed • What are the sources of APCON’s power?
4.0 CONCLUSION The Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) has come of age.It has gone through a rigorous process of formation.
It has all the support it desires to function very effectively still, it must overcome some challenges in order to succeed.
Some of such obstacles include the infiltration of the profession by quacks who refuse to go through the right processes of registration and other formalities before practicing the profession.
Another is the inadequacy of the needed manpower with which it can properly police the vast country in its regulatory activities.
Besides, more can still be done to improve the level of professionalism in the industry, and above all enhancing the contributions of the profession to national growth and development.
123 5.0 SUMMARY The unit makes efforts at presenting sufficient insights to the historical background, sectoral structure, the powers and legal backings APCON requires and has and how they are affecting the discharge of its statutory responsibilities Students would gain from this to strengthen their knowledge of the industry, the regulatory body, the sectoral bodies, other related and supportive bodies, among others.
The knowledge is very vital for current and would-be practitioners in the industry.
7.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSISNGMENT 1.With an exhaustive analysis, discuss the historial background of APCON 2.X-ray the symbiotic role of the sectoral bodies to effective performance of APCON.
3.How does the structural organization of APCON assist the effective attainment of its objectives?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aliede, J. E. (2000).
“Professionalising Advertising in Nigeria: The Role of the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria” , in Okunna, C. S (ed) Teaching Mass Communication: A Multidimentional Approach.
Enugu: New Generation Books.
Anyacho, R, C. (2007).
Advertising: Principkle and Practices - The Nigeria Perspective.
Lagos: Teejay Enterprises.
APCON(2003).
Advertising Annual, Vol.
II.
Lagos: APCON.
Nwosu, I. E and Nkamnebe, A.D.(2006).
Triple P Advertising: Principle, Process, Practices.
Aba: Afri-Towers Ltd Ozoh, H.C.(1998).
Principles and Practice of Advertising.
Lagos: APCON.
124 MAC 331 MODULE 5 UNIT 2 REGULATING ADVERTISING: TOOLS AT APCON’S DISPOSAL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Decree No.
55 of 1988 and its Powers 3.2 Code of Advertising Practice 3.0 Conclusion 4.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The responsibilities of APCON are summed up in “To control and regulate advertising in all its aspects and ramification”.
To carry this out, APCON requires a measure of authority.
This it got with the promulgation of Decree No.
55 of 1988.
The Council later gave to itself the Code of Advertising Practice to provide guidelines of the expected manner of approach to the handling of advertisers’ products.
These two items constitute the main tools with which APCON is performing its statutory functions.
This unit will, therefore, closely examine the contents of these instruments, with a view to exposing how they aid the body to achieve its goals 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • appreciate the detailed content of Decree no.
55 of 1988 and Code of Advertising Practice of APCON • relate their contents to the statutory responsibilities of APCON.
125 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Decree No.
55 of 1988 and its Powers With the promulgation of the Decree, now an Act, the following were achieved as APCON (2003:5) puts it: • A principal Act is provided to APCON; • It sets up APCON and specifies its functions and powers; • It professionalizes advertising in Nigeria; and • Opens a new chapter in the growth in the sector and economy.
The law became effective from December 27, 1988.
It has seven parts and two schedules, as follows: Part 1: Establishment of APCON, etc.
It declares the Council established and specified its functions.
It also enumerates the members of the Council; its powers, funding, financial provision; directives of the Minister of Information and Communication; registrar and staff of the Council.
Part 2: Registration: details how the Council will prepare and maintain register of advertising practitioners in the country; its publication and correction; the division of the register, conditions for registration and qualifications.
Part 3: Training: This part contains approval of courses, supervision of institutions and nature of examination leading to qualification and power of the Council to consider matters relating to training, etc.
Part 4 Privileges of registered persons and offenses by unregistered persons.
The details include the invalidity of certification given by unregistered person; positions non-registered persons cannot hold; punishments for false claims an unregistered person, recovery of fees and committable offences.
Part 5: Discipline.
This part establishes APCON disciplinary committee and investigation panel.
It spells out the proceedings of the committee; punishments for behaving unprofessionally, restoration of the position of a registered person, removal of the name of a fraudulent member and procedure for his appeal in the Court of Appeal.
Part 6: Supplementary: This part deals with regulations, interpretation and actions.
126 Schedule 1: This stipulates the qualification and tenure of office of members of the Council; proceedings of the Council, its communities and miscellaneous.
Schedule 2: Supplementary provisions relating to the disciplinary committee and the investigating panel and miscellaneous.
The Act was later amended.
The first, on December 15, 1992, included such provisions as the establishment of the Advertising Standard Panel and numerous other amendments.
The second amendment was on November 18, 1993.
This slightly touched two areas of the principal Act’s provisions.
3.2 Code of Advertising Practice A detailed and comprehensive document touching virtually all segments of advertising, the code treats about eleven issues and other special areas of equal number APCON (1993).
The issues handled include: • Responsibilities of APCON • Definition of advertising • Definition of advertisement • Essence of advertising • The scope of the code (sectors covered) • Essence of good advertising • Administration of the code • General principles • Presentation and claims • Special categories of advertisements • Guidelines on handling sensitive advertisements: alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, direct media buying, media owners, political advertising, medicine and treatment, food, cosmetics, children, mail order advertising, direct sale advertising, banking and financial services.
• Vetting guidelines advertisements.
These embodiments make clear to the advertising practitioner what he should know and how he should act among others, in order to ensure advertisement that conform with the principle and essence of good advertising, APCON (1993:2): 127 1.Be legal decent, honest, truthful and respectful of our culture 2.Prepared with high sense of social responsibility and regard to consumers and the entire society.
3.In conformity with the principle of fair competition as in business and fair comment acceptable in human communication.
1.
Should enhance public confidence in the advertising industry and profession.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Discuss the major contents of Decree No.
55 of 1988.
2.
Highlight the contents of the Code Advertising Practices.
4.0 CONCUSION These are the catechisms of the advertising profession.
Every intending practitioner must be acquainted with them so as to be knowledgeable of the critical principles that guarantee credible practice.
This knowledge of the enabling law and the code of principles is a stepping stone to that informed application that will lead to effective advertising practice.
5.0 SUMMARY Students should, therefore, regard as very essential their knowledge of this unit.
This profession is not for the half-informed, due to its sensitivity, intrusiveness and pervasiveness.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT 1.
Discuss the major components of the law establishment APCON and show how they assist it discharge its duties 2.
Critically analyze the importance of the Code of Advertising to the effective practice of the profession.
3.
Show the interface between the law establishing APCON and the code of Advertising Practice.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Decree No.
55 of 1988 (Advertising Practitioners Registration) Etc Decree Decree No.
93 of 1992 (First Amendment to the Principal Act ( Advertising Practitioners Registration, Etc).
Decree No.
116 of 1993 (Second Amendment to the Principal Act (Advertising Practitioners Registration, Etc).
128 MAC 331 MODULE 5 UNIT 3 REGULATING ADVERTISING: AREAS REQUIRING SPECIAL ATTENTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.3 Alcoholic Beverages 3.4 Tobacco Products 3.5 Medicine and Treatment 3.6 Children 3.7 Political Advertising 5.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION By now, it is no more in doubt that there are sufficient justifications to regulate advertising.
However, for the purpose of reiteration, let it be made known that advertising as a form of communication and a social agent is very sensitive and pervasive that it must be handled with care, maturity, responsibility, rationality, decorum and decency.
This is moreso when some of the issues, items, products or ideas that are involved are very delicate, critical and often very dangerous, for instance, drugs.
It is, therefore, very pertinent we wrap up this very crucial unit with a close look at some of those products that require special care, handling and treatment in order not to mishandle their advertisements or use such promotional publicity to cause disruption or harm to the society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify some of the sensitive products requiring special care.
• appreciate why they require special care when advertised.
129 • explain how care can be taken to ensure such products are assisted by advertising to aid and not harm the consumers 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Alcoholic Beverages Among these categories of products are beer, stout, dry gin, tonic wine and caffeinated provisions.
The Code of Advertising Practice, APCON (1993) demands honesty, truthfulness, decency and legality.
However, handling these kinds of products goes beyond the above tenets.
Put in another way, measures must be taken to ensure that the consumption of the products do not cause any harm to the user or the society at large.
Indeed an aspect of the advertising code, APCON (1993:2) speaks on this and says that every advertisement should be “prepared with high sense of social responsibility and should not show disregard for the interests of consumers and the wide Nigerian society.” Contending against the ban of alcoholic advertising, Akingbade (1994:35- 38) at the same time counts the benefits of alcohol to include: • Key ingredient for mutual social interactions.
• Veritable items for the entertainment of guests.
• Needed to inject excitement and liveliness in social occasions • Refreshing the body and enjoyment and gatherings.
• Required for relaxation.
• Important as a digestive and nutritional supplement • Inextricably linked with the cultural heritage of all classes of Nigerians.
• Have positive roles in the lives of consumers when consumed moderately and responsibly.
• Alcoholic drinks are not strictly hazardous to health, but rather have some medicinal values as some people argue.
However, the issue is the serious havoc its misuse can cause, and such misuse can result from wrong or negative advertising.
For that reason, its regulation, control and restriction is necessary.
Akingbade (1994:34) agrees with this: The ostensible reason given for these restrictions are linked with the feeling in some official quarters that “these advertisements do not only 130 constitute serious health hazards to the citizenry, they also contain misleading information.” He goes on: “It is further argued that there is a link between the “advertisement of alcoholic beverages” and excessive consumption, which is in turn linked with the following: reckless driving and resultant increase in road accidents; public disorder, hooliganism and other forms of anti-social behaviours; and (ill-healths, like) liver sclerosis and heart disease.” These are enough justifications to warrant serious checks.
It is also more important if we recall that the group who are most exposed and accessible to such advertisements, no matter the medium, is the youth.
Such negative influences of the advertisements can also cause reckless spending and alcoholic addiction, which ruins the consumer at such tender age.
To forestall this, the Code of Advertising Ethics made some prescriptive guidelines of what all adverting media outlets must and should not do, APCON (1993), when advertising alcoholic beverages.
Besides, “All advertisements for alcoholic beverages should be cleared with APCON (through the process of their vetting) before they are exposed through the media to the public,” the code insists.
3.2 Tobacco Products Tobacco products are other sensitive goods whose advertising requires strict control.
Experts say that tobacco smoking affects the lungs, causing cardiovascular pain and coronary heart diseases in the heart region and blood vessels.
It is also said to further hurt women by causing infertility and giving birth to babies with low birth weight, who may be prone to infant mortality syndrome.
Incidentally, analysts insist that the easiest and surest means of promoting tobacco smoking is through advertisement.
To put a check to this, according to Okigbo (1994:13), government has to come in, as is the case globally, first in 1990, through Tobacco Smoking (Control) Decree, No.
20.
Among others, it: • Makes it an offence to advertise tobacco without a warning; • Tobacco cannot be promoted during any sport event; • Every packet of tobacco meant for sale in Nigeria must have the 131 inscription: The Federal Ministry of Health warns that tobacco smoking is dangerous to health, and smokers are liable to die young.
• The packet of the tobacco must contain the amount of tar and nicotine contents of the product.
The Advertising Code of Ethics hence recommends dos and don’ts for the various media, including the timing of tobacco advertisements on radio and television.
Too, no tobacco billboard should be sited near stadia, schools, churches and hospitals, APCON (1993).
The special interest and the measures in place for a long way to underscore the high premium placed on the matter.
3.3 Medicine and Treatment The sensitivity and delicacy of drugs and their administration do not require emphasis.
Consequently, to curb the tendency for some people to take undue advantage of the anxiety and worry of the sick; uncontrollable quest to get brisk business by some dealers; disregard for norms and rules by quacks, and the gullible nature of some citizens, the control of advertising, the main vehicle for conveying drug messages, publicity and promotion, becomes expedient.
The checks through advertising code of ethics are complementary.
Before, there existed series of measures through the Federal Ministry of Health and its agencies like NAFDAC, NDLEA, among others.
The code in an 18-piont stipulation, spelt out guidelines on the advertisement of medicine and treatment using medicine and drugs.
It is a wise decision since unless it is checked, the misapplication of medicine can cause more harm than good, and more deaths than levies it can save.
3.4 Children At their age, children are at the stage of ignorance, gullibility, shyness, fear and uncritical mindedness.
As such, they must be shielded from the activities of quacks, charlatans and irresponsible advertisers and advertising practitioners, whose goal is never to use the profession and industry to improve the citizenry and the society, but to enhance their financial well being.
Their activities compel every responsible government to put measures 132 in place to protect the vulnerable in the society like children, as is the case through this Code, APCON (1993).
The guidelines in an 11-point guideline that includes not inducing children to mount undue pressure on their parents and guardians, not exaggerating of the use of products to children, their safety, keeping medicines out of their reach and not presenting children driving cars or similar objects.
These areas are summed up with: “All advertisements directed at children must promote their physical and moral wellbeing and should not exploit their natural credulity.” Certainly, without these types of rules, some advertisers and marketers would not really mind the appropriateness of their messages, but how they make profits at the end.
3.3 Political Advertising This is yet another sensitive and explosive type of advertising and may, due to its nature require more careful policing of the media than the other areas, especially during intense political periods like elections, moreso in the developing nations like Nigeria.
Accordingly, to handle this, the code harps on such areas as truthful, issue- oriented, sponsorship identification, avoidance of sectionalism, equal opportunity to political opponents (Fairness Doctrine in USA) and strict compliance with the provisions of this section of the code.
In Nigeria, what we witness during periods of electioneering campaigns and election result announcement is usually an awful experience.
One then wonders what the case would be without guidelines, rules and regulations.
It is then necessary to liaise with all the relevant authorities and stakeholders and take necessary steps to check the excesses of politicians, their agents, advertising agencies and media, who are beclouded by the quest for power and money and ignore the ugly consequences of their actions.
Decorum, decency, public peace and orderliness, responsibility and professionalism are thrown over-board.
They deliberately dish out false, misleading, distorted, deceptive, fake, unsubstantiated, disparaging and volatile information to cause disaffection, disunity, disorderliness and chaos in the society.
133 Desperate politicians stop at nothing to achieve their selfish ambitions and do not case for the harm that befall the society because of their actions and inactions.
The only means of checking them is through effective regulation as is already the case.
There should be collective actions by INEC, the police, the civil society, the media and the advertising industry to achieve this vital goal.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Discuss some of the sensitive sections of advertising that require the provision of guidelines.
2.
Explain why alcohol requires special attention, as an advertising product.
3.
Why do some advertising practitioners, after proper training, need further policing to do their work professionally?
4.0 CONCLUSION There have been some bold steps towards underlining the need for the enforcement of proper handling of the advertisement of certain products.
This stems from their nature, sensitivity and the fact that they are prone to misapplication.
Such products and issues some of which we have given indepth insight like alcoholic, medical, tobacco and political advertising require serious care.
Practitioners need to appreciate that it is in their own reputation, integrity and professional interests for this ethical issues to be taken maturely and responsibly.
The days of anything goes are over.
Besides, without this kind of self-checks, government is bound to clamp down on practitioners with its own measures, which may be very stringent and uncomfortable and therefore, antithetical.
5.0 SUMMARRY Students should avail themselves the opportunity offered by this unit to acquaint and update themselves with the crucial guidelines one must know to be an effective practitioner in this sensitive profession.
It is no more free for all.
Hence, all potential practitioners must be prepared for ethical and social responsibility practices so as to use the profession to assist, the country’s growth and development.
134 7.0 REFERENCES/FURHTER READING Akingbade, B.
(1994).
“Alcohol Advertising: Manufacturer’s View Point, in Issuance on Advertising of Controlled Products.
Lagos: APCON.
APCON (1993).
Code of Advertising Ethics.
Lagos :APCON.
Okigbo, C. (1994), “The Status of Advertising Regulation”,in Issues on Advertising of Controlled Products, Lagos: APCON.
Tobacco Smoking (Control) Decree No.
20 of 1990.
135 APPENDIX ONE ADVERTISING PRACTITIONERS (REGISTRATION ETC) DECREE NO 55 OF 1988 (CAP 7 LAWS OF FEDERATION (OF NIGERIA, 1988) DECREE NO.55 ( 27TH DECEMBER 1988) COMMENCEMENT THE FEDERAL MILITARY GOVERNMENT HEREBY DECREES AS FOLLOWS: PART 1- Establishment of the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria,etc.
1.
There is hereby established for advertising practitioners a body to be known as the Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (hereafter in this Decree referred to as ‘’the council’’) which shall be charged with the general duty of- a.Determining who are advertising practioners; Determining what standards of knowledge and skill are to be attained by person seeking to become registered as members of the advertising profession and reviewing that standard from time to time; c. Securing in accordance with the provisions of this Decree, the establishment and maintenance of a register of persons entitled to practice as advertising practitioners and the publication from time to time, of lists of those persons d. Regulating and controlling the practice of advertising in all its aspects and ramifications; e. Conducting examinations in the profession and awarding certificates or diplomas to successful candidates as and when appropriate and for such purpose, the Council shall prescribe fees to be paid in respect thereof; f. Performing the other functions conferred on the Council by this Decree.
2.
–(The Council shall consist of- a.
Chairman who shall be a person of distinction in the profession to be appointed by the President , Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces; b.
Seven persons to be appointed by the Minister one of whom shall be from the Ministry and the others from amongst other interests in the field of Advertising which in the opinion of the Minister ought to be adequately represented; c. Ten persons to be elected from the Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (hereafter in this Decree referred to as ‘’The Association’’) in the manner for the time being provided by its constitution; and d. Two persons to represent institution of higher learning in Nigeria offering course leading to an approval qualification; to be appointed by the Minister in a rotation, so however that the two persons shall not come from the same institution.
3.
The provision set out in Schedule 1 to this Decree shall have effect to the qualification, and tenure of office of members of the Council and other matter therein mentioned.
3.
(1) subject to subsection (2) of this section and to any direction of the Minister under this Decree, the Council shall have power to do anything which this Decree in its opinion is calculated to facilitate the carrying out of its functions under this Decree.
2.
The Council shall not have power to borrow or dispose of any property except with prior concept of the Minister and shall not have power to pay remuneration (including pensions), allowance or expenses to any employee of the Council or any other person except in accordance With scales approved by the Minister.
4.
– (1) The Council shall establish and maintain a fund for the purposes of this Decree.
136  (2) There shall – (a) Be paid into the fund of the Council- (i) All fees and other monies payable to the Council in pursuance of this Decree: (ii) Such monies as may be payable to the Council, whether in the course of the discharge of its function or not; and (b) Be paid out of the fund of the council (i) The remuneration and allowances of the registrar and other employees of the Council; (ii) such reasonable travelling and subsistence of members of its council, in respect of the time spent in business of the council , as the council, may with the approval of the Minister, determine; and (iii) Any other expenses incurred by the Council in the discharge of its functions under this Decree.
5.-(1) The Council shall prepare and submit to the Minister not later than the 30th day of September of each year (so however that the Minister may, if he considers it necessary, extend the period in the year in which this Decree comes into force) an estimate of the income and expenditure of the Council during the next succeeding year.
(2) The council shall keep proper account s in respect of each year and proper records in relation to those accounts and shall cause the accounts to be audited within six months after the end of the year to which the accounts relate by auditors appointed by the list and in accordance with the guidelines supplied by the auditor – General of the federation.
6.
The Ministry may give the Council directives of a general character or relating generally to particular matters but not to any individual person or case with regard to the exercise by the council of its functions under this Decree and it shall be the duty of the council to comply with the directives.
7.
– (1) it shall be the duty of the council to appoint a fit and proper person to be the registrar for the purposes of this decree (2) The registrar shall , in addition to his other functions under this decree be the secretary to the council and shall on its instructions of the Chairman of the Council, convene and keep minutes of the proceeding at all meetings of the council and committees thereof, as the case may be.
(3) The council may appoint such other persons to be employees of the council as the council may determine to assist the registrar in the exercise of its functions under this decree.
(4) The council may, whether the registrar is absent, or for any other reason is unable to discharge the functions of its office, appoint an acting registrar to discharge his functions.
(5) The registrar and other employees of the council shall hold office on such terms and conditions as the council may, with the approval of the Minister, determine.
PART TWO REGISTRATION 8 - (1) It shall be the duty of the registrar to prepare and maintain, in accordance with rules made by the council under this section, a register of the names, addresses, approved qualifications and of such other particulars as may be specified of all persons who are entitled in accordance with the provisions of this decree to be registered as fellows, full members, associates or students of the profession and who apply in the specified manner to be registered.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, the council shall make rules with respect to the form of keeping of the register and the making of the entries therein, and in particulars- (a)Regulating the making of applications for registration and providing for the evidence to be produced in support of application; (b) Providing for the notification to the registrar by the person to whom any registered particulars relate, of any change in those particulars; (c) Authorizing a registered person to have any qualification which is in, in relation to his profession, an approved qualification or an accepted qualification under section II (2) of this decree, 137 registered in relation of his name in addition to or, as he may elect in substitution for any other qualifications so registered; (d) Specifying anything falling to be specified under the foregoing provisions of this section; (e) Specifying the fees to be paid to the council in respect of the entry of names of the register and authorizing the registrar to refuse to enter a name on the register until any fees specified for entry has been paid.
(3) It shall be the duty of the registrar- (a) To correct, in accordance with the directions of the council, any entry in the register which the council directs him to correct as being in the opinion of the council an entry which was incorrectly made; (b) To make, from time to time, any necessary alterations to be registered particulars of registered persons; (c) To remove from the register the name of any registered person who has died, has become insane or has committed an act of gross misconduct.
(4) If the registrar – (a) Should send by post to any registered person a registered letter addressed to him at his address on the register enquiring whether the registered particulars relating to him are correct and receives no reply to letter within three months from the date of posting it ; and (b) Upon the expiration of that period sends in like manner to the person in question a second letter and receives no reply to that letter within months from the date of posting.
The registrar may remove the particulars relating to the person in question from the register but the council may direct the register any particulars removed therefrom under this subsection.
(9) - (1) it shall be the duty of the registrar – (a) to cause the register to be printed , published and put on sale to members of the public not later than two years from the beginning of the year in which this decree comes into force; (b) in each year after in which a register is first published and put on sale as aforesaid either a corrected edition of the register or a list of alterations made to each register since it was last printed; and (c) To cause a print of each edition of the register and of each list of corrections to be deposited at the principal office to council, and it shall be the duty of the council to keep each register and list so deposited open at all reasonable times for inspection by members of the public.
(2) A document reporting to be a print of an edition of a register published under this section by authority of the registrar so published in the current year, shall (without prejudice to any other mode of proof) be admissible in any proceedings as evidence that any person specified in the document, or the documents read together, as being registered and that any person not so specified is not so registered.
(10) The register maintained under section 8 of this Decree shall consist of three parts: (a) One part in respect of fellows (b) One part in respect of full members (c) One part in respect of associate member (11) -(1) A person shall be entitled to be registered as a student member of the profession and being so registered to receive a certification if he satisfies the council that he is undergoing a course of studies recognized by the council leading to a qualification in the profession in an institution approved by the council.
(2) A person shall be entitled to be registered as an associate member of the profession and being so registered to receive a certificate of registration if – 138  (a) he holds a university degree or Higher National Diploma in mass communication or other professional qualification recognized by the council and he is employed in a recognized organization where he can acquire professional experience; (b) He is of character; (c) He has not been convicted in Nigeria or elsewhere of an offence involving fraud or dishonesty; and (d) He has attained the age of 21 years.
(3) A person shall be entitled to be registered as a full member of the profession and being so registered to receive a certificate of registration if – (a) He fulfills the condition for registration under subsection (2) of this section; (b) He satisfies the council that in the five years immediately preceding the date of his application, he has been in continuous active practice as an advertising practitioner either alone or in partnership with other advertising practitioners.
(4) A person shall be entitled to be registered as a fellow of the profession and being so registered to receive a certificated of registration if – (a) He fulfills the conditions for registration under subsection (2) or (3) of this section; and (b) He satisfies the council that, the fifteen years immediately preceding the date of his application, he has been in continuous active practice as an advertising practitioner either alone or in partnership with other advertising practitioners.
(5) The council may in its absolute discretion provisionally accept a qualification produced in respect of an application for registration under this section or direct that the application be received within such period as may be specified on the direction.
(6) The council shall, from time to time, publish in the Gazette particulars of the qualifications for the time being accepted for registration.
PART III – Training 12.- (1) The council may approve for the purpose of section II of this Decree.
(a) any course of training which is intended for persons seeking to become members of the profession under this decree and which the council considers is designed to confer on persons completing it sufficient knowledge and still for the practice of the profession; (b) any institution either in Nigeria or elsewhere which the council considers is properly organized and equipped for conducting the whole or any part of the course of training approved by the council under this section; or (c) any qualification which, as a result of examination taken in conjunction with the course of training approved by the council under this section, is granted to candidates reaching a standard at the examination indicating, in the opinion of the council, that they have sufficient knowledge and skill to practice the profession.
(2) The council may, if it thinks fit, withdraw any approval given under this section in respect of any course, qualification or institution but before withdrawing such an approval, the council shall – (a) Give notice that it proposes to do so to person by whom the course is conducted or the qualification is granted or the institution is controlled, as the case may be; (b) Afford each such person an opportunity of making to the council representation with regard to the proposal; and (c) Take into consideration any representations made in respect of the proposal in pursuance of paragraph (b) of this subsection.
(3) In respect of any period during which the approval of the council under this section for a course , institution or qualification is withdrawn, the course, institution or qualification shall not be treated as approved under this section but the withdrawal of such an approval shall not prejudice the 139 registration or eligibility for registration of any person who by virtue of the approval was registered or eligible for registration immediately before the approval was withdrawn.
(4) The giving or withdrawal of an approval under this section shall have effect from such date, after the execution of the instrument signifying the giving or withdrawal of the approval, as the council may specify in the instrument, and the council shall shall – (a) as soon as may be, published a copy every instrument in the Gazette; and (b) not later than seven days before its publication as aforesaid send a copy of the instrument to the Minister.
13.- (1) It shall be the duty of the council to keep itself information of the nature of – (a) The instruction given at approved institutions to persons attending approved course of training; and (b) The examinations as a result of which approved qualifications are granted; And for the purpose of performing that duty, the council may appoint, either from among its own members or otherwise, persons d to visit approved institutions or such examination.
(2) it shall be the duty of a visitor appointed under subsection (1) of this section to report to the council on – (a) The adequacy of the institution given to persons attending approved Course of training at institutions visited by him; (b) The adequacy of the examination attended by him; and (c) any other matter relating to the institutions or examinations on which the council may, either generally or in a particular case, request him to report, but no visitor shall interfere with the given of any instruction or the holding of any examination.
(3) on receive a report made in pursuance of this section, the council shall, as soon as may be, send a copy of the report to the person appearing to the council to be in charge of the institution or responsible for the examinations to which the report relates requesting that persons to make representations to the council within such times as may be specified in the request not being more than one month beginning with the date of the request.
14.
– (1) The council may, if it thinks fit, consider and report to the minister upon all matters relating to the professional training and other qualifications required for admission to the professional under this decree and the conditions of practice after registration.
(2) The Minister may require the council to advise him on any matter referred to in subsection (1) of this section.
PART IV- Privileges of registered Persons and Offences by Unregistered persons 15.
– A certificate required by any written law from any class of persons from whom a register is maintained under this decree shall not be valid, unless the person signing it is registered in accordance with this decree.
16.
- (1) Subject to the provisions of this decree, no person, not being registered in accordance with this Decree, shall be entitled to hold any appointment in the public service of the Federation or of a State or any public or private establishment, body or institution, if the holding of such appointment involves the performance by him in Nigeria of any act pertaining to the profession for gain.
(2) Nothing in this section or any other provisions of this part of this decree shall prevent a person from holding any appointment referred in subsection (1) of this section while he is undergoing training for the purpose of becoming qualified for registration under this Decree under the supervision of persons who are registered in accordance with this Decree.
17.
Any person, not being registered in any register established under section II of this decree, who holds himself out to be so registered or uses any name, title, description or symbol calculated to lead any person to infer that he is so registered , shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction 140 for a first to a maximum fine of one thousand naira or to imprisonment for a term of six months or to both such fine and imprisonment for a term of less than one year or more than three years.
18.
No remuneration shall be recoverable by legal proceedings in respect of any act pertaining to the profession of a registered person when performed by a person who is prohibited from performing such act for gain.
19.
– (1) if any person for the purpose of procuring the registration of any name, qualification or other matter- (a) makes a statement which he believes to be false in a material particular, or (b) Recklessly makes statement which is false in material particular, he shall be guilty of an offence under this section.
(2) If the registrar or any other person employed by the council willfully makes any falsification in any matter relating to any register maintained under this decree, he shall be guilt of an offence under this section.
(3) A person of an offence under this section shall be liable- (a) On conviction a court of inferior jurisdiction, to a fine not exceeding five hundred naira; or (b) On conviction in a High Court or the Federal High Court to a fine not exceeding one thousand naira or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding two years, or to both fine and imprisonment.
(4) Where an offence under this part of this decree, which has been committed by a body corporate, is proved to have committed with the connivance of or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate or any such capacity, he, as well as the body corporate, shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to proceeded against and punished accordingly.
20.
In any criminal proceedings against any person upon a charge of having performed an act which constitutes an offence if performed an act which constitutes if performed by an unregistered person, the person charged shall be deemed to be unregistered unless he proves the contrary.
PART V- Discipline 21.- (1) There shall be established committee to be known decree referred to as the Advertising Practitioners Disciplinary Committee (hereafter in this Decree referred to as ‘’the disciplinary committee’’) which shall be charged with the duty of considering and determining any case referred to it by the panel established by the following provisions of this decree.
(2) The disciplinary committee shall consist of seven members of the council at least three of whom shall be members holding office by virtue of paragraph (c) of subsection (2) of section 2 of this decree.
(3) There shall be established a body to be known as the advertising practitioners investigating panel (hereafter in the decree referred to as ‘’the investigating panel’’) which shall be charged with the duty of – (a) Conducting preliminary investigation into any case where it is alleged that a registered person has misbehaved in his capacity as such, or should for any other reason be the subject of proceeding before the disciplinary committee; and (b) Deciding whether the case should be referred to the disciplinary committee.
(4) The investigating panel hall be appointed by the council and shall consist of five members of the council.
(5) The provisions of schedule 2 to this decree shall, in so as is applicable to the disciplinary committee and investigative panel respectively, have respect with effect to those bodies.
(22).
- (1) At any meeting of the disciplinary committee three members shall form a quorum.
(2) The chairman shall preside at any meeting of the disciplinary committee or in his absence the members’ present at the meeting shall appoint one of their members to preside at the meeting.
141  (3) Any question proposed for decision by the disciplinary committee shall be determined by the majority of the members present and voting at a meeting of the disciplinary committee at which a quorum is present.
(4) At all meetings of the disciplinary committee each member present shall have one vote on a question proposed for decision by the disciplinary committee, and in the event of an equality of, the chairman shall have, in addition to a deliberate vote, a casting vote.
23.- (1) Where- (a) a person registered under this decree is convicted by any court or tribunal in Nigeria or elsewhere having power to award punishment for an offence ( whether or not an offence punishable with imprisonment) which in the opinion of the disciplinary committee is incompatible with the status of such professional; or (b) a registered person is judged by the disciplinary committee to be guilty of infamous conduct in a professional respect; or (c) The disciplinary committee is satisfied that the name of any person has been fraudulently registered; the disciplinary committee may give any of the directions mentioned in subsection (2) of this section (2) The disciplinary committee may give a direction under subsection (1) of this section.
(a) Ordering the register to strike the person’s name off the relevant apart of the register; (b) Suspending the person from practice for such period as may be specified in the direction; (c) Reprimanding the person; (d) Ordering the person to pay to the council any costs or and incidentally to the proceedings or any other sums of money whatsoever incurred by the council; or (e) cautioning the person and postponing for a period not exceeding one year any further action against him on one or more conditions as to his conduct during that period, And any such direction may, where appropriate, include provisions requiring the refund of monies paid or the handing over of documents or any other thing as the case may require.
(3) For the purposes of subsection (1) of this section, a person shall not be treated as convicted unless the conviction stands at a time when no appeal or further appeal is pending or may (without extension of time) be brought in connection with the conviction.
(4) In any inquiry under this section, any finding of fact which is shown to have been made in- (a) Any criminal proceedings in a court in Nigeria, or (b) Any civil proceeding in a court in Nigeria, shall be conclusive evidence of the fact found (5) If, after due inquiry, the disciplinary committee is satisfied that during the period of any postponement under paragraph (e) of subsection (2) of this section, a person has not complied with the conditions imposed there under, the disciplinary committee may, if it thinks fit, impose any one more penalties mentioned in paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d) of that subsection.
(6) A certificate under the hand of the Chairman that any costs have been ordered to be paid by a person under this section shall be conclusive evidence thereof.
(24).
–(1) where the name of a person has been struck off from the register in pursuance of a direction given section 23 of this decree, the disciplinary committee, may if thinks fit, at any time direct the restoration of his name to the register.
(2) an application for the restoration of a name to a register under subsection (1) of this section shall not be made to the disciplinary committee before the expiration of such period from the date of the striking off (and where he has made such an application, from the date of his last application) as may be specified in the direction.
(3) There shall be payable to the council by any person on the restoration of his name to a register in pursuance of a direction given under his section the like fees as would be payable by that person on first becoming register.
142 25.- (1) If it proved to the satisfaction of the disciplinary committee that any entry made in a register has been fraudulently or incorrectly made, the disciplinary committee may direct that the entry shall be struck off from the register.
(2) A person may be registered in pursuance of any provisions of this decree notwithstanding that his name had been struck (3) Any reference in this decree to the striking off from or the restoration to a register of the name of a person shall be construed as including a reference to the striking off from or the restoration to the register of any other registrable particulars relating to that person.
26.
–(1) Where the disciplinary committee- (a) Makes a finding and imposes a penalty on a registered person under section 23 of this decree; or (b) Rejects an application for restoration of a name to a register under section 24 (1) of this decree; or (c) Direct the striking off of any entry from a register under section 25 (1) of this decree, the register shall give the person to whom the proceedings relate notice in writing thereof and such person may, within twenty – eight days from the date of service on him of the notice, appeal to the court of Appeal.
(2) On any appeal under this section, the council shall be the respondent.
(3) No direction for the striking of the name of a registered person from a register under section (25) of this decree shall take effect until the expiration of the time for appealing or if an appeal is brought, until such time as the appeal is disposed of, withdrawn or stuck out for want of prosecution, as the case may be.
(4) The court of appeal may, on an appeal under this section – (a) Conform, very or set aside any finding of fact, penalty imposed or discretion given by the disciplinary committee; (b) Confirm the rejection of the disciplinary committee of the application for restoration or direct the restoration of the name to the register; (c) Remit the matter to the disciplinary committee for further consideration; or (d) Make such other order as to otherwise as may to is seem just, but no proceeding before the disciplinary committee shall be set aside by reason only of informality in those proceedings which did not embarrass or prejudice the appellant.
PART VI- Supplementary 27.- (1) The Ministry may make regulations as may in his opining be necessary or expedient for giving full effect to the provisions of this decree and for the administration thereof.
(2) any power to make regulations, rules or orders conferred under this decree shall include- (a) The power to make regulations for such incidental and supplementary matters as the authority making the instrument considers expedient for the purposes of the instruments; and (b) the power to make provisions or for different circumstances.
28.
In this decree, unless the the context otherwise requires- ‘’ Association’’ means the Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria established under section 1 of this decree; ‘’ Members’’ means a member of the Board and includes the Chairman; ‘’ Minister’’ means the Minister charge with the responsibility for matters relating to information and ‘’ Ministry’’ shall be constructed accordingly; ‘’ Profession’’ means advertising profession; ‘’ Register’’ means this register maintained in pursuance of section 8 of this decree; ‘’Registered ‘’ means registered as a fellow, member, and associate or student member of the profession in the part of the register relating to fellows, members, associates or students, as the case may be; ‘’Register’’ means the register appointed under section 7 of this decree.
143 29.
This decree may be cited as the Advertising Practitioners ( Registration,etc.)
Decree 1988.
SCHEDULE 1 section 2 (2) Qualification and tenure of Office of members 1.
- (1) a person other than a person appointed under section 2 (1) (a) and (d) of this decree shall not be a member of the council unless he is a citizen of Nigeria and is registered (or in the case of the first members of the council is eligible for registration) as a member of the profession.
(2) In exercise of his power under section 29 (1) (a) and (b) of this decree, the Minister shall take into consideration representatives of print media, commercial radio and television broadcasting, outdoor cinema advertising and the advertisers.
(3) Subject to section 2 (2) of this decree, the chairman shall hold office for a period not exceeding three years beginning with the date of his appointment and shall not be re-appointed as chairman.
(4) A person who has ceased to be a chairman of the council shall be eligible to become a member of the council (5) Subject to the provisions of this paragraph, a member of the council other than a public officer shall hold office for a period not exceeding three years beginning with of his appointment or election as the case may be.
(6) Any member of the council may by notice to the council, resign his membership.
(7) Subject to section 2 of this decree, a person who has ceased to be a member of the council shall be eligible for re- appointed or re – election, as the case may be.
(8) Where a member of the council ceases to hold office before the date when his term of office would have expired by affluxion of time, the body or person by whom he was appointed or elected shall as soon as may be, appoint or elect a person to fill the vacancy for the residue of the term aforesaid.
Proceeding of the council (2) subject to the provisions of his decree and section 26 of the Interpretation Act 1964 (Which provides for decisions of a body and for the chairman to have a second or casting vote) the council may make standing orders regulating the proceedings of the council or of any committee thereof or elect a temporary vice chairman in the absence of the chairman for the conduct of affairs of the council.
3.
The question of the council shall be seven and the quorum of any committee of the council shall be determined by the council 4.
At any time while the office of the chairman is vacant or the chairman is in the opinion of the council temporarily or permanently unable to perform the functions of his office, the vice chairman shall be construed accordingly.
5.
– (1) Subject to the provisions of any applicable standing orders, the council shall meet whenever summoned by the chairman is required so to do by notice given to him by not less than six other members, he shall summon a meeting of the council to be held within twenty – one days from the date on which the notice is given.
(2) at any meeting of the council, the chairman or in his absence, the vice chairman shall preside, but if both are absent the members present at the meeting shall appoint one of their number to preside at the meeting.
(3) Where the council wishes to obtain the advice of any person on a particular matter, the council may co- opt him as a member for such period as it thinks fit, but a person who is a member by virtue of this sub paragraph shall not be entitled to vote at any meeting of the council and shall not count towards a quorum.
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the first meeting of the council shall be summoned by the Minister who gives such directions as to the procedure to be followed at that meeting as he may deem fit.
Committees 144 6.
– (1) The council may appoint one or more committees to carry out, on behalf of the council such of its functions as the council may determine.
(2) a committee appointed under this paragraph shall consist of number of persons determined by the council and not more than one – third of those persons may be persons who are members of the council.
(3) A person other than a member of the council shall hold office on a committee in accordance with the terms of the letter by which he is appointed.
(4) A decision of a committee of the council shall be of no effect until it is confirmed by the council.
Miscellaneous (7) – (1) The fixing of the seal of the council shall be authenticated by the signature of The Chairman of some other member authorized generally or specially by the council to act for that purpose.
(2) Any contract or instrument which if made or executed by a person, not being a body corporate, would not be required to be under seal may be made or executed on behalf of the council by any person generally or specially authorized by the council for that purposes.
SCHEDULE 2 Section 21 (5) SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE DISCIPLINARY COMMITTEE AND INVESTIGATING PANEL The disciplinary Committee 1.- (1) The Chief justice of Nigeria shall make rules as to procedure to be followed and the rules of evidence to be observed in proceeding before the disciplinary committee.
(2) The rules shall in particular provide: - (a) for securing that notice of proceedings shall be given at such time, and in such manner as may be specified by the rules, to the person who is the subject of the proceedings; (b) For determining who, in addition to the person who is the subject of the proceedings; (c) For securing that any party to the proceeding shall, if he so requires, be entitled to be heard by the disciplinary committee; (f) for enquiring in a case where it is alleged that the person who is the subject of the proceedings is guilty of infamous conduct in any professional respect, that where the disciplinary committee judges that the allegation has not been proved it shall record a finding that the person is not guilty of such conduct in respect of the matter to which the allegation relates; (g) For publishing in the Gazette of notice of any direction of the disciplinary committee which has taken effect providing that a person’s name shall be struck off a register.
2.
–(1) For the purpose of advising the disciplinary committee on questions of law arising in proceedings before it, there shall in such proceedings be an assessor to the disciplinary committee who shall be appointed by the council on the recommendation of the Attorney General of the Federation and shall be a legal practitioner of not less than seven years standing; (2) The Attorney General of the Federation shall make rules as to the functions of assessors appointed under this paragraph, and, in particular such rules shall contain provisions for securing- (a) That where an assessor advise the disciplinary committee on any question of law as to evidence, procedure or any other matter specified by the rules, he shall do so in the presence of every party or person representing a party to the proceedings who appears threat or, if the advice is tendered while the disciplinary committee is deliberating in private, that every such party or person as aforesaid shall be informed as to what advice the assessor has tendered.
(b) that every party or person as aforesaid shall be informed if in any case the disciplinary committee does not accept the advice of the assessor on such a question as aforesaid.
145 (3) An assessor may be appointed under this paragraph either generally or for any particular proceeding or class of proceedings, and shall hold and vacate office in accordance with the terms of the instrument by which he is appointed.
The Investigating Panel 3.
The question of the investigating panel shall be three.
4.
The investigating panel may, at any of its meetings attended by not less than five members of the investigating panel, make standing orders with respect to the investigating panel and subject to the provisions of any such standing orders, the investigating panel shall sit as a member of the Disciplinary Committee.
Miscellaneous (6) A person ceasing to be a member of the disciplinary committee or the investigating panel shall be eligible for re – appointment as a member of that body.
(7) The disciplinary or investigating panel may act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership, and the proceedings of either body shall not be invalid by any irregularity in appointment of a member of that body or (subject to paragraph 5 of this schedule) by reason of the fact that any person who was not entitled to do so took part in the proceedings of that body.
(8) The disciplinary committee and the investigating panel may each sit in two or more places.
(9).
Any document authorized or required by virtue of this decree to be served on the disciplinary committee or the panel shall be served on the Registrar (10).
Any expenses of the disciplinary committee or the panel shall be defrayed by the council.
Made in Lagos this 27th day of December, 1988.
GENERAL I.B.
BABANGIDA President, Commander-in-Chief Armed Forces, Federal Republic of Nigeria.
146 APPENDIX TWO THE CODE OF ADVERTISING ETHICS, ADVERTISING PRACTITIONERS COUNCIL OF NIGERIA (APCON) – 1993 CONTENTS Responsibilities of APCON What is Advertising?
What is an Advertisement?
Essence of Code The scope of the Code Essence of good Advertising Administration of the code General Principles Presentation and Claims Special Categories of Advertising Guidelines: Alcoholic beverages Tobaco Products Direct media buying Media Owners Political Advertising Medicine and Treatment Food Cosmetics Children Mail Order Advertising Direct Sale Advertising Banking and Financial Services RESPONSIBITIES OF APCON The Advertising Practioners of Nigeria was Established by Decree 55 of 19 88 and charged with the following responsibilties: a) Determining who are advertising practitioners: b) Setting the standards of knowledge required of such practitioners; c) Compiling and maintaining an register d) Regulating and controlling the practice of advertising in all its aspects and ramifications; e) Conducting examinations in the profession; f) Other functions related to the above In pursuance of the above functions, Council has approved this code for the control of advertising in all its ramifications.
As stipulated in the enabling decree, nobody can practice advertising for profit in any form in Nigeria without first being registerd with APCON .
Any contravention of this provision is punishable under the law WHAT IS AN ADVERTISING?
1.
Advertising is a form of communication through media about products, services, or idea for paid for an identifiable sponsor.
2.
A dvertising as profession is a body of experts involved in the art of planning, creating and placing advertisements in the media 147 3.
Advertising Practioners is one who is skilled in planning, creating and placing advertisements in the media.
WHAT IS AN ADVERTISEMENT?
An advertisement is a communication in the media paid for by an identifiable sponsor and directed at a target audience with the aim of imparting information about a product , service, idea or opinion.
Media in this case may include, but is not limited to newspaper, magazine, radio, television, outdoor, cinema and direct mail.
ESSENCE OF THE CODE The Code is designed to establish a common set of principles to guide the professional conduct of all advertising practitioners.
THE SCOPE OF THE CODE T his code is to be applied by all arms of the advertising industry in Nigeria.
For now, these are: AAPN- Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria ADVAN -- Advertisers Association of Nigeria BON - Broadcasting Organisations of Nigeria CAA - Cinema Advertising Association NPAN - Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria ONNA - Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigeria Other Advertisers - Comprising government, individuals, distributors and marketing agents THE ESSENCE OF GOOD ADVERTISING All advertisements in Nigeria should: 1.
Be legal, decent, honest, truthful and should be respectful of Nigeria’s culture.
2.
Be prepared with high sense of social responsibility and should not show disregard for the interests of consumers and the wide Nigerian society 3.
Conform to the principles of fair competition generally accepted in business, and fair comment expected in human communication 4.
Enhance public confidence in advertising ADMINISTRATION OF THE CODE 1.
Complaints against the professional conduct of a member may be made by an individual or a corporate body.
Such complaints may emanate from what is perceived to be (i) Unethical or unprofessional conduct of a member (ii) Offensive or unacceptable advertisement 2.
All complaints should be in writing 3.
Complaints will be treated as appropriated (i) The Advertising Practioners Investigating Panel (APIP) (ii) The Advertising Practitioners Discplinary Committee (APDC) 4.
Decisions of the council on all complaints will be appropriately communicated.
5.
(i) This code applies to the entire contents of an advertisements, including, all words and numbers (spoken or written), visual presentation, music and sound effects 148 (iii) It should be applied in spirit as well as by the 1.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES 1.
Advertisements must not use visual illustrations that offend public taste and decency.In particular, no obscene exposure will be allowed in any advertisement.
2.
Advertisements should not exploit set in obvious or implied contexts by depicting one sex as weaker or subservuent by casting one group as inferior to the other.
3.
The appeal to fear must nit be used without justification in advertisements.
Even when it is appropriate as in health and diseases, caution must be exercised to ensure that decorum is maintained.
4.
Advertisements must not encourage the popularization of negative myths and Superstitious beliefs, even when these are based on aspects of our culture, philosophy and world view.
5.
Advertisements for household or industrial products that need to be handled with care must reflect concern for safety, especially with regard to children and handicapped people.
6.
Testimonials and endorsements must be genuine, and the models used must be suitable for the products, services and ideas they endorse.
7.
Promotions must not only be genuine, but must also appear to be so to the public.
The claims as to prizes won must be verifiable.
No exaggerated claims or winnings are allowed, and as much as possible, ordinary members of the public should be involved in the selection of winners.
8.
Advertisements should contain nothing which is in breac of Nigerian and International copyright laws, nor omit anything which the laws require.
When in doubt about what the existing seek guidance from The Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria.
9.
The rights of individual to privacy must be respected, and proper contractual agreements must be entered into by agencies, advertisers and models.
Pictures and property of individuals should not be used arbitrarily without the prior consent of the rightful owners.
10.
Advertisements for educational institutions, and courses of study must show correct street address (es) where personal calls could be made to ascertain the genuineness of claims contained in the advertisements.
Such advertisements should not contain promises of automatic employment after training 11.
Advertisements for financial services must contain nothing , which is in breach of the laws, not omit anything, which tje law requires, When in doubt, practitioners should seek clarification from the Advertisement Practitioners Council of Nigeria.
12.
Advertisements must not disparage the religious beliefs of the people, nor deceive people, into believing that miracles are common place events.
The propagation of religious faith deserves utmost care.
149 13.
The depiction of violence against people, product or other objects must be avoided, especially in advertisements directed at children and mentally handicapped people who may not be able to distinguish the media world from the real world.
14.
Advertisements for political parties and politicians should not unnecessarily employ negative motives.
While there is a role for ‘’ opposition research’’ and ‘’opposition advertising’’ campaings, the virtues of highlighting a positive outlook should be encouraged.
15.
As much as possible, advertising campaingns should focus on the salient issues that concern the greatest number of voters.
16.
Though the age – old and world – wide practice of individuals, societies, clubs, etc.
Buying media space and/ or air time directly is respected, un ethical direct media buying should not be encouraged.
17.
Media should not grant commission, discounts or other incentives to individuals or groups that engage in unethical and unprofessional conduct in media buying.
2.
PRESENTATION AND CLAIMS 3.
Media: Owing to the different characteristics of various media, it does not necessarily follow that a presentation acceptable in one medium is equally acceptable in another.
1.
SUPERSTITION: No advertisement should be presented in such a manner as to exploit the superstiyious.
2.
Description: No advertisement should contain any description, claims or illustrations which directly or by implication mislead about the product or service advertised; or about its suitability for the purpose recommend.
3.
Appeals to fear: No advertisements should be aimed at playing no people’s fear without justification to induce or stampede them to purchase the product advertised.
4.
Evidence: Advertisers and their advertising agencies should be prepared to produce evidence to substantiate any description, claim or illustration in their advertisements.
5.
Scientific Terms: In advertisements aimed at the general public, scientific terms, and quotations of technical nature should be used only with a proper sense of responsibility to the ordinary members of the public.
6.
Scientific jargon: Calculated irrelevance and scientific jargon should not be used to make claims apper to have a scientific basis they do possess.
7.
Statistics: Statistics with limited validity should not be presented in such a way as to make it appear universally true.
8.
Testimonials and Endorsements: Advertisers and advertising agencies must be prepared to produce evidence in support of any testimonial and any claims therein.
150 9.
Consent: The written consents of models or named people must be obtained by advertisers and agencies before their endorsements of the product or service are presented in anyy advertisements.
10.
Guaranty/ Warranty: ‘’Guarantee’’ or ‘’Warranty’’ should be used with due regard to its legal meaning as it concerns the conditions of sale/ purchase of a product, which must be clearly spelt out.
There is no objection to the use of ‘’Guarantee’’ in a colloqual sense.
11.
Disparagement : No advertisement should contain disparaging references to products or services of other advertisers.
However, substantiated competitive claims inviting comparison of a product with others in the same group shall not necessarily be regarded as disparaging.
12.
Imitation: No advertisement should so closely resemble another advertisement as to mislead or confuse the public.
SPECIAL CATEGORIES OF ADVERTISEMENTS 4.
GUIDELINES: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 1.
Radio and Television No advertisement for alcoholic beverages will be allowed in children’s programmes.
Children, sports men and women will not be used as models.
There must be no religious connotations in advertisements.
2.
Print media For the print media, including direct mail, children, sports men and women and pregnant women must not be used as models.
No advertisement for alcholic beverages will be accepted in children’s publication 3.
Outdoor No displays are allowed near places of worship, schools, motor parks and stadia.
4.
Cinema No advertisement for alcholic beverages will be allowed during children’s shows 5.
Sponsorships Sponsorship of programmes and events are allowed but the content of the advertisements inserted within the programmes must respect all other clause of the code.
GIFT ITEMS Gift items promoting alcholic beverages must not be directed at children and sports men and women.
6.
Content The content of advertisements must not be misleading and must be free of health claims.
Offensive content and insinuations must be eliminated.
There should be no association between drinking, during and/ or riding.
7.
Timing Television commercials for alcholic beverages should ni#ot be aired before 9.45 p.m.. On radio, no commercials will be allowed during children and sport programmes.
8.
Product in use Where the product is shown in actual advertisement, it should only be seen to be sipped and not gulped or glamourised.
9.
Age limits 151 For beer advertisements, models must not be less than 21 years and for spirits, the minimum age is 30 .
All models must not look the specified age.
10.
Vetting All advertisements for alcholic beverages should be cleared with APCON before they are exposed through the media to the public.
5.
GUIDELINES: TOBACCO PRODUCTS 1.
On the packs a.
Language The warnings ( ‘’ The Federal Ministry of Health warns that tobacco smoking is dangerous to Health’’ and ‘’Smokers are liable to die young’’ ) should be in the same language ( English or vernacular) as the other messages or wordings on cigarette packs.
b. Colour The warnings should be printed in black over white background.
c. Type size i.
On cigarette packs, (20xl and 10xl) 6- point type size is recommended.
ii.
The warnings must be positioned at the base of the front of pack.
d. Type face Universe Bold in upper and lower case is recommended.
2.
Press Ads In a full – page press ad, the type size must be 10 points.
For sizes less than full page reduce type size pro – rate but never less than 6 points.
3.
Outdoor a.
The warning in universe Bold type face, mut be boxed, and positioned to the right, at the base of the poster.
b.
The warning must comply with the following dimensions: i. Bulletin board : 30cm x 213 cm ( 12 ins x 7ft) ii.
40- sheet Poster : 20.30 cm x 150cm (8 ins x 5ft) iii.
16 – sheet poster : 15.3cm x 100.2cm (6 ins x3 ¼ ft) iv.
4.
Sheet poster : 8.9cm x 45cm (33 ½ ins x3 ½ ins) v. Crown poster: 7.6cm x 45cm (3 ins x13 ½ ins) 4.
Radio/ TV/ Cinema Commercials On radio, the warning must be voiced and heard clearly.
On television and cinema, the warning must be voiced and clearly visible as part of the commercial.
5.
Direct mail The guidelines for press ads apply to direct mail 6.
Elements/ Models in ads a.
Only adults can be used in tobacco ads.
b.
Pregnant women shoul not be used as models c. Sports men and women should not be used as models.
7.
Timing on radio/ TV/ Cinema a.
Tobacco ads must not be broadcast or screened during religious and/ or children’s programmes.
b.
No tobacco commercial on radio will be broadcast before 6.00 p.m. c. No tobacco commercial will be broadcast before 9.45 p.m screened in the cinema theartre when children make up the larger part of the audience.
d. No tobacco commercial will be screened in thecinema theartre when children make up the larger part of the audience.
152 8.
Sitting of Billbords No billboard for tobacco products will be sited near stadia, schools and/ or hospitals.
9.
Other Tobacco Products All recommendations herein apply to all other tobacco products e.g.
cigars and pipi tobacco.
6.
GUIDELINES: DIRECT MEDIA BUYING 1.
APCON does not approve of direct media buying and media brokerage service when these are done contrary to the ethics of the advertising profession.
2.
Direct media buying and / or media brokerage service must adequately protect the interests of the advertiser, the medium owner, the advertising agency, and the consumer.
These interests concern the quality of service and economy of rates to the advertiser , and consumer on one hand; as well as the income of the medium owner and the advertising agency on the oyher hand.
3.
In furtherance of the need to sanitize the practice of advertising in Nigeria, the following sectoral procedures should be observed henceforth: a.
Only recognised AAPN member agencies will practise as professional advertising agencies, and they only will be entitled to the traditional agency commissions.
b.
Only recognized OAAN member companies will practise the advertising profession as it relates to the outdoor medium.
c. All AAPN agencies shoul, in their professional practice, use only media organizations that belong to the following sectoral bodies: • Broadcasting Organizations of Nigeria (BON) • Cinema Advertising Association (CAA) • Newspaper Proprietors Association of Nigeria(OAAN) 4.
AAPN, ADVAN.
BON.
CAA, NPAN and OAAN must take effective steps to monitor the activities of their respective corporate members and where necessary adhere strictly to the guidelines and codes of ethics of the advertising profession.
5.
APCON states categorically that advertising agencies, media owners and advertiers or clients inter – relate strictly and legally as ‘’Principals’’ with each keeping to its area of specialization.
The media owners, in the sectoral groups of BON, CAA, NPAN and OAAN are expected to blank – list brands on whoe advertising campaigns an advertising agency has overstretched its credit limits.
Such black – listing is intended to ensure that advertising agencies promptly meet their financial obligations to media owners.
6.
Where an advertisers does not retain the services of an advertising agency, the advertiser must ensure that its media purchase orders and relevant advertising materials are duly endorsed by an advertising practitioner, in the advertiser’s employment, who must quote his or her registration number with APCON.
7.
All media owners will be responsible for ensuring that these guidelines are strictly adhered to.
8.
APCON recognizes that there will always be individuals, societies, clubs, er#tc, whose advertising requirements may not justify the need for the services of an ad.
Agency.
Such categories of advertisers may still buy media directly.
However, the onus to ensure strict adherence to the ethics and codes of advertising practice will lie on the advertising practitioners within media organizations.
7.
GUIDELINES: MEDIA OWNERS 153 1.
Rate: All media rates should adequately published for the information of advertisers, agencies and the general public.
2.
Rate changes : Media rate changes should be adequately notified to advertisers, agencies and the general public and the period of notice must not be less than 90 days prior to the change.
3.
Rate cards : All conditions relating to the accptance of advertisements should be clearly stated in the media rate cards.
Cash discount, rebates and similar incentives should be clearly stated in media rate cards.
4.
Equal opportunities : Equal oppurtunities to buy media space or air time should be given to all agencies and advertisers.
The principle of ‘’first come, first served’’ should be adhered to at all times.
5.
Commissions Agency commissions should be extended only to members of AAPN.
8.
Competitive Ads Placing of ads for competitive brands nest to each other should be avoided as much as possible to ensure fair competition.
9.
Black – Listing Before the media black – list a brand on which an outstanding debt has not been paid, due notice should be served on the agency and the advertiser concerned.
10.
Offensive Advertisement It is the responsibility of all media owners to ensure that no advertisement in their media offends against any part of the code or the law.
10 Endorsement Every advertising material and media purchase order (except for personal paid announcements) must be duly endorsed by an APCON member not below the grade of FULL MEMBER.
11 Audience Interest Commercial breaks on radio, television and cinema should show regard for the interest of the audience.
12 Outdoor regulations All outdoor boards and structures should be sited, and maintained, with due regard for the local bye-laws, states ales and industry guidelines.
13 Outdoors and Environment All outdoor boards and structures should be sited, and maintained with adequate consideration for the safety of the public and the protection of the environment.
14 Sectoral Guideline All other guidelines, outide this Code, adopted by the sectoral groups: AAPN, ADVAN, BON, CAA, NPAN,OAAN must be in consonance with the spirit and letter of this code.
15 Product Registration Media houses should not accept for publication broadcast any advertisements for foods, cosmetics, medicines any devices, unless there is evidence that such products have been registered by the National Agency for Food, Drug Administration and Control (NAFDAC) as required by law.
6.
Guidelines : Political Advertiing 1.
Truth: Political ads shall not be deceptive or misleading in word, photograph, film or sound.
154 2.
False Claims : Political advertisements shall be issue-oriented and devoid of abusive statements of references.
Furthermore, they should not employ fake, distorted or unsubstantiated claims or misrepresentations.
3.
Advertiser’s identity : Every political advertisement must clearly identify the sponsoring organization or individual, visually and or orally.
Anonymous sponsors like ‘’ Committee of friends’’ musst be avoided.
4.
Sectional interest : Political advertisements shall not explicitly or implicitly exploit ethnicity, religion or any other sectional interest not strictly related to political issues under discussion.
5.
Agency Conduct : Agencies engaged in political advertising must not produce or use any material that is capable of bringing the advertising profession into disrepute.
6.
Equal Oppurtunity : Political candidates must be given equal oppurtunity to buy space and / or air time ‘’ Equal oppurtunity’’ means that each competing candidate must have rqual access to comparable space and/ or air time, generally on the basis of first come first served.
7.
Compliance : Media houses, agencies, political parties politicians and their agents must enure that political advertisements are in cononance with the provisions of the code.
When in doubt, they should seek immediate clarification from APCON S ecretariat.
8.
GUIDELINES: MEDICINE AND TREATMENT 1.
Legal Provisions: In accordance with the provisions of section 2 of the food and drugs act of 1974 ( formally f.D.D.
1974) no person shall advertise to the general public in Nigeria any drug as a treatment, prevention or cure for any of the diseases, disorders or abnormal physical state specified in schedulem 1 of the said Decree.
2.
O.T.C.
Products No person shall advertie any over- the counter drug to the general public in Nigeria unless the drug has been duly registered by the Federal Ministry of Health.
3.
Cure: No advertisement should contain a vcontain a claim to cure any ailment or symptom of il-l health , nor should any advertisement contain a word or expression or impression used in in such a form as to mean in the positive sense the expiration of any ailment, ill-ness or disease.
4.
Illness, Conditions, etc.
Requiring Proper Medical Attention: No advertisment to the general public is allowed for a medical , product, or device relating to the treatment of diseases, complaints, conditions or symptoms, which rightly should receive the attention of a registered medical practitioner.
5.
Conmpetitions: No advertisement should contain any prize offers or similar promotional schemes.
6.
Diagnosis, Prescription or Treatment by Correspondence: No advertisement should contain any offer to dignose, advise, prescribe or treat by correspondence.
7.
Appeals to fear, Exploitation of Credulity: No advertisement should cause those who see it unwarranted anxiety lest they are suffering (or may without responding to the advertiser’s offer, suffer ) from any disease or consumption or use of the advertised product is necessary for the maintainance of physical or mental capacities, whether by people in general or by any particular group.
8.
Prevention of Ageing : No advertisement should contain any claim to provide rejuvenation, that is to prevent, retard or reverse the physiological changes and degenerative conditions brought about by, or associated with, increasing age.
9.
Encouragement of Excess: No advertisement should in any way encourage indiscriminate, unnecessary or excessive use of products within the scope of this section.
10.
Refund of Money: No advertisement for any medicinal product should contain an offer to refund money to dissatisfied consumers.
155 11.
Exaggerated Copy: No advertisement should contain copy which is exaggerated by reason of the improper use of words, phrases or methods of presentation, e.g., the use of the words ‘’Magic’’, ‘’Magical’’, ‘’Miracle’’, Miraculous’’ etc.
12.
Sexual weakness, Loss of Virility: No advertisement should claim that the product, medicine, or treatment advertise will promote sexual virility or be effective in treating sexual weakness, or habits associated with sexual excess indulgence, or any ailment, illness or disease associated with these habits.
13.
Tonic: The use of this expression in advertisement should not imply that the product or medicine can be used in the treatment of sexual weakness.
14.
Testimonial : No advertisement should contain any testimonial, other than the actual views of the writer, and where a medical doctor is used, he should be a registered medical practitioners in Nigeria.
15.
Hypnosis: No advertisement should contain any offer to diagnose or treat complaints or conditions by hypnosis.
16.
Products Offered for Baldness: No advertisement should claim or imply that the product, medicine or treatment advertised will do more than arrest the loss of hair, but claims to restore lost hair may be permitted provided that they refer only to cases of temporary baldness.
17.
Slimming, Weight Loss or Figure Control: No advertisement should offer any product or treatment for slimmming, weight reduction or limitation, or figure control, if the taking or using of the product or following the course of treatment is likely to lead to harmful effects.
All side effects must be clearly stated in the advertisement.
18.
Appliance for Self-Treatment: Advertisement for appliances or devices sold for self treatment of any disease, disability, or physical condition should not make claims for effectiveness, safety, permanence of results or ease or painless in use, unless such claims are based on scientific proofs.
9.GUIDELINES FOOD (including non-alcoholic beverages) 1.
Nutrition: Any claim as to the nutritious value of any product must be verifiable, scientifically.
2.
Social status: No advertisement should present any product, in this category, as responsible for the social status of the consumer in the society.
3.
Decency: No advertisement should encourage lack of decency in the use of the product.
4.
Health claims: No advertisement should present to the audience that the consumer’s good health or well-being is totally dependent on the use of the product.
5.
Ingredients: Claims as to ingredients that make up the product must be verifiable, scientifically.
10.
GUIDELINES: COSMETICS 1.
Biological Changes: Any claim pertaining to any biological change in the body of the consumer must be capable of being proved, scientifically.
2.
Skin Bleaching: The claim of the efficacy of any cosmetics to bleach the skin has been proved to be harmful to people’s health.
3.
Chemical Composition: Claims as to the chemical composition of the product must be verifiable scientifically.
156 11.
GUIDELINES: CHILDREN 1.
Inducements: Advertisements should not induce children to unduly pressurize their parents, guardians or any other adults to forced purchase of the advertised products.
2.
Inferiority Appeal: Appeals directed at children not make them feel inferior or less likeable than other children who buy or use the advertised product.
3.
Exaggeration: No exaggeration of the use of advertised product or situations should be depicted in advertisements directed at children.
4.
Price: The price of the advertised product should be indicated whenever possible.
5.
Safety: Children should not be induced to copy behaviors or practices, which may be unsafe for them.
6.
Highway Code: Street scenes depicted in advertisements should show adequate regard for the Highway Code and safety.
7.
Unsafe Situations: i.
Children should not be depicted in dangerous situations, such as walking unguarded stairways or leaning over balconies.
ii.
Small children should not be shown attempting to pick items far above their heads that may lead to accidents.
8.
Medicaments: All medicines, etc should be kept out of the reach of children; and if shown in use must be so demonstrated with an adult supervision.
9.
Accident: Children should not be shown using items that could easily lead to accidental shock, fire or burns.
Such items include cooking gas, matches, kerosine, petrol, electrical appliances etc.
10.
Vehicle: Children should not be shown driving cars or any other motorized machines 11.
Credulity: All advertisements directed at children must promote their physical and moral well-being and should not exploit their nature credulity.
12.
GUIDELINES MAIL ORDER ADVERTISING 1.
Stock: Advertisements should ensure that they have adequate stock of the products to satisfy the demand expected to be generated for the advertised products.
Consumers who show reasonable causes for dissatisfaction must be granted full refund ofv their money.
All advertisements hould clearly indicate a promise to this effect.
2.
Sample: Media owners may demand from advertiser, for a demonstration or sample of the advertised products and the advertiser will be required to oblige.
3.
Address: All advertisements must clearly state the name and full address of the advertiser.
4.
Display: At the advertiser,s premise, the advertised products should be displayed during normal business hours for members of the public to see.
5.
Conformity: All products must conform to the description contained in the advertisements.
13.
GUIDELINES: DIRECT SALE ADVERTISING Preamble Advertisement in this category are understood to mean that products so advertised are to be sold to the buyer at his home.
1.
Statement: This selling arrangement should be clearly stated in the advertisement.
157 2.
Substitution: Interested consumers who respond to the advertisements must be offered the products advertised.
No substitutes should be delivered without the clear conent of the buyers.
3.
Availability: The advertiements must clearly indicate the availability of stock of the advertised products.
14.
GUIDELINES : BANKING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES Preamble These regulations apply to all advertiements for commercial and merchant banking, mortgage financial, general financing and insurance services.
The law currently demands that all advertisements for banking and financial services must be approved by the Central Bank of Nigeria before the media exposure of such advertisements.
1.
General: All advertisements for banking and financial service should, in addition to other provisions of this code,be prepared with care to ensure that members of the public fully appreciate any commitments into which they may enter as a result of responding to the advertisements.
Advertisers should note that the complexities of finance are beyond the understanding of the general public and should therefore not take advantages of this situation.
2.
Address: All advertisements in newspapers, magazines and other print media 9except outdoor) should bear at least the corporate stree address of the advertiser.
3.
Deposits and Interest rates: Where rates of interest are stated, the rate per annum should be clearly indicated.
4.
Tenor: Where deposits are solicited for a minimum period, the tenor of such deposits with the rates payable should be clearly stated.
5.
Naira I.
The reproduction of the naira in advertisements in the same size as the real note in colour or black and white should be avoided.
II.
Coins may be reproduced in print but cut-out or die-out reproduction in any material should be avoided.
III.
Advertisements that feature naira notes or coins must encourage proper handling.
6.
Coded accounts: no advertisement should encourage or imply that coded (anonymous) bank accounts can be operated in Nigeria unless permitted by law.
7.
Exchange rates: where foreign currencies are qouted, the current naira equivalents should be indicated.
VETTING GUIDELINES OF THE ADVERTISING STANDARDS PANEL OF THE APCON Pursuant to the provisions Decree 93 of 1992 Section 21A, the following are issued as guidelines for the vetting of advertisements/commercials for all categories of products and services.
The Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) reiterates its commitment to ensuring that only legal, honest, truthful and decent advertisements are produced and placed in the media.
The Council has approved the following procedure for vetting of advertisements are produced and placed in the media.
The Council has approved the following procedure for vetting of advertisements and commercials: i) A formal application for vetting should be sent to the Chairman, Advertising Standards Panel, APCON Secretariat, 3, William Carew Street, Anthony Village, Lagos.
Tel.01 - 4970842,4936317. ii) Only Rregistered Practitioners not below the rank of Associate Membership category of APCON can send materials for vetting.
158 iii) All such applications must be duly signed by the Registered Practitioner who shall be expected to qoute his/her appropriate APCON Registration Number.
(See Application Form 001 & 002).
iv) Evidence must be produced to show that the product has been duly registered with appropriate government agency.
For example, for foods, drinks, drugs, cosmetics.
Such evidence will be a Product Registration Certificate issued by the National Registration Certificate issued by the National Agency for Food and Drugs Administration and Control (NAFDAC).
( See Requirements for Product Registration).
v) Two samples of the product being advertised should accompany such application.
vi) Materials for vetting should include the following: Television Commercials • To avoid unnecessary cost, applicants are advised to forward script s/storyboards for approval before production.
• Final production on VHS PAL system must be submitted for final approval before being creened Radio Commercials • Scripts or scripts/recording.
• Final recording mut be approved before being aired.
Print/ Outdoor Advertisements • Professionally produced copy/layout only Vetting Procedure (a) Applications are made by the advertising agency seeking clearance to advertise products/services.
(b) Such applications with all relevant documents are sent to the Chairman, Advertising Standards Pnel, APCON, who duly acknowledges receipt of same.
(c) The Advertising Standards Panel meets once every month.
Turn- around time, therefore, for an application should be withing one month.
(d) However, a request may be made for an emergency vetting of advertisements/commercials.
Such request may be honoured provided the applicant takes full responsibility for such ad hoc meeting.
(e) A formal letter notifying the applicant of the status of the application will be sent.
(f) No advertisement/commercial should be exposed UNLESS a written approval signed by the Chairman , Advertising Standards panel, detailing such an approval has been received by the applicant.
(g) Where requests duly made to advertise have been refused or denied an applicant, such an applicant should feel free to appeal to the governing council of APCON.
Such an appeal should be addressed to the Registrar, APCON, stating ground (s) of appeal.
(h) Approval to advertise could be revoked by APCON, acting through its Advertising Standards Panel, at any time after it has been granted, it is in the opinion of the Advertising Standards Panel or APCON Council, conditions for such an approval have been violated, alerted or changed in any way or if new facts emerge to affect the validity of clear authenticity or earlier data/claims submitted by the applicant.
(i) All approvals will be coded and it shall be so reflected on all advertising materials, especially print/television.
Vetting fees The approved fees are as follows: TV Commercial: Five Thousand Naira(N5,000.00) only per commercial Radio Commercial: Three Thousand Naira (N3,000.00) only per commercial 159 Print/Outdoor Advertisement: Two Thousand Naoira (N2,000.00) only per advertisement Membership The Advertising Standards Panel (ASP) was inaugurated on March 24, 1994, pursuant to the empowernment of Decree 55 of 1988 which established APCON and was duly amended by Decree 93 of 1992.
The Advertising Standards Panel, a statutory committee of APCON , has representatives from: • The Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria (APCON) • The Association of Advertising Practitioners of Nigeria (AAPN) • The Broadcasting Organization of Nigeria (BON) • The Advertiers Association of Nigeria (ADVAN) • Newspaper Proprietor Association Of Nigeria ( NPAN) • National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and Control ( NAFDAC) • Consumer Education and Protection Council of Nigeria (CEPCON) • Outdoor Advertising Association of Nigeria (OAAN) • Financial Institution/ Central Bank of Nigeria Provision has also been made to co-opt person (s) from relevant professional groups, or an individual merit, whose knowledge could be determined as relevant to functions of the panel.
Monitoring APCON has a monitoring unit within the secretariat.
In addition, members of the Advertising Standards Panel and Council members will provide back-up monitoring service to ensure that advertising agencies, manufacturers and media organisations conform a the guidelines and other various laws of the land as well as codes of standards and practice relevant to the business operation.
Media organisations are advised to adhere to scheduling restrictions and co-operate by not accepting advertisements/commercials that have not been duly vetted and approved by the Advertising Standards Panel.
Such an approval would be in the form of a Letter of Approval or Certificate duly signed by the Chairman of Advertising Standards Panel (ASP).
For further information, please, call on the Secretary, Advertising Standards Panel (ASP), APCON Secretariat,3, William Carew Street, Anthony Village, Lagos.
Tel.
01- 4970842,4936317.
Issued by : Advertising Standards Panel, APCON 3, Williams Carew Street, Off Sylvia Crescent, Anthony Village, Lagos.
160
