 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC 334 COURSE TITLE: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 1 | P a ge  COURSE GUIDE MAC334: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Course Team Course Writer: Dr. Nnamdi Tobechukwu Ekeanyanwu Covenant University, Ota, Ogun State 08069395473 nnamdiekeanyanwu@yahoo.cpom Content Editor: Joseph Bel-Molokwu Oshiroga Estate, Igbo-Oluwo, Ikorodu, Lagos 08033030017 beljoseph@yahoo.com Course Coordinator: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com Programme Leader: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com 2 | P a ge  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2006 First Printed 2006 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria 3 | P a ge  TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ………………………………………………………………………5 What You Will Learn in this Course………………….
…………………………6 Course Aims …………………………………………………………...................6 Course Objectives..………………………………………………………….........6 Working Through this Course …………………………………………………...7 Course Materials and Structure………………………………………..................7 Study Units …………………………………………………………………........8 Textbooks and References …………………………………………………........10 Assessment File……………………………………………………….................10 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs)…………………………………………….11 Final Examination and Grading ………………………………………………....11 Course Marking Scheme………………………………………………………....11 Presentation Schedule and Course Overview………………………………........12 How to Get the Most from this Course…..............................................................14 Tutors and Tutorials …………………………………………………..................14 Summary ………………………………………………………………………...15 4 | P a ge  INTRODUCTION This is MAC 334: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS (IPR), designed to train students to become knowledgeable about issues and concepts in Global Public Relations.
Relations among publics, according to Culbertson and Chen (1996), have become more complex, fragile, and often hostile in recent years due to varied factors ranging from weapons of mass destruction to regional alliances, nationalism, and the internet.
The world has also become smaller, thanks to many of the same factors enumerated above.
We are further said to be in a flat world: a global village where today’s neighbours are no longer inhibited or separated by the traditional boundaries our fore fathers grappled with.
We are in a New World of possibilities defined by the continued advances and sophistication in Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs), Information Technology (IT), New Communication Technologies (NCTs), New Communication Age (NCA) or, New Media Technologies.
These advances and global changes do not occur in technologies alone; they also occur in our socio-cultural cum economic environments.
So, we now have boundless markets and living in a cyberspace amongst global citizens practicing a global culture!
This situation makes it imperative that people from other cultures understand one another and others better because interdependency and interrelationships are now inevitable.
This also necessitates the study and application of International Public Relations principles in our daily cultural ethics.
International Public Relations (IPR) is a two-credit-unit course with 29 Study Units.
This Course Guide is for distance learners enrolled in the B.A.
Mass Communication programme of the National Open University of Nigeria.
The Course Guide provides you with the necessary information about the contents, process, and materials with which to read and understand the subject matter of the course.
The guide also specifies the amount of time you are required to spend on each unit of the assignments.
It also gives you some guidance on your Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs).
You are advised to attend the tutorial classes to discuss your difficulties with your tutorial facilitators.
I strongly recommend that you go through this Course Guide and complete the feedback form at the end before you begin your study of the course.
The feedback form must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator along with your first assignment.
This guide also provides answers to several of your questions in case you are still in doubt of anything at this stage of your study.
However, do not hesitate to contact your study centre if you have further questions.
It is my honest expectation that at the end of this course, you will have become familiar with the concepts, programs, strategies and tactics of International Public Relations and how to apply such knowledge in dealing with issues of international relations and the public relations demands of transnational corporations.
5 | P a ge WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The course aims at preparing the students to appreciate the uniqueness of International Public Relations - that is looking at public relations from a global perspective.
The course also teaches the students how to make use of International Public Relations programs, tactics and strategies to achieve specified objectives for corporate organizations, national governments, international organizations and institutions.
In general terms, this course is an overview of the relevance of public relations for solving the peculiar problems of multinational corporations, international businesses, governments and personalities.
The course also examines relevant case studies and research reports in this area of study with the aim of assessing the general application of international relations and how it impacts international public relations.
In specific terms, this course examines the globalization of public relations and the consequences in this century.
To achieve the latter, there is a brief comparative overview of Public Relations in some selected countries and regions of the world to technically situate Public Relations in the international context.
COURSE AIMS This course aims at preparing the students to appreciate the uniqueness of International Public Relations as a vital discipline and strategy for increasing our level of tolerance, cooperation, and mutual understanding among people with different basic beliefs and ways of thinking.
The primary aim is to build relationships that do not currently exist as well as manage and soften those that are now hostile and/or based on misunderstanding.
This course is therefore an overview of the relevance of public relations for solving the peculiar problems of multinational corporations, international businesses, governments and personalities.
The course also examines relevant case studies and research reports in this area of study with the aim of assessing the general application of international relations and how it impacts international public relations.
The course also examines the globalization of public relations and the consequences in this century.
There is also a brief comparative overview of Public Relations in some selected regions of the world.
COURSE OBJECTIVES At the end of this course, the student who diligently applies himself or herself to the demands of the course should be able to do the following: 1.
Define and discuss the rationale behind the study of International Public Relations.
2.
List and discuss the similarities and differences between Domestic Public Relations and International Public Relations 3.
Identify some pertinent interdisciplinary theoretical foundations of International Public Relations 6 | P a ge 4.
Identify and describe International Public Relations’ Strategies and Programmes.
5.
Discuss transnational corporate ethical perspectives as well as other ethical issues confronting Public Relations and International Public Relations.
6.
Discuss how to apply International Public Relations’ Strategies and Programmes to image challenges facing corporate organizations, national governments and international institutions.
7.
Identify and discuss the opportunities and challenges facing International Public Relations.
8.
Identify and discuss what makes for effective Public Relations in a multinational organization.
9.
Identify and discuss emerging issues in the globalization of Public Relations as they affect the current global matrix.
10.
Identify and explain the connecting lines as well as points of departure between a country’s Public Relations practices and processes with another WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE To make the most out of this course, you are expected to read the Study Units and other materials provided by NOUN.
Each Unit contains Self Assessment Exercise (SAE).
At certain points in the module, you are required to carry out the assignments, which will be marked by assessors appointed by the University.
Remember, all components of this course contribute to your all-round success.
So, take your time to read and study the Study Units very well in order to successfully derive the best from the course.
I will also advise you to make concerted efforts towards locating the recommended texts listed hereunder and READ them.
This course material will never take the place of those recommended literature for further readings.
They will help equip you for an all-round experience and exposure in the exciting world of International Public Relations.
COURSE MATERIALS AND STRUCTURE The major materials you will need for this course are: 1.
A Course Guide 2.
Study units that have been broken down to 29 3.
Self Assessment Exercise (SAE) file 4.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) file 5.
Relevant textbooks, including the ones listed under each unit 7 | P a ge In addition to the materials listed above, you are advised to read through this Course Guide to familiarize yourself with the structure of the course; the Study Units as well as attempt all SAEs and TMAs.
You are also expected to consult most of the recommended resource materials for further reading.
Each unit contains Self Assessment Exercises, and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there is a final examination.
The course should take you about 60 hours to complete.
You have to draw up your own timetable and allocate time to complete each Study Unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.
All the components of the course are listed and explained below.
STUDY UNITS This course is structured in an seven-module compact with 29 units thus: MODULE 1: GENERAL INTRODUCTION Unit 1: Definitions of Public Relations and International Public Relations Unit 2: Similarities and Differences between Domestic Public Relations (DPR) and International Public Relations (IPR) Unit 3: International Public Relations Publics Unit 4: Overview of Public Relations MODULE 2: THE BASICS Unit 1: Roles and Objectives of International Public Relations Unit 2: International Public Relations Strategies and Tactics Unit 3: Overview of International Relations Unit 4: Theoretical Issues for International Public Relations MODULE 3: CORPORATE ADVERTISING AND MULTINATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1: Introduction to Corporate Advertising Unit 2: Types of Corporate Advertising and How Multinational Corporations Use them for International Public Relations Unit 3: Advantages and Disadvantages of Corporate Advertising Unit 4: Measuring the Effectiveness of Corporate Advertising MODULE 4: GLOBALIZATION OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1: Effective Public Relations in Multinational Organizations Unit 2: Opportunities of International Public Relations for the 21st Century Unit 3: Challenges of International Public Relations for the 21st Century Unit 4: Paths to the Theory and the Practice of International Public Relations 8 | P a ge  Unit 5: International Public Relations and Pedagogy MODULE 5: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS Unit 1: The Development of Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 2: The Development of Public Relations in the United States Unit 3: European Public Relations Unit 4: Middle East Public Relations MODULE 6: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS: ETHICAL ISSUES Unit 1: Ethics in Public Relations Unit 2: International Public Relations Codes of Ethics Unit 3: Transnational Corporate Ethical Responsibilities Unit 4: Relativism versus Universalism MODULE 7: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS AND NIGERIA’S IMAGE IN FOREIGN CONTRIES: A CASE STUDY Unit 1: What Led to Nigeria’s Image Problems?
Unit 2: How Did this Image Become an International Issue?
Unit 3: Efforts of Past Nigeria’s Government and Eminent Citizens at Enhancing Nigeria Global Image Unit 4: How to Apply International Public Relations Strategies in Dealing with Nigeria’s Image Problems TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCES 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 9 | P a ge 5.
Grunig, J. E.
(ed.)
(1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 6.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 7.
Skinner, J.
& Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 8.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(eds) (1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
9.
Nwosu, I.E.
(ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
10.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 11.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 12.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 13.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 14.
Okoye, Innocent (2008).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: Unilag 15.
Ewelukwa, B.N.
(2004).
Introduction to Nigerian Press Law.
Onitsha: Maranatha Press Ltd 16.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill ASSESSMENT FILE An Assessment File and a marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file, you will find details of the assignments you need to do and submit to your assigned tutor for grading.
The Assessment for this course is divided into two 10 | P a ge namely: TMAs and the Written Examination.
Both of them will total 100% at the end of the course.
The assignments should be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the lifelines stated in the presentation schedule and the Assessment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score while the Written Examination will account for the remaining 70%.
TUTOR MARKED ASSSIGNMENTS (TMAs) You will have to submit about 29 TMAs.
This means one TMA for each of the Units of the entire Course Structure.
You are required to attempt all the questions, and you will be assessed on all of them but the best six performances from the (TMAs) will be used for your 30% grading.
This means each will amount to about 4% or returned to 4% after grading.
When you have completed each assignment, together with a Tutor Marked Assignment form, send it to your tutor.
Make sure each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the lifeline for submissions.
If, for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor with a valid explanation on why you need an extension.
Failure to do this may result in unpleasant and avoidable situations.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING Since this is a two-unit course, the final examination will be a test of two hours.
All areas of the course will be examined.
It is in your own interest to read the entire units all over again before your written examination.
As earlier mentioned, the final examination will attract 70% of the total course grade.
This should not be taken for granted.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflects the kinds of SAEs and TMAs you have previously dealt with in the course.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down.
S/N ASSESSMENT MARKS 1.
The best in Module One (Assignments 1-4) 4% 2.
The best in Module Two (Assignments 5-8) 4% 3.
The best in Module Three (Assignments 9-12) 4% 4.
The best in Module Four (Assignments 13-17) 5% 5.
The best in Module Five (Assignments 18-21) 4% 6.
The best in Module Six (Assignments 22-25) 4% 7.
The Best in Module Eight (Assignments 26-29) 5% 11 | P a ge 8.
Total for TMAs 30% 9.
Final Written Examination 70% 10.
Overall Total 100% COURSE OVERVIEW AND PRESENTATION SCHEDULE Module Unit Title Of Module Weeks Assessment Activity ONE 1-5 GENERAL INTRODUCTION Unit 1 Definitions of Public Relations and Week 1 Assignment International Public Relations 1 Unit 2 Similarities and Differences between Week 1 Assignment Domestic Public Relations (DPR) and 2 International Public Relations (IPR) Unit 3 International Public Relations Publics Week 2 Assignment 3 Unit 4 Overview of Public Relations Week 2 Assignment 4 TWO 1-4 THE BASICS Unit 1 Roles and Objectives of International Public Week 2 Assignment Relations 1 Unit 2 International Public Relations Strategies and Week 3 Assignment Tactics 2 Unit 3 Overview of International Relations Week 3 Assignment 3 Unit 4 Theoretical Issues for International Public Week 3 Assignment Relations 4 THREE 1-4 CORPORATE ADVERTISING AND MULTINATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1 Introduction to Corporate Advertising Week 4 Assignment 1 Unit 2 Types of Corporate Advertising and How Week 4 Assignment Multinational Corporations Use Them for 3 IPR Unit 3 Advantages and Disadvantages of Corporate Week 4 Assignment Advertising 4 Unit 4 Measuring the Effectiveness of Corporate Week 5 Assignment Advertising 5 FOUR 1-5 GLOBALIZATION OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1 Effective Public Relations in Multinational Week 5 Assignment Organizations 1 Unit 2 Opportunities of International Public Week 5 Assignment 12 | P a ge Relations for the 21st Century 2 Unit 3 Challenges of International Public Relations Week 6 Assignment for the 21st Century 3 Unit 4 Paths to the Theory and the Practice of Week 6 Assignment International Public Relations 4 Unit 5 International Public Relations and Week 6 Assignment 5 Pedagogy FIVE 1-4 INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS Unit 1 The Development of Public Relations in Week 7 Assignment Nigeria 1 Unit 2 The Development of Public Relations in the Week 7 Assignment United States 2 Unit 3 European Public Relations Week 8 Assignment 3 Unit 4 Middle East Public Relations Week 8 Assignment 4 SIX 1-4 INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS: ETHICAL ISSUES Unit 1 Ethics in Public Relations Week 9 Assignment 1 Unit 2 International Public Relations Codes of Week 9 Assignment Ethics 2 Unit 3 Transnational Corporate Ethical Week Assignment Responsibilities 10 3 Unit 4 Relativism versus Universalism Week Assignment 10 4 EIGHT 1-4 INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS AND NIGERIA’S IMAGE IN FOREIGN CONTRIES: A CASE STUDY Unit 1 What Led to Nigeria’s Image Problems?
Week Assignment 11 1 Unit 2 How Did this Image Become an International Week Assignment Issue?
11 2 Unit 3 Efforts of Past Nigeria’s Government and Week Assignment Eminent Citizens at Enhancing Nigeria 12 3 Global Image How to Apply International Public Relations Week Assignment Unit 4 Strategies in Dealing with Nigeria’s Image 13 4 Problems Revision 2 weeks Written Examination 1 Week Total Weeks 16 Wks 13 | P a ge HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE The Open University system is a unique system whereby the study units replace the traditional university lectures.
You will therefore be required to study the units on your own.
However, you may arrange to meet with your assigned tutor for tutorials on an optional basis at the study centre.
You can also locate like-minded course mates and have interactive sessions with them.
You will have assignments at the end of every Module and Units.
This is not different from the traditional university system where a Lecturer might give you some reading to do.
The study units will tell you where to read, and which are your text materials or recommended books.
You have been given enough in this course so none of you will have any excuse not to do well in this course.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of Learning Objectives.
These objectives will help you assess your comprehensive of the unit per time.
They are also meant to guide your study so as to give you an all round learning experience.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your recommended books or from a particular reading section.
In summary, this structure is designed to bring out the best in a distance learner.
However, you may still want to interact with a tutor over controversial, confusing or any other topic or issue you are finding it difficult to comprehend yourself.
NOUN has made adequate arrangement to see that this is resolved in the interest of the student.
This is the major reason why you must patronize the Study Centres.
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS The NOUN Headquarters will provide you with information relating to the Tutor and tutorials at the appropriate time.
Your Tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close academic watch on your progress as well as assist you resolve any difficulties you might encounter from time to time.
You must therefore take your TMAs to the Study Centre well before the due date (at least two working days before the expiration of the lifeline).
The TMAs will be marked by your Tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
In the NOUN guidelines, you are expected to contact your Tutor if you need help over the following issues: 1.
You do not understand any part of the Study Units or the assigned readings; 2.
You have difficulty with the exercises and assignments; 14 | P a ge 3.
You have a question or a problem with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
4.
You have a question or problem with any part of the Course Structure which you think has not been adequately discussed in this Course Guide.
At NOUN, it is also expected (in your own interest) that you make concerted efforts to attend tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your Tutor and ask pending and pertinent questions which are answered immediately.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study during the tutorial sessions.
To gain the maximum benefit from the course tutorials, it is advised you prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from being an active participant in the discussions at the Study Centres or during tutorial sessions.
SUMMARY This course aims at preparing the students to appreciate the uniqueness of International Public Relations as a vital discipline and strategy for increasing our level of tolerance, cooperation, and mutual understanding among people with different basic beliefs, background, and values.
The primary aim is to build relationships that do not currently exist as well as manage and soften those that are now hostile and/or based on misunderstanding.
It is also aimed at maintaining a positive and cordial image amongst members of a given public.
This course is therefore an overview of the relevance of public relations for solving the peculiar problems of multinational corporations, international businesses, governments and personalities.
We wish you success with the course and hope that at the end of this course, you will be able advice interested parties on how to maintain healthy corporate image, how to live peacefully with all men, and how to manage your diverse global relationships.
15 | P a ge  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: MAC334 COURSE TITLE: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 16 | P a ge  MAIN COURSE MAC334 INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Course Team Course Writer: Dr. Nnamdi Tobechukwu Ekeanyanwu Covenant University, Ota, Ogun State 08069395473 nnamdiekeanyanwu@yahoo.cpom Content Editor: Joseph Bel-Molokwu Oshiroga Estate, Igbo-Oluwo, Ikorodu, Lagos 08033030017 beljoseph@yahoo.com Course Coordinator: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com Programme Leader: Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria 08069395473 aliedeom@yahoo.com 17 | P a ge  National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annexe 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria, 2012 First Printed 2012 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria 18 | P a ge  CONTENTS PAGE MODULE 1: GENERAL INTRODUCTION………………………………20-43 Unit 1: Definitions of Public Relations and International Public Relations Unit 2: Similarities and Differences between Domestic Public Relations (DPR) and International Public Relations (IPR) Unit 3: International Public Relations Publics Unit 4: Overview of Public Relations MODULE 2: THE BASICS………………………………………………….44-71 Unit 1: Roles and Objectives of International Public Relations Unit 2: International Public Relations Strategies and Tactics Unit 3: Overview of International Relations Unit 4: Theoretical Issues for International Public Relations MODULE 3: CORPORATE ADVERTISING AND MULTINATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS………………………………………..72-86 Unit 1: Introduction to Corporate Advertising Unit 2: Types of Corporate Advertising and How Multinational Corporations Use them for International Public Relations Unit 3: Advantages and Disadvantages of Corporate Advertising Unit 4: Measuring the Effectiveness of Corporate Advertising MODULE 4: GLOBALIZATION OF PUBLIC RELATIONS………….87-111 Unit 1: Effective Public Relations in Multinational Organizations Unit 2: Opportunities of International Public Relations for the 21st Century Unit 3: Challenges of International Public Relations for the 21st Century Unit 4: Paths to the Theory and the Practice of International Public Relations Unit 5: International Public Relations and Pedagogy MODULE 5: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS……………………………...112-130 Unit 1: The Development of Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 2: The Development of Public Relations in the United States Unit 3: European Public Relations Unit 4: Middle East Public Relations 19 | P a ge MODULE 6: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS: ETHICAL ISSUES…………………………………………………......131-157 Unit 1: Ethics in Public Relations Unit 2: International Public Relations Codes of Ethics Unit 3: Transnational Corporate Ethical Responsibilities Unit 4: Relativism versus Universalism MODULE 7: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS AND NIGERIA’S IMAGE IN FOREIGN CONTRIES: A CASE STUDY…...158-180 Unit 1: What Led to Nigeria’s Image Problems?
Unit 2: How Did this Image Become an International Issue?
Unit 3: Efforts of Past Nigeria’s Government and Eminent Citizens at Enhancing Nigeria Global Image Unit 4: How to Apply International Public Relations Strategies in Dealing with Nigeria’s Image Problems 20 | P a ge  MODULE 1: GENERAL INTRODUCTION Unit 1: Definitions of Public Relations and International Public Relations Unit 2: Similarities and Differences between Domestic Public Relations (DPR) and International Public Relations (IPR) Unit 3: International Public Relations Publics Unit 4: Overview of Public Relations UNIT 1: Definitions of Public Relations and International Public Relations CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Public Relations?
3.2 What is International Public Relations?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This course is designed to train students to become knowledgeable about issues and concepts in International Public Relations.
This becomes pertinent because relations among publics, according to Culbertson and Chen (1996), has become more complex, fragile, and often hostile in recent years due to varied factors ranging from weapons of mass destruction to regional alliances, nationalism, and the internet.
The world has also become smaller thanks to many of the same factors enumerated above.
We are further said to be in a flat world: a global village where today’s neighbours are no longer inhibited or separated by the 21 | P a ge traditional boundaries our fore fathers grappled with.
All of these make International Public Relations important in the 21st century.
However, before we delve into International Public Relations proper, we need to define public relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This section is aimed at introducing the students to the basic definitions of Public Relations and International Public Relations and gives them the basic knowledge about the meaning of both concepts and discipline.
In summary, the objectives of this Unit include: • To define Public Relations • To define International Public Relations • To explain the definitions of Public Relations and International Public Relations presented in this Unit.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Public Relations?
There are many definitions of Public Relations as there are many scholars and authors who have written on the subject.
Most of the definitions say one true thing or the other about the subject of public relations but others just give a narrow perspective to the subject.
I shall not bore you with all these definitions.
I will only present the generally accepted and acknowledged definition of Public Relations which addresses the core issues the subject deals with and presents the vital components of the subject matter with such depth and nuances.
The most comprehensive definition of Public Relations is that offered by the “Public Relations News” (the weekly newsletter of the industry).
The PR News says PR is: The management function, which evaluates public attitudes, identifies the policies and procedures of an organization with the public interest, and executes a program of action (and communicates) to earn public understanding and acceptance.
From this definition, Public Relations requires a series of stages, including: 1.
The determination and evaluation of public attitudes 2.
The identification of policies and procedures of an organization with a public interest.
22 | P a ge 3.
The development and execution of a communications program designed to bring about public understanding and acceptance.
The processes identified above do not all occur at once.
An effective Public Relations program continues over months or even years.
It requires sustained and consistent efforts over a long period of time for it to truly succeed.
This definition also reveals that Public Relations involves much more than activities designed to sell a product or service.
It also involves some promotional programs that concentrate on corporate image building, making and maintenance.
For instance, press releases may be used to announce corporate policies and changes in the organization or special events may be used to create goodwill in the community, and advertising may be used to state the firm’s position on a controversial issue or debate etc.
This necessitates the application of Public Relations, advertising and promotions in international related issues like national image and reputation.
3.2 What is International Public Relations?
While definitions of Public Relations may vary greatly according to the orientation of who is defining it, most authors and scholars on the subject matter seem to agree on the definition of International Public Relations.
According to Prof. Ikechukwu Nwosu, International Public Relations (IPR): is the deliberately planned systematic and researched based activities of an individual or marketing organization or nation which are aimed at maintaining sound productive and international relations with international publics, such as customers, agents, governments, business organizations and others.
Ekeanyanwu sees International Public Relations as effective, proactive and productive Public Relations in multinational organizations and nations, which are deliberately aimed at sustaining the confidence of their international publics in an attempt to enhance international relations and corporate reputation.
The above definitions suggest that International Public Relations is aimed at winning friends, getting support or sympathy of international relations through evaluation of their opinion concerning one’s actions.
It also aims at achieving common interest; corporate, government and other publics approval and understanding.
23 | P a ge International Public Relations could also be referred to as Comparative Public Relations – which involves a search for both similarities and differences between the practice in one or more countries and in the other platforms.
The primary purpose of Comparative Public Relations is to identify more or less universal problems that apply widely (Culbertson, 1996).
In simple terms, International Public Relations could also be defined as the practice of Public Relations in an international or cross-cultural context (Culbertson, 1996).
According to Culbertson (1996), International Public Relations involves Public Relations practices in at least four different realms: 1. International organizations, e.g.
UN, World Bank, IMF 2.
Intergovernmental relations e.g.
diplomatic recognition, alliance formation/disintegration, and sanctions/embargoes.
3.
Transnational economic transaction e.g.
investment trading, financing of multinational corporations.
4.
Interactions among citizens of different national e.g.
through sports, tourism, arts, films, entertainment etc.
Self Assessment Exercise (SAEs) 1.1 1.
Discuss any two widely accepted definitions of Public Relations and why you think they are widely regarded.
4.0 CONCLUSION While acknowledging the fact that Public Relations could be defined differently by different people, the subject matter has always remained consistent.
This is also similar with International Public Relations which has few controversies or disagreement about what International Public Relations means.
Beyond all these, International Public Relations remains a proactive and effective way of reaching out and building confidence with ones international publics.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit discussed the definitions and meanings of Public Relations and International Public Relations so as to properly situate the subject matter of this discourse.
Emphasis was placed on the more comprehensive and widely accepted definitions which brought out to the fore the true perspectives of the subject matter.
24 | P a ge 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why do we have many and different definitions of Public Relations?
2.
Discuss the major focus of the Public Relations News’ definition of Public Relations.
3.
Analyze the definition of International Public Relations as given by Ekeanyanwu with emphasis on the key words of the definition.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson Unit 2: Similarities and Differences between Domestic Public Relations (DPR) and International Public Relations (IPR) 25 | P a ge CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Similarities between Domestic Public Relations and International Public Relations (IPR) 3.2 Differences between Domestic Public Relations (DPR) and International Public Relations (IPR) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Practitioners, students and all others who are interested in International Public Relations need to have a clear understanding of the similarities and differences between Domestic Public Relations and International Public Relations.
Some persons have argued the Domestic Public Relations is the same thing as International Public Relations at a global level.
This argument will be made clearer in this Unit as we explore some of the major differences between DPR and IPR.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The primary objective of this unit is to teach the students the major similarities and differences between Domestic Public Relations and International Public Relations.
At the end of this Unit, it is expected that the student should be able to do the following: 1.
Identify and describe the major similarities between Domestic Public Relations and International Public Relations.
2.
Identify and describe the major differences between Domestic Public Relations and International Public Relations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Similarities between Domestic Public Relations and International Public Relations (IPR) 26 | P a ge The similarities between Domestic Public Relations (DPR) and International Public Relations (IPR) include: 3.1.1 Some forms of media relations occur everywhere in the same manner and have target publics: Media relation is one primary function of Public Relations you can find that is common in most societies.
Media relation is not just practiced in most firms and nations; the strategic focus, the modus operandi, the objectives and sometimes, the basic output are similar whether at the domestic level or the international level.
3.1.2 In the area of ethics, the standards are now universal in application: Behavioural codes, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Public Relations Association’s Code of Athens, are gaining acceptance globally.
We now have a situation where morality questions in the profession is not just subject to geographic locations but to universal laws of right and wrong conduct in a civilized world.
3.1.3 In the use of Public Relations in organizations, all entities, whether domestic or multinational, strive to preserve their reputation from internal or external threats: This has remained one of the primary objectives of Public Relations at whatever level it is practiced.
For organizations at the domestic fronts, Public Relations is strategically focused at preserving the reputation of the organization.
This is the same thing at the international or multinational level.
3.1.4 All organizations, whether domestic or international, also try to identify and build relationships with vital publics: One other critical function of Public Relations is to help its organization identify and build the organization’s corporate relationship so as to maintain an all round atmosphere of cordiality and mutual respect.
This is not an easy task but remains the role of Public Relations at both the local and global levels.
3.1.5 All organizations, whether domestic or international, also anticipate problems and seek to dominate them or at least reduce the adverse effects: All firms that make use of Public Relations as a management function expect it to be the early warning signal which helps them to properly evaluate and 27 | P a ge reevaluate proposed policies and actions so as to receive the greatest support from its diverse publics.
Self Assessment Exercise (SAE) 1.2 1.
On what basis will you agree that Public Relations practised at the domestic front is similar to the one practised at the global level.
Please, use valid points in your argument.
3.2 Differences between Domestic Public Relations (DPR) and International Public Relations (IPR) A speaker at the Public Relations Society of America, (PRSA) conference observed a few years ago thus: “There aren’t many differences between cultures, but those differences make all the difference in the world” This statement is true with International Public Relations.
It is easy to list similarities between countries- and just as easy to dismiss the differences.
But organizations get into trouble by not recognizing that the international arena is exponentially more complex than domestic fronts (Wakefield, 2001).
As noted by Wakefield (2001), this complexity lies both in organizations themselves and in the added cross cultural factors of each country, most of which are human elements that can fall into the realm of Public Relations.
The differences between Domestic Public Relations and International Public Relations include: 1.
Multinationals, which practice International Public Relations, face multiple regulatory arenas governing products, language, employees, taxation and so forth.
This then, affects employee relations, promotional materials, translations, claims and other Public Relations activities.
2.
Multinationals and the like have multicultural employee forces with diverse perspectives on work hours, use of time and space, managerial space, managerial styles and other work-related attributes.
This makes international communication much more difficult.
3.
Externally, there are dispersed publics that often mistrust multinationals and that now can affect great global pressure through the mass media or the internet.
4.
There are also cross-border problems, such as pollutions and labour, whose resolutions require intercultural communication.
All of these factors above are 28 | P a ge faced by managers who might have years of experience in the domestic setting but are entirely out of their comfort zones in the international environment.
5.
Distinctions and differences are also seen in PR practices between countries.
For example, some countries have national communication systems, whereas others are highly local or regional.
For example, media campaigns can be nightmarish in India, which has more than a dozen official languages.
Again, practising PR in Brazil requires a license, but to obtain publicity, one needs a journalist’s license.
For these and other reasons, senior International Public Relations practitioner, John Reed advocated a “First Rule of IPR: “Get Responsible Local Help’ (Reed, 1999:31).
1.0 CONCLUSION There is enough evidence around a comparative study to conclude that many of the foundational concepts of Public Relations are more or less universal in origin and application.
The specific tactics certainly change from one country to the other, but strategically, Public Relations is respected and valued amongst practitioners worldwide as a corporate channel of relating with an organization’s publics.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit specifically dealt with the similarities and differences between Domestic Public Relations and International Public Relations.
We ascertained that the practice of Public Relations is universal with respect to the strategic focus, objectives, application and overall expectations.
We also found out that there are very limited distinctions in its operations; however, those limited distinctions make a lot of difference in Public Relations practice in individual countries.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Give five reasons why Public Relations practised in Nigeria may differ from that of the United States.
2.
Compare and contrast Public Relations in India and that of Brazil.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni (Eds.)
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 29 | P a ge  2.
Health, R.
(ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C.
(Eds.)
(2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 30 | P a ge UNIT 3: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS PUBLICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 International Public Relations Publics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A Public Relations public is one or people with whom a PR department or firm on behalf of a larger institution has a committed relationship with.
Anybody or person or corporate organization that your organizational policies and actions affect, positively or negatively and whose actions in return affect your own organization or institution, is your public.
In order words, you must have a committed relationship with a particular individual, community or corporate organization to refer to it as part of your public.
Public Relations essentially deal with different publics because they represent firms that deal with human beings of diverse expectations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This unit generally aims to identify the typical publics of you can find in a typical organization that practices International Public Relations.
At the end of this Unit, you are expected to identify and explain certain lists of persons, associations and corporate organizations of particular institutions as publics of such institutions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 International Public Relations Publics As defined in the introduction above, in order to be classified as “Public” of Procter and Gamble, for instance, you must have a committed relationship with Procter and Gamble.
In order words, your actions or inactions must affect Procter and Gamble while Procter 31 | P a ge and Gamble’s actions or inactions must also affect you in a particular way.
Firms and organizations which practise International Public Relations obviously have wide range of other institutions as publics.
The list in this instance could be exhaustive depending on the magnitude of assignment the firm performs.
The list of publics for a particular organization also changes with a change in operations and relationships.
However, the list below is a fair representation of the International Public Relations publics of many firms that operate at the multinational/transnational levels: 1.
National Governments: These are the national governments of nations where the particular Multinational firm has operational base or branch.
The national government becomes a public of such Multinational Corporation (MNC) becomes of the regulatory capacity of the government wherever such a firm operates.
2.
Multinational Corporations and Firms: A multinational firm in a particular situation or context could become a public of another multinational firm if their lines of businesses cross.
In this instance, the MNC could be a supplier or exporting partner etc.
3.
Stockholders and Investors in Global Ventures: Stockholders and shareholders are basically the owners/investors in businesses.
At the global level, they finance such MNCs and therefore constitute a primary public of any MNC where they have put their money in.
4.
Legislative Houses of Independent States: Legislatives Houses in any independent State where MNCs practice are the law making arm of the governance structure in such States.
Since MNCs are subject to the laws of the nation where they operate, Legislative organs become their primary publics that they usually lobby to have favourable legislation and policies.
5.
The Judiciary of Independent States/Nations: The Judiciary is law adjudication and interpretation arm in the governance structure of most independent nations.
They interpret the law and are therefore regarded as the custodian of the rules, regulations and most importantly, the Constitution of their independent States.
MNCs sometimes have need to approach them for litigation, arbitration and interpretation of operational laws etc.
These 32 | P a ge functions make it imperative to include the Judiciary as a vital public of International Public Relations.
6.
Community Members/Host Communities: Every MNC or firm must have an operational oversea base.
This base is someone else’s community.
In order words, there is no MNC or transnational corporations (TNCs) without a host community.
It is very important for MNCs or TNCs to cooperate with their host communities so as to have peaceful and mutually beneficial stay at such communities.
7.
Suppliers to Global Businesses: Every MNC must have suppliers in its chain of business.
These suppliers may be the middle men between the firms and the raw material needed for their business survival.
To ignore them therefore may be suicidal in any business calculations.
They remain a vital public of MNCs.
8.
Distributors for Global Firms: Most MNC firms prefer not to deal with consumers directly for the sake of convenience at most instances.
They make use of major distributors who serve as representatives in their areas of operations.
It is important therefore to include this group into the public’s network of MNC.
9.
Customers and Consumers of MNCs: Customers and consumers are the ultimate publics of any MNC because they are the ones whose patronage keeps the company running.
Without them, there will be no MNC.
They are diverse in nature with different demands on the company.
Their satisfaction should be the ultimate goal of any MNC apart from making profits.
For me, they are the most important public of any MNC.
10.
The Local and International Media Organizations and Professionals: Every MNC must have solid media relations to survive the intrigues in international business.
You cannot have or talk about media relations in the absence of a regular engagement of both local and international media organizations and professionals who are interested in the business you do.
The media sometimes exist as the “devil’s advocate”, fourth estate of the realm, the peoples’ watchdog etc.
To ignore them or pretend they do not exist is wrong business policy for any business that wants to survive stiff competition at the international level.
Media organizations and the professionals that work them are therefore, obvious publics of MNCs.
33 | P a ge 11.
Civic and other Business Organizations: There are different civic groups in a given society that exist to protect the interest of the other members of a given public in their dealings with other publics.
They are called civic organizations.
They are also a recognized stakeholders and thus publics of MNCs.
12.
Financial Groups and Institutions Engaged in International Financing: Financial groups engaged in international financing like the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, African Development Bank (ADB) etc usually support, consult or churn out policies that may affect the operational procedures of many MNCs.
Their inevitable and vital role in international financing makes them a vital public of International Public Relations.
13.
Labour Unions/Employees: Labour Unions are key publics to any MNC because they represent the employees of the company.
Most of the time, employee grievances are channeled through the Labour Unions so as to protect individual employee from Management victimization and enjoy the benefits of collective bargaining.
14. International Labour Organizations: International Labour Organizations exist as regulatory, policy making and international advisory or consultancy bodies for MNCs.
They are therefore important in the operational circle of many MNCs.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.3 1.
Discuss 10 typical publics of MNCs engaged in International Public Relations.
1.0 CONCLUSION No MNC or TNC can exist without a committed dealing with the publics of the organization.
It is also important to emphasis here that every company must have a set of publics which they are committed to.
The survival of a company therefore is dependent on how the company manages its numerous publics.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we looked out the various publics of MNCs and how they exert influences on the day-to-day running of such MNCs.
It is my humble opinion that the strategic survival of these MNCs is largely dependent on their diverse and multi-sectoral 34 | P a ge publics.
Based on this, the relationships between the MNCs and the publics were analyzed in line with the Unit’s focus.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Coca Cola is regarded as an MNC because it has many operational branches in many nations of the world.
Identify 10 solid publics of this company and justify your listing them as members of the network of Coca Cola.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
1.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 2.
Cutlip, S., Center, A.
& Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 3.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 4.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 5.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 35 | P a ge UNIT 4: OVERVIEW OF PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of Public Relations 3.2 The Process of Public Relations 3.2.1 Determining and Evaluating Public Attitudes 3.2.2 Establishing a Public Relations Plan 3.2.3 Developing and Executing the Public Relations Program 3.2.4 Measuring the Effectiveness of Public Relations 3.3 Advantages of Public Relations 3.4 Disadvantages of Public Relations Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION International Public Relations, in terms of the level and the depth of practice is Public relations at a global level.
With this understanding, it is important to do a quick overview of Public Relations so as properly situate our discourse on International Public relations.
1.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the studious student should be able to do a recap of Public Relations and specifically identify and discuss: 1.
Functions of Public Relations 2.
The Process of Public Relations 36 | P a ge 3.
Advantages of Public Relations 4.
Disadvantages of Public Relations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC RELATIONS The functions associated with Public Relations work are numerous.
From the perspectives of Seitel (2007), these functions include: 3.1.1 Writing: It is the duty of the Public Relations unit to prepare and write speeches for the top management of the organization.
It is also the duty of Public Relations to write news or press releases for the organization.
3.1.2 Media Relations: This is a primary role of Public Relations in any organization.
It is the duty of Public Relations to deal with the press or media on behalf of the organization on corporate matters.
3.1.3 Planning: The Public Relations department organizes for special events, media events and any other approved management functions.
3.1.4 Counseling: The Public Relations department also counsels management in all its dealings and interactions with others.
3.1.5 Researching: The Public Relations department is expected to research into the opinions, attitudes and behaviours that influence values and beliefs.
3.1.6 Publicity: The Public Relations department must generate positive publicity and attention for its organization.
37 | P a ge 3.1.7 Marketing Communications: Marketing communication is a key function of Public Relations.
Under this arrangement, Public Relations performs other marketing related functions such as: creating brochures, producing sales literature, arranging meeting displays and organizing sales promotions.
3.1.8 Community Relations: The Public Relations department identifies and supports the host community’s internal and external struggles.
This helps it maintain a cordial relationship with the host community.
3.1.9 Consumer Relations: The Public Relations department interfaces with consumers through written and verbal communication.
3.1.10 Employee Relations: The Public Relations department engages the employees of the organization in positive relations.
3.1.11 Government Relations: The Public Relations department deals with all arms of the governance structure of a State on behalf of the organization.
3.1.12 Investor Relations: The Public Relations department also communicates with the organization’s shareholders and stockholders; help package communications materials meant for them etc to ensure that the desired effects are achieved.
3.1.13 Public Affairs and Issues Management: Another major function of the Public Relations unit is to deal with public policy and its impact on the organization.
3.1.14 Website Development and Web Interface: The Public Relations department creates an interface between the organization and its diverse publics via the organization’s website which it develops and manages.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.4 38 | P a ge 1.
Discuss ten critical roles Public Relations plays in a corporate organization.
3.2 The Process of Public Relations The normal process of integrating Public Relations at the international level into any promotional program involves a series of both traditional and marketing-oriented tasks.
We shall now discuss them one after the other (From the perspective of Belch and Belch, 2001): 3.2.1 Determining and Evaluating Public Attitudes: Public Relations is primarily concerned about public attitudes towards a firm, an institution etc thus it must determine and evaluate this in its program of action or any course of action it wants to undertake.
Public attitudes affect sales, image and reputation of an organization or government.
Second, no one wants to be perceived as a bad citizen, therefore, public attitudes/perceptions need to be determined and evaluated from time to time (Belch and Belch, 2001).
The reasons for conducting research into the areas of public attitudes and perception include: (A) It Provides Input into the Planning Process The determination and evaluation of public attitudes provides the focus in the development of program especially PR and promotional programs, which will help the organization in question, maintain positive image before its publics (Belch and Belch, 2001).
(B) It Also Serves as an Early Warning Signal The cost of solving image and reputation challenges is so enormous that the common cliché “Prevention is better than cure” holds sway here.
Through research in determining and evaluating public attitudes, the organization may be able to identify potential problems and handle them effectively before they become serious concern (Belch and Belch, 2001).
(C) It Secures Support for PR Proposed Actions Internally Determining and evaluating public attitudes is research-based.
So, if it identifies a potential challenge or that one actually exists, it will be much easier for the PR department to seek and gain the support of top management to address these challenges (Belch and Belch, 2001).
(D) It Increases the Effectiveness of Targeted Communications 39 | P a ge Because the communications targeted to a particular issue is research based and address identified challenges, this inevitably increases the effectiveness of such communication.
Invariably, the better an organization or PR understands a challenge for its organization, the better the organization or PR department designs communications to address the challenges (Belch and Belch, 2001).
3.2.2 Establishing a Public Relations Plan In a recent survey, it was discovered that most PR firms encourage a haphazard approach to issues.
They just issue out press releases, trade shows, press kits etc without even designing them into a formal PR efforts.
No wonder such actions have not gotten the desired results!
International Public Relations (IPR) for instance is an ongoing process requiring formalized policies and procedures so as to increase effectiveness.
To achieve the desired effectiveness, one needs to plan and this plan must be integrated into the overall marketing communications program.
To develop a PR plan, the Cutlip, Center, and Broom four-step process may be adopted: (I) First, you define the PR problem (II) Second, you plan and program (III) Third, you now take action and communicate based on your plans and programs (IV) Fourth, you evaluate the effectiveness of your action The following 10 questions need to be answered for you to evaluate your PR plans: 1) Does the plan reflect a thorough understanding of the situation?
2) Has the PR program made good use of research and background sources?
3) Does the plan include full analysis of recent editorial coverage?
4) Do the PR people fully understand the product’s strengths and weakness?
5) Does the PR program describe several cogent, relevant conclusions from the research?
6) Are the program objectives specific and measurable?
7) Does the program clearly describe what the PR activity will be and how it will benefit the company?
8) Does the program describe how its results will be measured?
9) Do the research objectives, activities, and evaluations tie together?
10) Has the PR department communicated with marketing throughout the development of the program (Belch & Belch, 2001)?
40 | P a ge  3.2.3 Developing and Executing the Public Relations Program: Because of the new and broader outlook of PR, it may extend beyond promotion in the development of its program and subsequent execution.
To do this, two vital issues need to be addressed: (I) Determining Relevant Target Audiences like the internal audiences, which may include employees of the firm, stockholders and investors, members of the local community, suppliers, and current customers.
External publics or audiences are those people who are not closely connected with the organization e.g., the public at large (Belch & Belch, 2001).
(II) Implementing The PR Program: immediately the research has been conducted and the target audiences identified, the PR program must be developed and delivered to the audience.
A number of PR tools like press releases, press conferences, exclusives interviews and community relations are available for this purpose (Belch & Belch, 2001).
3.2.4 Measuring the Effectiveness of Public Relations: After program implementation, the PR efforts need to be measured for effectiveness so that such effort could be entrenched if found to be very effective or modification made to correct lapses.
Measuring the effectiveness of PR gives the following advantages: 1.
Helps to determine the contributions of the program element to attaining communications objectives.
2.
It tells management what has been achieved through PR activities 3.
It provides management with a way to measure public relations achievements quantitatively.
4.
It gives management a way to judge the quality of PR achievements and activities.
Means of Measuring the Effectiveness of PR 1.
Personal Observation and reaction 2.
Matching Objectives and results 3.
The Team Approach 4.
Management by Objectives (MBO) 41 | P a ge 5.
Public Opinion and Surveys 6.
Internal and External Audits 3.3 Advantages of Public Relations 1.
Credibility: PR communications are not perceived in the same way advertising is perceived.
This is because unlike advertising, the public does not realize that the organization directly or indirectly pays for PR communications.
This tends to create more credibility for the PR communications.
2.
Cost: In both absolute and relative terms, the cost of PR is very low especially when the possible effects and benefits are considered.
Sometimes, it is cheaper than normal advertising.
3.
Avoidance of Clutter: PR communications are usually considered as news items.
For this reason, they are not subject to the clutter of advertisements.
For example, a story regarding a new product introduction or breakthrough is treated as a news item and is therefore, likely to receive attention.
4.
Lead Generation: News about technological innovations, breakthroughs etc usually result in a multitude of enquiries.
These inquiries may give the organization quality sales and service leads, as well as some publicity in the media.
5.
Ability to Reach Specific Groups: Some products or services usually appeal to only a small segment of the market.
To use advertising and/or promotions to reach this market segment may be wasteful and very costly.
PR offers a leeway or an alternative to reaching these specific groups.
6.
Image Building: Effective PR helps to develop a positive image for the organization.
A strong positive image is insurance against later misfortunes.
3.4 Disadvantages of Public Relations: 42 | P a ge 5.
A major disadvantage of PR lies in its inability or the potential for not completing the communication’s process.
While PR messages can break through the clutter of commercials, the receiver may not make the connection to the source because many PR messages are never associated with their sponsors in the public mind.
6.
PR may also misfire through mismanagement and lack of coordination with the marketing department.
When marketing and PR departments operate independently, there is a danger of inconsistent communications, redundancies in efforts, and so on.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Public Relations industry remains a vital one for the success of multinational corporations.
To have effective Public Relations, the fundamental issues in public relations must be addressed and put to proper context so as to build on those foundations for a global contextual operation tagged International Public Relations.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit focused on the overview of the some of the fundamental processes of Public Relations.
The functions, advantages and disadvantages of Public Relations were also discussed in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the reason why an overview of Public Relations is important in the study of International Public Relations.
2.
Discuss five solid advantages Public Relations has over advertising 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 43 | P a ge 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 6.
Grunig, J.
& Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 7.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 8.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds) (1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
9.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
10.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 11.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 44 | P a ge  MODULE 2: THE BASICS Unit 1: Roles and Objectives of International Public Relations Unit 2: International Public Relations Strategies and Tactics Unit 3: Overview of International Relations Unit 4: Theoretical Issues for International Public Relations UNIT 1: ROLES AND OBJECTIVES OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Major Role of International Public Relations 3.2 Objectives of International Public Relations Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Obviously, the world is growing smaller and smaller everyday due largely to the advancement in Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs).
Beyond becoming what I call “Villagization of the Globe”, ICTs have also made the world flat.
The flatting process has made it possible that the traditional boundaries that distinguished one nation from the other are gradually disappearing.
And so, events in faraway countries now have significance in other nations that may not really be connected to such a nation in terms of formal relationships (Ekeanyanwu, 2008).
This development is not as healthy as one will have wished it.
For example, 45 | P a ge terrorism like suicide bombing, which was completely alien to Nigeria and Nigerians, is now here with us real!
This simply means we need to now build relationships that never existed to accommodate these “strange” happenings that we are now faced with.
In essence, there is now an urgent need for more tolerance, cooperation and mutual understanding among people of different cultures and different ways of seeing reality (Culbertson, 1996).
This is where IPR comes in and here lies its major role and objectives as a discipline.
1.0 OBJECTIVES This unit aims at teaching the students the major role and objectives of International Public Relations.
At the end of this unit, the student should be able to: 1.
Identify and discuss the major roles of International Public Relations.
2.
Identify and discuss the other objectives of International Public Relations.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE MAJOR ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS The world is growing smaller in many ways.
The Global Village is even now truer than before due largely to the advancement and greater sophistication in the application of ICTs.
Beyond ICTs or New Communication Technologies, weapons of mass destruction, joint-venture firms, multinational/transnational corporations, supersonic transports, nationalist sentiments, religious zealotry and other issues make it possible that events anywhere in the world affect people almost everywhere else (Culbertson, 1996).
In essence, there is now an urgent need for more tolerance, cooperation and mutual understanding among people of different cultures and different ways of seeing reality (Culbertson, 1996).
This is where International Public Relations finds meaning and here lies its major role as a discipline.
Second, if we also consider the aspect of International Public Relations that is referred to as Comparative Public Relations (which involves a search for both similarities and differences between the practice of Public Relations in one or more countries and in other platforms); then we are able to identify that the primary purpose or role of IPR is to identify more or less universal problems that challenge many or all nations, and to search for generic principles that apply widely (Culbertson, 1996).
46 | P a ge Third, International Public Relations focuses (as one of its major roles) on the practice of Public Relations in an international or cross cultural context (Culbertson, 1996).
As an integral part of international or cross-cultural communication, IPR involves PR practice in at least 4 different realms: 1. International Organization e.g.
UN, World Bank, IMF 2.
Intergovernmental Relations e.g.
diplomatic recognition, alliance formation/disintegration, and sanctions/embargoes.
3.
Transnational Economic Transaction e.g.
investment trading, financing of MNC 4.
Interactions among citizens of different national e.g.
through sports, tourism, arts, films, entertainment etc.
3.3 OBJECTIVES OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.3.1 The objectives of International Public Relations involve effective communication and persuasion towards winning support for our actions and policies in the global comity of nations.
3.3.2 One other major objective of International Public Relations is the winning and sustaining of loyalty, good citizenship and respect for governments and leadership of independent nations.
3.3.3 International Public Relations helps to build patriotism amongst citizens in the country and in those in Diaspora.
3.3.4 International Public Relations also aims at combating and upsetting false propaganda against one’s government and state.
3.3.5 International Public Relations ensures a steady two-way flow of communication between one nation and the other.
3.3.6 Another unique objective of International Public Relations is that of achieving and sustaining media understanding and cooperation amongst players and stakeholders in the global arena.
3.3.7 International Public Relations also aims to identify more or less universal problems that challenge many or all nations, and to search for generic principles that apply widely.
3.3.8 International Public Relations helps to build new relationships that address upcoming and emergent situations as well as help to maintain greater cooperation, 47 | P a ge tolerance, and mutual understanding among people with different basic beliefs, values and ways of thinking.
3.3.9 International Public Relations aids us in making or winning friends for our nation as well as maintaining and sustaining such friendships and relationships.
3.3.10 Winning positive legislation, attitudes, and images for your country, institutions or organizations is another strategic objective of International Public Relations.
3.3.11 International Public Relations also helps in attracting new businesses, institutions and organizations for your nation.
3.3.12 International Public Relations helps in balancing the global and the local in multinational business relations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2.1 1.
Discuss the rationale for the study of International Public Relations 4.0 CONCLUSION The roles and objectives of International Public Relations cannot be overemphasized.
The world today is a global village far beyond the imagination of McLuhan and any other scholar associated with that concept.
We now live in a world of interconnectedness demanding interrelationships that never existed.
How do we mingle in such a novel situation?
How do we ensure peaceful co-existence in a world threatened by violence, terrorism, religious zealotry made worse by economic regression?
How do we manage inevitable relationships that came to us because of the flattening of the world?
How do we maintain our indigenous cultural values in the midst of cultural globalization?
These questions could go on and on; however, the answers lie in greater practice and appreciation of the role and objectives of International Public Relations.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit focused on the role and objectives of International Public Relations.
Three major roles and 12 distinct objectives were identified and discussed.
In summary, it was concluded that for the world to continue to live in peace and mutual respect of nations and States; the world’s citizens must apply the principles of IPR so as to have greater tolerance and mutual respect for the differences that make them unique.
48 | P a ge  6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Defend the argument that the presence of International Public Relations will aid greater understanding between State and non-State actors in global relationship.
2.
Discuss at least ten objectives of International Public Relations and show how meeting these objectives will enhance international relationships.
3.
Discuss the major roles International Public Relations should play in the comity of nations.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A.
& Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Grunig, J. E. (ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 6.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 7.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 8.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds) (1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
9.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
49 | P a ge 10.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 11.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 12.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 13.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 14.
Okoye, Innocent (2008).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: Unilag 15.
Ewelukwa, B.N.
(2004).
Introduction to Nigerian Press Law.
Onitsha: Maranatha Press Ltd 16.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 50 | P a ge UNIT 2: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS STRATEGIES AND TACTICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 International Public Relations Strategies and Tactics Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION International Public Relations, like other forms of Public Relations, is not a quick fix mechanism for image problems for nations and corporate organizations.
It demands concerted, consistent and complementary efforts over a long period for the strategies and programs to have maximum effects.
The strategies and programmes of activities presented below can only have the desired effect if they are administered on specific situations over a specified length of time.
3.0 OBJECTIVES This section teaches students the strategies and program of activities International Public Relations practitioners engage in addressing IPR related challenges.
At the end of this lecture, the students will be able to: 1.
Identify the different types of IPR strategies and programs.
2.
Discuss how to apply such strategies in addressing specific IPR challenges facing MNCs and independent nations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 51 | P a ge  3.1 INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS STRATEGIES, PROGRAMS AND TACTICS Using Nigeria’s image problems and challenges as a typical and practical case, the following IPR strategies or tactics could be applied to the situation to have a more appealing image in the international circle: 1.
Through The Establishment Of Cultural Centers Cultural centers should be set up abroad and maintained by the country’s International Public Relations experts or specialists.
Within these centers, different types of cultural activities should be displayed.
Dr. G. G. Darah defines culture as, “the philosophical touchstone of every development.
It is the aggregate and state of the experience, thought, science, efforts and technical equipment of people with which they define their relationships and negotiate their transactions with the rest of the human community” (Cited in Ekeanyanwu, 2008).
Admanson Hoebel on his part defines culture as “the integrated sum total of learned behavioral traits which are manifested and shared by the members of a society.” The Cultural Policy for Nigeria, published by the Federal Ministry of Culture, defined culture as: The totality of the way of life of a people in their attempts to meet the challenge of living in their environment, which give order and meaning to the social, political, economic, aesthetic, and religious norms and modes of the organization thus distinguishing a people from their neighbors.
Culture, from these definitions, is not merely a return to the customs of the past.
It embodies the attitudes of a people to the future of their traditional values faced with the demands of modern technology, which is an essential factor of development and progress.
In essence, Cultural Centers in major capital cities of the world will give foreigners an opportunity to get a better picture of our nation.
In summary, cultural centers should be set up abroad to specifically showcase the rich cultural values of our great nation so that foreigners or nationals of such countries could appreciate and understand us better.
52 | P a ge 2.
Organizing International Trade Fairs International trade fairs like Lagos and Kaduna International Trade Fairs organized yearly is one unique IPR strategy to project Nigeria’s image in the eyes of foreigners in the quality and technological development of the country.
This has the potential/or may lead to bilateral talks between Nigeria and other countries.
International Trade Fairs offer opportunity of interaction with foreign participants to sort out the way of enhancing the technological and societal development of both nations in the bilateral talks and fairs.
3.
Organizing Seminars Locally and Internationally Seminar is another potential tool of IPR because it offers the participants the opportunity to rub minds together and share ideas and knowledge.
During the Babangida administration, a very effective seminar was organized under the auspices of the Nigerian Institute for Cultural Orientation (NICO).
The theme of the seminar was “Perspectives in Nigeria’s Cultural Diplomacy”.
This seminar drew participants from the academia, private/public sectors of the economy, embassies/high commissions and international organizations.
The then Minister of Information and Culture, Professor Jerry Gana, used the opportunity to appeal to diplomats in Nigeria to strive to acquire better knowledge and understanding of Nigeria’s diverse cultures in view of their proximity to and daily interaction with the people.
He said that a perfect society exists only in theory books and that every society has its own share of anti-social elements.
That our society places a high premium on such values as honesty, fair play, justice, the love of good name and brotherliness.
He urged the foreign participants at the seminar to convey to their peoples and governments the positive realities about Nigeria and her people.
These kinds of fora acquaint foreign participants with the finer qualities of the country and personal interaction with the people and with their warm hospitality.
This will make them to understand Nigeria and the various efforts to grapple with problem of national development.
4.
Periodic Organization of Press Conference: Press conferences as IPR tools give a government functionary the unique opportunity to meet the public, especially the international public and media in person in order to correct misconceptions and policies and programmes of the nation.
They also offer opportunity of feedback from the public to the government.
For international press conferences, the public and the international media get a first hand opportunity to see Nigerian realities.
At press conferences held in public 53 | P a ge relations spirit, wonders always happen.
A fool could even give a wise man counsel.
This presupposes that every conference is result-oriented and essentially Omni-directional, if not multi-purposeful.
5.
Use of Conference Centers Conference centers could be used as talking shops where ideas are freely exchanged or marketed for public welfare.
They transform lives and reshape the collective destiny through the creation of better perspective for peace, equity and cultural understanding.
By and large, mutual understanding and cooperation will be established.
6.
Effective Community Relations Application Using this strategy as IPR tool, Nigerians abroad should be encouraged to participate in community development and seek acceptance on such occasions from those who never accommodate them.
Nigerians should identify themselves with hopes and aspirations of their immediate locality abroad.
This will help to correct misconception, answer criticism and repel attacks by foreigners who are misinformed about Nigeria and her people.
It helps convince foreigners or nationals of a particular foreign country where Nigerians reside, that Nigerians are capable of maintaining laws and order in any society they find themselves.
This is inferred from a basic PR rule that doing good is a basic requirement for a PR campaign to succeed.
7.
Effective Media Relations The media are central points on which community interpersonal and inter- organizational relations hang.
Because of the vital role of the media in modern society, it is impossible to successfully perform PR duties without the media.
In this respect, PR professionals and practitioners must, as a matter of priority and strategy, maintain a cordial relationship with them and use their services to facilitate the flow of information to the greater generality of the people.
Open door policies should be established where press men and women at all our foreign embassies and high commissions could come in and ask questions to clarify issues concerning our nation’s activities and her nationals.
This IPR tool will ensure in the long run that information about Nigeria is not distorted in the global media.
Nigerian embassies and high commissions should give all the necessary assistance to any medium that is out to correct any distorted or misconceived information about Nigeria and her people.
54 | P a ge 8.
Sponsorship of Sports Activities This also helps to enhance Nigeria’s image abroad.
Because sports activities are now political weapons in the international arena, their use as an IPR tool is now common amongst nations.
After the Nigerian Dream Team won the football event of the Atlanta 1996 Olympic Games, Nigeria’s image shot up positively in the global media.
It will amount to sheer ignorance after that superlative victory at the Games for any European or American to ask a Nigerian where the hell Nigeria is.
9.
Sponsorship of Literary Works The Nigerian government’s sponsorship of literary works of well known/internationally acclaimed personalities like Professors Chinua Achebe and Wole Soyinka will go a long way in polishing our tarnished image abroad.
Professor Skid Gates, at Wole Soyinka’s birthday celebration in 1993 said that Nigeria should be proud of producing such a prolific and patriotic writer whose works will endure for a long time to come.
According to the scholar, Harvard University in US has opened Wole Soyinka Archives at Houghton Bare Book and Manuscript Library.
This will tell foreigners that there are still some Nigerians who are honest and dedicated to their professional calling in life.
Everybody in Nigeria is not a 419niner or fraudster or trickster!
10.
Film and Documentary Film Production The government should encourage films that are centered on our culture and some of them should also be taken abroad to be aired in some selected media abroad to give Nigeria a true and realistic image representation overseas.
Documentary films that package Nigeria’s image positively should also be sponsored by the government and distributed abroad.
For instance, a documentary on the Nigerian Drug Law Enforcement Agency (NDLEA) showed on NTA in July, 1993, which centered on the activities of Agency against drug traffickers should be reintroduced to let the entire world know the country’s stand on such negative issues.
The EFCC is currently on a crusade against all forms of financial crimes in Nigeria.
Is the international community adequately informed about the activities of this agency with regards to issues of financial corruption?
Documentary productions could be one sure way to use to get the message out that Nigeria as a nation is fighting corruption head-on.
11.
Advertising in International Media 55 | P a ge Advertising in the international media especially on topical and contemporary issues and policies about the behavior of its citizens in Diaspora and at home will go a long way in exposing Nigeria’s stand on such issues.
This will erode misconception about the nation.
It can also be done through a public information series, which should appear in volumes under paid columns in newspapers and magazines to offer the reader as much information as possible about the realities in Nigeria.
12.
Crisis Communication Management In spite of well organized PR programmes as stated above, the ability to manage crisis must be ensured when there is an attack by foreign media and government on some Nigerian behaviors or misconstrued government policies or action which may be blown out of proportion.
In some cases, such crises will end up as a blessing because they will give us the opportunity to fight back and in the process do what we might have overlooked, through explanations.
On some occasions, there will be need to quietly educate the people concerned or the governments concerned instead of generating these crises through open confrontations.
The ability to manage crisis of international dimension goes a long way to tell about our national image.
This is the reason it is adopted here as an IPR tool.
13.
Effective Use of Corporate Advertising Corporate Advertising (CA) is an extension of the PR function, which does not aim at promoting any one specific product or service.
It is a form of advertising designed to promote the overall image of the firm or organizational reputation.
The IPR practitioner could comfortably use Corporate Advertising types to achieve desired IPR results and goal.
14.
Rebranding Rebranding talks about changing the particular image of something that is no longer acceptable or representative of what one expects.
To rebrand is therefore to repackage the image of a thing, this time, Nigeria, to what can sell.
Rebranding is a total repackaging to eliminate elements that are no longer suitable or representative and in this vein introduce elements that will project a new image of the thing or nation in question.
15.
Mass Reorientation Mass orientation is about a sustained public relations’ program of action to change the prevailing mindset of the populace of a particular society, nation or corporate organization.
Most people, for example, think that nothing good can come out of Nigerians because of the negative things they have been associated with in the time 56 | P a ge past.
Mass reorientation will help change such notions by working on the individuals and groups within the nation to see that their present stand on some issues is not in the best interest of the country.
Mass reorientation is all about changing people’s attitudes, values, mindset, and traditional ways of thinking that are no longer acceptable in the modern world.
Mass reorientation will also help those who are on a particular route of self or communal destruction out of ignorance to turn back from such vices.
This is a powerful IPR strategy to combat negative perception and images.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2.1 I.
Discuss the relevance of rebranding as an International Public Relations strategy.
4.0 CONCLUSION Enhancing Nigeria’s image abroad through IPR must be backed by a high moral standard in behavioral attitude of Nigerians living abroad.
As image makers and sustainers of a nation’s image, PR is to articulate principles and enlarge understanding of the national, inspire all members to do their best cheerfully, and influence or restrain other members from doing or saying anything detrimental to the nation’s welfare.
The continuous strive to win recognition has given rise to a deepened sense of social responsibility among entrepreneurs or organizations or governments.
It is PR that facilitates and ensures an inflow of representative opinion from an organization’s several publics so that its policies and operations may be kept considerably compatible with diverse needs and views of these publics.
I am of the opinion therefore that if these selected IPR strategies are carried out throughout our embassies and high commissions abroad, the attitude of the host countries towards Nigerians abroad will change automatically.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit focused on the strategies and tactics that corporate organizations, nations or individuals could apply to combat negative perception or images that they do not want to see anymore.
1.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the place of corporate advertising as a tactics that MNCs could use to win favourable perception for their primary activities.
57 | P a ge 2.
Discuss 10 IPR strategies you could recommend to the Nigerian President as he attempts to rebrand Nigeria.
Tell him how feasible and practical the recommended tactics are.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A.
& Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 6.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 7.
Grunig, J.
& Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 8.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 9.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds) (1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
10.
Nwosu, I.E.
(ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
11.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 58 | P a ge 12.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 13.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 14.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 59 | P a ge UNIT 3: OVERVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Overview of International Relations 3.1.1 Public International Relations (PUR) 3.1.2 Private International Relations (PIR) 3.1.3 Economic International Relations (EIR) 3.1.4 Cultural International Relations (CIR) 3.1.5 International Communications Relations (ICR) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The primary focus of this course is International Public Relations which I consider a critical aspect of International Relations.
International Relations is the totality of relations that state actors especially enter into in their quest to have meaningful interaction with their neighbours and other nations that also think they cannot exist in isolation.
Therefore, an overview of international relations is pertinent as the bigger picture in our discussion of International Public Relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to do the following: 1.
Explain the meaning of International Relations 2.
Define and differentiate between Public, Private, Economic, Cultural and International Communication Relations as major components of International Relations.
60 | P a ge 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 OVERVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS International Relations as relations among nations refers to complex processes through which nations develop, maintain, improve or at times destroy its relationships among the members of the global community (Ezeukwu, 1999:30).
The relations among nations or states may be friendly, hostile, warlike, undefined or anything between the dichotomies of friendliness and hostility.
From the perspective of relations among countries, International Relations can be viewed as the sum total of activities between two or more nations.
It involves private and public activities among individuals and governments of different countries.
In an attempt to delimit the scope of International Relations activities, Ofoegbu (1980) cited in Ezeukwu (1999) identifies Public, Private, Economic, and Cultural activities as the four broad areas of international relations among nations.
We may add Communications as the fifth activity.
3.1.1 Public International Relations (PUR) Ofoegbu (1980) contends that Public International Relations (PUR) refers to the entirety of political activities, processes, institutions and actors going on or existing in the international system.
It includes government deals, world politics and diplomatic affairs among nations.
Precisely, PUR means the same thing as international politics or politics among nations.
Whereas international relations is an inclusive term embodying all forms of interaction between two or more countries, world politics is an aspects of such interactions.
It is restricted to official patterns of actions and reactions between two or more nations.
3.1.2 Private International Relations (PIR) Unofficial international relations activities emanate from the deals among private individuals of different countries.
Such relationships are not instituted and maintained by the states (Ezeukwu, 1999).
However, states regulate Private International Relations activities.
Thus, they issue passports, visas, foreign trade licenses and foreign exchange certificates to individuals engaging in private international relations activities for personal or corporate reasons.
3.1.3 Economic International Relations (EIR): Economic International Relations (EIR) activities among nations cover the dimensions of international trade, commerce, movement of capital, goods and 61 | P a ge services; transfer of technology and payment arrangements.
The New International Economic Order (NIEO) falls within this category.
3.1.4 Cultural International Relations (CIR): The aspect of Cultural International Relations (CIR) activities embraces cultural, social and intellectual activities but brings citizens of different nations together.
World sports, games, symposia, exchange of students and academic or professional views fall within cultural relations.
3.1.5 International Communications Relations (ICR): International Communications Relations (ICR) cuts across all the other forms of international relations.
Countries all over the world utilize the services of both Print and Electronic media to develop and maintain public, private, economic, cultural, and miscellaneous international relations.
The mass media are the hub around which all forms of international relations revolve.
Governments Use the Services of the Media for the Following Reasons: 1.
To effect external and infrastructural broadcasting services.
2.
To keep in touch with nationals abroad to render national language services.
3.
To provide up-to-date factual reporting on national and international events as a service to those who might not have access to what the transmitter considers objective news.
4.
As a strategy to correct foreign domination of a country’s mass media and biased news reporting by foreign nations.
5.
To portray internationally an image of the country’s society and culture in a style that could foster listeners’ interest and understanding; the tendency to hear and be heard.
6.
To carry on propaganda and news-talk attacks against other nations.
7.
To spread abroad a nation’s national policies and views on current events of global affairs.
62 | P a ge SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3.1 1.
Discuss four international relations activities you are familiar with.
4.0 CONCLUSION As we have pointed out in the introductory sections of this course, the world is getting smaller and smaller by the day due largely to Information and Communication Technologies that have partially eliminated the traditional boundaries that separated one nation from the other in the old order.
Today, it is inconceivable to imagine a State that has no relations with any other state.
International Relations therefore help to manage the relationship among different State actors and their supporting influences.
As long as interdependence remains in high demand, international relations will remain a valid course of study in the 21st century and beyond.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed International Relations as the bigger picture in any International Public Relations activity.
The various aspects and levels of international relations interactions were also discussed as an overview for the student of IPR who may not have greater opportunity of in-depth study of International Relations.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss four valid reasons why you think the understanding of International Relations is important in International Public Relations.
2.
Discuss three major differences between Cultural International Relations and Economic International Relations.
3.
Justify the inclusion of International Communication Relations as an aspect of International Relations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
63 | P a ge 3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 5.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 6.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 7.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 64 | P a ge UNIT 4: THEORETICAL ISSUES FOR INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Theory Building Needed for the Field 3.2 Model for Organizing Research in IPR 3.3 Implications for IPR Research 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The concept of International Public Relations has continued to attract the attention of Public Relations practitioners and scholars all over the world (Wakefield, 11999966)).
Bolan (1992) has also noted that the growth of IPR is both phenomenal and haphazard.
Joseph (1990) is, however, of the view that more and more countries are adopting American or European PR principles and building a profession along their own cultural lines.
He also noted that other nations relegate PR to mere technical tasks, and some other business leaders in countries like Japan still think the practice is all hype.
There is also no consensus on what the field entails.
Common and available literature in this field has been anecdotal or descriptive.
These issues make it imperative to discuss the theoretical foundations for IPR so as to properly focus on the practice because anything that cannot be explained by theory does not really exist.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this chapter, it is expected that you will be able to list and explain some of the theories that are relevant to IPR discourse as well as explain their implications to research.
The student is also expected to identify and explain the acceptable 65 | P a ge model for organizing research in IPR.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Theory Building Needed For the Field The practice of International Public Relations needs a foundation of principles and assumptions that come from scholarly research and theory building.
This will help address nomadic issues or what effectiveness ought to look like (Wakefield, 1996).
According to Grunig (1992), theory building occurs piece by piece and is shaped, revised and improved for solving problems and directing human behavior and actions.
It helps to explain reality and situates discourse within contexts and related reality.
So, both practitioners and scholars are admonished to build theoretical foundation that will help them explain objective reality better.
According to Wakefield (1996), theory building needed for the practice and application of International Public Relations could be done in three ways: 1.
Assemble theories from related disciplines that have thrived internationally and test them in Public Relations situations.
2.
Find ways to test theories on Public Relations in international settings.
3.
Build theories from the descriptions about PR in various countries, using “thick description” (Geertz, 1973) to investigate the real meaning behind the activity (a common practice in anthropology).
3.2 Model for Organizing Research in International Public Relations 66 | P a ge Fig 1 Global society theories • “Global Village” concept (McLuhan, 1994): Society interacting more often.
• Postmodernism Theory: Globalization occurring but not homogenization or integration (Featherstone, 1990).
• Divergence/Convergence: Ongoing debate that unifying world exaggerates differences (Hennessy, 1985).
• Result is turbulence: Conflict, competition and uncertainty (Robertson, 1990; Lesly, 1991) Creates need for: 1.
Adaptive structures 2.
Formative research 3.
Conflict resolution Cultural theories • “Collective programming” distinguishes one group from another (Hofstede, 1980).
• Cultural dimensions: Individual/collective; power distance; risk avoidance; masculine/feminine (Hofstede, 1980).
• Acculturation theory: Introduces “third-culture” people (Alder & Graham, 1989: Ellingsworth, 1977).
• “Culture is communication, and communication is PR” (Hall, 1959: Sriramesh & White, 1992) Illustrates need for: 1.
Open system approach 2.
Employee diversity 3.
Global/local coordination 67 | P a ge Management theories • Comparative Management Theory: Combines organizational and cultural theories to create international management studies (Alder, 1983).
• Contingency Theory “gone global”: Open systems particularly suitable in international environment (Negandhi, 1983).
• Culture free vs culture specific debate: Management styles often culture-bound (Bartlett & Ghoshal, 1989).
• Generic/Specific Theory: Combines global vision with local practice (Brinkerhoff & Ingle, 1986).
Shows need for: 1.
Cultural sensitivity 2.
“Third culture” practitioners Communication theories • Media Dependency Theory: Images from other countries come from mass media (Manheim & Albritton, 1984).
• Global information flow: Mostly one way, from Western nations to developing nations (Bagdikian, 1989).
• Modernization/dependency theories: Do media facilitate economic improvement or dependency in developing nations?
• Media are conduits for activist agendas (Hiebert, 1992) Indicates need for: 1.
Relationship building 2.
Proactive public relations Therefore, these theoretical domains provide context for public relations in the international arena.
68 | P a ge Public Relations Theories Excellence Theories (J. Grunig, 1992): • PR contributes to organization’s success by reducing conflicts and building relationships, if: - Management supports PR - Organization respects publics and practices two-way communication with them - PR manager participates in “inner circle” of management - Organization respects diversity Critical Theories (Creedon, 1992): • Emphasize relationship building and networking traits as more conducive to effective public relations.
Generic/Specific Theories of International PR (J. Grunig, 1992); Wakefield, 1994): • Testing most effective global/local combinations Source: Wakefield (1996) Fig.
1 outlines the framework for ordering research in IPR.
This model (as presented in Fig.1) categorizes interdisciplinary theory into four main bodies thus: 1.
Theories of Postmodernism and Global Society drawn from sociology and other disciplines.
2.
Cultural Theories developed largely by anthropologists.
3.
Comparative Management Theories derived from international business scholars.
4.
Theories on communication 3.3 Implications of Theory for International Public Relations Research 1.
Global Society Theories show that as cultures interact, turbulence increases because international media coverage helps perpetuate negative stereotypes.
IPR practitioners must therefore become experts in conflict resolution because conflict is inevitable (Wakefield, 1996).
2.
Cultural Theories show the need for Public Relations programs that are sensitive to discuss cultures.
The management domain illustrates the value of open systems that adapts to rapid changes and balance central vision with local implementation.
Both cultural and comparative studies suggest that organization 69 | P a ge must add broader perspectives to their traditional cultural views (Wakefield, 1996).
3.
Good communicators fill the needs already addressed above and they also help to anticipate the challenges ahead and aid organizations think and act in terms that balance their own goals with the desires of a variety of international publics (Wakefield, 1996).
4.
Another implication is that the research necessary for the future are usually addressed.
However, research should identify more implications and more variables of effectiveness.
There is a gap between current practice and theories that describe and explain effective practice in cross-border PR programs.
When the gap is filled, the theories can be used to determine the effectiveness of international practices (Wakefield, 1996).
5.
Domestic Research in PR is Reaching a State of Maturity.
It also contains a growing volume of critical scholarship that proposes a paradigm for PR away from short-term manipulation toward the more long-term, human relations perspective discussed above (Wakefield, 1996).
6.
This has led to the emergence of a comprehensive project called the “IABC Excellence Study” (Wakefield, 1996).
7.
Laying of a foundation for the establishment of the same type of theory building to guide IPR practice (Wakefield, 1996).
4.0 CONCLUSION Theories are the benchmarks upon which new and novel ideas could be tested.
They also offer empirical support to such novel ideas.
A theory has also been defined as a set of interrelated concepts, definitions, and statements that present a systematic view of a phenomenon by specifying relationships among the concepts with the purpose of explaining the phenomenon (Kerlinger, 1973, cited in White, 2001).
This is the primary reason while theory building in IPR practice should be encouraged and maintained for sound scholarly research in the area of IPR.
70 | P a ge  5.0 SUMMARY This unit dealt with the place of theories in International Public Relations Research.
The theoretical model for International Public Relations also received scholarly attention in this unit.
To conclude the section, the implications of building theories for research in IPR were also discussed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss four relevant theories that could be applied in IPR practice.
2.
Are there any implications of theoretical build-up to research in IPR?
Please, support your argument with facts.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Grunig, J. E. (ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 6.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 7.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 8.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds) (1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
71 | P a ge 9.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
10.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 11.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 12.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 13.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 72 | P a ge MODULE 3: CORPORATE ADVERTISING AND MULTINATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1: Introduction to Corporate Advertising Unit 2: Types of Corporate Advertising and How Multinational Corporations Use Them for International Public Relations Unit 3: Advantages and Disadvantages of Corporate Advertising Unit 4: Measuring the Effectiveness of Corporate Advertising UNIT 1: INTRODUCTION TO CORPORATE ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Corporate Advertising?
3.2 Why is Corporate Advertising Controversial?
3.3 Objectives of Corporate Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION International Public Relations uses specific tactics and strategies to achieve its own objectives.
Most of these tactics have been discussed in Module Two, Unit 2 of this course.
However, one principal strategy that was briefly mentioned then but requires detailed analysis because of its place in multinational corporation’s public relations positioning is Corporate Advertising.
Corporate Advertising is mostly used by MNCs to connect and entice its public to continue to accept them as socially responsible to their needs.
Since Multinational Public Relations is International Public Relations, how 73 | P a ge Corporate Advertising is manipulated to achieve specific IPR objectives will be discussed in this Unit.
3.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: 1.
Define Corporate Advertising 2.
Explain the reasons why Corporate Advertising is controversial 3.
Discuss the objectives of Corporate Advertising 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT IS CORPORATE ADVERTISING?
Corporate Advertising (CA) is an extension of the Public Relations function which does not aim at promoting any one specific product or service.
It is a form of advertising designed to promote the overall image of a corporate organization or organizational reputation.
In essence, Corporate Advertising is image and reputational advertising.
It is advertising that focuses on projecting a good image for the firm.
It is not focused on advertising any particular product or service.
The rationale is that if the organization has good reputation and image before its various publics, patronizing the organization’s products and services becomes a guaranteed matter.
3.2 WHY IS CORPORATE ADVERTISING CONTROVERSIAL?
A number of reasons have been given on why Corporate Advertising may be regarded as controversial in nature and conceptual application: 3.2.1 Consumers are not interested in this form of advertising because they do not understand the reasons behind such advertisements and most of the ones they have come across are not very good from a communications standpoint or point of view.
(Belch and Belch, 2001).
3.2.2 It is also a costly form of self-indulgence as most firms who engage in it have been accused of only trying to satisfy the egos of the top management of such organization.
This argument stems from the fact that corporate ads are not easy to write, so top management often dictate the content of the ads; therefore the copy 74 | P a ge usually reflects their ideas and images of the organization (Belch and Belch, 2001).
3.2.3 Another vital element of/or reason for the controversial nature of Corporate Advertising is the belief by critics that firms engage in Corporate Advertising only when they are in trouble and so they are merely advertising to attempt to remedy the problem and restore confidence in their dwindling reputation or wounded image.
3.2.4 There is a major concern that Corporate Advertising is an unnecessary waste of money because the advertisements do not directly appeal to anyone in particular, are not easily understood, and do not promote anything specific.
This argument is based on the fact that Corporate Advertising is often intangible (Belch and Belch, 2001).
Despite these criticisms and others you may find out in the course of your studies, that Corporate Advertising has increased in use especially amongst MNCs that now use it as a propaganda tool or image laundering device.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3.2 1.
Discuss three controversies associated with the application of Corporate Advertising in corporate practice.
3.3 OBJECTIVES OF CORPORATE ADVERTISING Corporate Advertising has two basic goals in mind: 3.3.1 Creating a positive image for the firm: Corporate Advertising basically aims at creating a positive image for the organization using it.
By identifying with certain viewpoints in the society of by supporting a course of action or the other, organizations that use Corporate Advertising make it clear that they are with a particular public on such an issue in question.
3.3.2 Communicating the organization’s views on social, business and environmental issues: Corporate Advertising is one subtle way by which a corporate organization could convince its numerous publics that it is in a particular social, business or environmental concern.
For instance, Coca Cola’s advertisement in the Gay 75 | P a ge Magazine is enough to tell gays that the company does not discriminate against them.
This could be reassuring to the gay community to continue to patronize the products of the company.
However, companies that use such advertising should also be mindful of a backlash.
Some other publics may also be against the firm’s stance and take it out on them.
For instance, the Coca Cola’s advert on the Gay Magazine could also result in enemies from a segment of the public that does not support gay rights.
So, one has to be sure what the stakes are before venturing into such open declarations of stand on social, cultural or environmental issues.
Other objectives include: 3.3.3 Boosting employee morale and smoothing labour relations: Corporate Advertising also helps to boost employee morale in an organization.
When employees have high morale, work flows well and there are better labour relations that translate to peaceful coexistence.
3.3.4 Helping newly deregulated industries ease consumer uncertainty and answer investor questions: A firm could use Corporate Advertising to ease out shareholder or stakeholder uncertainties.
3.3.5 Helping diversified companies establish an identity for the parent firm rather than relying solely on brand names: Newly diversified companies could use Corporate Advertising to establish an independent identity and create its own brand potentials.
4.0 CONCLUSION Corporate Advertising is a unique tactic which Multinational Companies could use to establish a dominant image and reputation in their own industries.
The controversies surrounding it notwithstanding, the objectives clearly suggest that this a veritable tool to use in Multinational Public Relations (MPR).
3.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you were introduced to Corporate Advertising and why most Multinational Corporations use it, notwithstanding the controversies surrounding it.
76 | P a ge 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss some of the criticisms associated with Corporate Advertising.
Are these criticisms justified?
2.
Discuss three controversies associated with Corporate Advertising.
How do these affect the objectives of this type of advertising?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
2.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 3.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 77 | P a ge UNIT 2: Types of Corporate Advertising and How Multinational Corporations Use Them for International Public Relations CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Types of Corporate Advertising and How Multinational Corporations Use Them for International Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Corporate Advertising is an extension of the Public Relations function, which does not aim at promoting any one specific product or service.
It is a form of advertising designed to promote the overall image of the firm or organizational reputation.
Corporate organizations use different types of Corporate Advertising to achieve organizational objectives.
1.0 OBJECTIVES This unit teaches the students the different types of Corporate Advertising and how MNCs use the different types to achieve their objectives.
At the end of this unit, 1.
You should be able to identify and describe the different types of Corporate Advertising.
2.
You should be able to describe how MNCs use the different types of Corporate Advertising to achieve their objectives.
78 | P a ge 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TYPES OF CORPORATE ADVERTISING AND HOW MNCs USE THEM FOR INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS 3.1.1 Image Advertising This is a form of Corporate Advertising devoted to promoting the organization’s overall image.
Image advertising, according to Belch and Belch (2001), aims at the following: A.
Creating goodwill both internally and externally for the organization in question.
B.
Creating an advantageous position for the company C. Creating human and financial resources for the organization D. Creating general goodwill and public acceptance for the organization.
Common methods used in image advertising that are often exploited by MNCs for their IPR needs 1.
General Image or Positioning Adverts These are adverts often designed to create an image of the firm in the public mind or to attempt to change an existing image.
2.
Sponsorship: Organizations, which seek positive image for their organizations often, engage in sponsorship of some worthy courses.
Some of the programs usually sponsored are educational programs, sports programs; enlightenment programs etc.
Organizations, which engage in sponsorship programs, are seen as good corporate citizens.
3.
Recruiting: Corporate image advertising could also be designed to attract new employees to a MNC.
4.
Generating Financial Support: Image advertising could also be targeted at generating more investments for the Multinational organization.
By creating a more positive image, the organization makes itself attractive to potential investors and stock buyers.
3.1.2 Event Sponsorships: Corporate sponsorship of charities and causes is now a popular method of public relations.
This has necessitated its use by most firms who hope to achieve traditional public relations’ objectives.
In this area, sports events have continued 79 | P a ge to take the greatest percentage of budgets for event sponsorships.
Many Multinational Corporations, firms and Public Relations departments subscribe to event sponsorship because it gets their organizations, product names, brands, services etc before the consumers.
By selecting the right events to sponsor and at the right time, organizations can get visibility among their target market (Belch and Belch, 2001).
3.1.3 Advocacy Advertising This form of advertising addresses issues like environment, business and other sociopolitical issues.
Advocacy Advertising is concerned with propagating ideas and elucidating controversial social issues of public importance in a way that supports the interest of the sponsor.
Advocacy Advertising portrays the image of an organization indirectly by adopting a position on a particular issue rather than promoting the organization itself (Belch and Belch, 2001).
3.1.4 Cause Related Advertising: This is an increasing and very popular method of building a positive image for an organization.
Through this method, organizations link with charities or nonprofit organizations as contributing sponsors.
The organization benefits from favorable publicity, while the charity receives the much-needed funds to execute its mandate (Belch and Belch, 2001).
It is however, important to note at this juncture that cause-related advertising is not 100 percent guarantee for success, and it takes time and concerted effort.
Organizations have gotten into trouble by misleading consumers about their relationships and others wasted money by hooking up with a cause that offered little synergism or gateway to their customers or potential customers (Belch and Belch, 2001).
Multinational Corporations which use these methods are therefore admonished to have the majority of their publics in mind before making a decision on what cause, charity, event etc to sponsor or support.
A wrong analysis of the situation could backfire.
It is negative irony for a company to advertise itself out of business or competition.
4.0 CONCLUSION Good Corporate Advertising is a strategic tool for Multinational Corporations in dealing with public relations situations.
Building reputation is not a day’s job.
Public Relations experts will tell you it takes concerted efforts to achieve cordial relationships with diverse 80 | P a ge publics, some of which are hostile.
So, the IPR practitioner should adopt the types of Corporate Advertising formats discussed here to facilitate their strategic positioning in the minds of their numerous publics.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit focused on the various types of Corporate Advertising formats available for the Multinational Corporations to exploit in their strategic moves to leave a positive image in the consciousness of their various publics.
How the Multinational Corporations can use these various types of Corporate Advertising formats also received attention in this Unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differentiate between Advocacy Advertising and Cause-Related Advertising 2.
How is Image Advertising different from Institutional advertising?
3.
Discuss four ways Multinational Corporations could use Corporate Advertising to achieve some of their corporate objectives.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
2.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 3.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 81 | P a ge UNIT 3: ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF CORPORATE ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Advantages of Corporate Advertising 3.2 Disadvantages of Corporate Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION When Multinational Corporations use Corporate Advertising for public relations purposes, they sign on the advantages and disadvantages of using it.
These advantages and disadvantages are connected to the traditional advantages and disadvantages associated with advertising.
This is the focus of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES In this unit, you will be expected to identify and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using Corporate Advantages in image and reputation build-up.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ADVANTAGES OF CORPORATE ADVERTISING 1.
Corporate Advertising is an excellent vehicle for positioning the Multinational Corporation in the market place as well as in the minds of the various publics and consumers.
2.
Corporate Advertising takes advantage of the benefits derived from Public Relations while still using traditional advertising platforms.
When a firm 82 | P a ge engages in Public Relations efforts, there is no guarantee it will receive press coverage and publicity.
Corporate Advertising helps get the message out, and although consumers may not perceive it as positively as information from an objective source, the fact remains that it can communicate what has been done.
3.
It reaches a select target market.
It is not like traditional advertising module that sometimes finds it difficult to segment the market before unleashing advertising on both potential and non-existent market forces.
4.
Corporate Advertising is also relatively cheaper than traditional public relations functions which are meant to achieve same or similar objectives.
3.2 DISADVANTAGES OF CORPORATE ADVERTISING 1.
Questionable and Uncertain about the Effectiveness of Corporate Advertising: The impact of Corporate Advertising remains uncertain and sometimes questionable.
This is so because there is no strong evidence to support the belief that Corporate Advertising works.
2.
Constitutionality and/or Ethics: Some critics have argued that since the big firms are the ones that have the kind of resources required to engage in Corporate Advertising, they can easily use such resources aided by Corporate Advertising to control public opinion unfairly and to their advantage.
3.
Expensive Backlash: When Corporate Advertising backfires, it could be very costly and expensive to deal with.
This is apart from the fact that the tool is costly in itself.
A backlash could arise when the firm inadvertently through Corporate Advertising puts its support on a project, program, or issue the majority of its publics or core markets do not support.
4.
Attempts by Multinational Corporations to use Corporate Advertising to replace Corporate Social Responsibility have often been criticized by industry experts who strongly feel this is a wrong move.
According to them, Corporate Advertising benefits a few of the publics while Corporate Social Responsibility is 83 | P a ge for the majority of the community hosting that organization.
Therefore, Corporate Advertising should not replace Corporate Social Responsibility.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3.1 1.
Discuss any two reasons why Corporate Advertising should not replace Corporate Social Responsibility.
4.0 CONCLUSION From available literature, the use of Corporate Advertising has not abated with criticisms associated with it.
This is indicative of possible effectiveness in its use.
However, these indicators have not erased the valid debate on know who is right or wrong about the effectiveness and/or ineffectiveness of Corporate Advertising.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed you to the advantages and disadvantages of Corporate Advertising as a viable strategic tool use by Multinational Corporations in their public relations activities and programs.
6.0TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the major advantages of Corporate Advertising 2.
Discuss the major disadvantages of Corporate Advertising 3.
Is Corporate Advertising actually effective?
Please, support your position with valid argument.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
2.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 3.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 84 | P a ge UNIT 4: MEASURING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF CORPORATE ADVERTISING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Measuring the Effectiveness of Corporate Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Because of the controversy surrounding the effectiveness and/or ineffectiveness of Corporate Advertising, there is need to discuss the methods for evaluating whether or not such advertising is effective.
This is the major reason we are discussing how to measure the effectiveness of Corporate Advertising.
Some of the methods are discussed below.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this chapter you should be able to identify and explain the techniques of measuring the effectiveness of Corporate Advertising.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MEASURING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF CORPORATE ADVERTISING 3.1.1 Attitude Surveys: This is one sure way to determine or gain insights into both the publics’ and investors’ reaction to adverts.
This is usually carried out be advertising agencies on behalf of their clients to determine the effectiveness of a 85 | P a ge running campaign or one that just entered the market.
3.1.2 Studies Relating Corporate Advertising and Stock Prices: This method seeks to relate various elements of Corporate Advertising to stock prices (prices that investors offer for a firm’s stock).
These studies, however, have yielded conflicting conclusions, indicating that while the models for such measures seem logical, methodological problems may account for at least some of the discrepancies (Belch and Belch, 2001).
3.1.3 Focus Group Research: This method has been used to find out what investors want to see in adverts and how they react after the adverts are developed.
This is a practical approach that ensures investors participate in the evaluation of Corporate Advertising.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4.1 1.
How can Focus Group Research be used to evaluate Corporate Advertising?
4.0 CONCLUSION The effectiveness or ineffectiveness of Corporate Advertising has remained a subject of controversy and considerable debate for both practitioners and scholars in that field of knowledge.
However, current literature continues to suggest that Corporate Advertising is effective.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit dealt with the techniques used to evaluate the effectiveness of Corporate Advertising.
The three that are applicable in Multinational Corporations that use them were discussed in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How does Attitude Survey differ from Focus Group Research?
2.
How can stock prices affect the effectiveness of Corporate Advertising?
86 | P a ge  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
2.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 3.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 87 | P a ge  MODULE 4: GLOBALIZATION OF PUBLIC RELATIONS Unit 1: Effective Public Relations in Multinational Organizations Unit 2: Opportunities of International Public Relations for the 21st Century Unit 3: Challenges of International Public Relations for the 21st Century Unit 4: Paths to the Theory and the Practice of International Public Relations Unit 5: International Public Relations and Pedagogy UNIT 1: EFFECTIVE PUBLIC RELATIONS IN MULTINATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Evolution of Public Relations in Multinational Corporations Self Assessment Exercise 1.1 3.2 Effective Public Relations in the Multinational Corporations 1.
Balancing the Global and the Local 2.
Public Relations in One Unit 3.
Horizontal and Team-Oriented Structure 4.
Team Leader, Not Manager 5.
Considerations of Agencies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
88 | P a ge  1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit is based on the seminal work by Wakefield (2001) titled “Effective Public Relations in the Multinational Organization” which appeared in Heath, Robert L. (Ed) (2001) Handbook of Public Relations published by Sage Publications.
This Unit sees Multinational Public Relations as International Public Relations and therefore argues that what makes for effective Public Relations in Multinational Organizations could suffice for International Public Relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe the evolution of Public Relations 2.
Identify and discuss the issues that make for effective Public Relations in a Multinational Corporation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN MULTINATIONALS According to Harris & Moran (1991:21) cited in Wakefield (2001), “In the past, Public Relations officers and their organizations that operated in foreign environment relied solely on their own intuition.
But intuition devoid of any reliable road maps can result in grave mistakes that jeopardize millions of dollars in company revenues.” To avoid these grave mistakes, International Public Relations people must be guided by sound knowledge about cross-cultural practice.
They must know how to maintain consistent communication and protect their organization’s reputations around the world.
At the same time, multinationals need to understand the nuances of PR between countries, or even in different regions within countries, and how misunderstandings of these nuances can bring problems on a global scale (Wakefield, 2001).
Most multinational organizations, according to Wakefield (2001), have gone through evolutionary stages as they have expanded overseas.
As they add new international units, they often try to keep everything coordinated from Head Quarters.
But they found this practice increasingly difficult to do as their 89 | P a ge geographic reach brought in more and more languages and cultures.
So, most of the organizations created autonomous local units to respond to the varying socio- cultural and political differences in the markets.
Then, as they saw the extreme costs and challenges of uniquely addressing each market, they sometimes abandoned local autonomy in favour of a least-cost (i.e.
centralized) approach to getting homogenous products to all markets (Wakefield, 2001).
Self Assessment Exercise 1.1 1.
Briefly summarize the evolution of Public Relations in Multinational organizations.
3.2 EFFECTIVE PUBLIC RELATIONS IN THE MULTINATIONAL When talking about International Public Relations, there is no one best prescription.
All multinational organizations work in the same global scene, but each has its unique traits and challenges.
Despite these unique traits and challenges, the following suggestions from the perspective of Wakefield (2001) could be argued as the ingredients of effective PR in multinational organizations.
1.
Balancing The Global And The Local: According to Wakefield (2001), the majority of organizations still struggle with “either\or” mentalities about international management.
They give their host offices significant autonomy to handle the local mores, or they peddle their one- size-fits-all products and management concepts.
With either mode of thinking, PR could suffer.
In the first case, senior local managers assume complete authority over all host country activities including PR, even though they most likely know nothing about PR.
In the other case, strong central policies tend to destroy local flexibility and can be so marketing driven that PR is reduced to mere promotional support (Wakefield, 2001).
To be effective, Wakefield (2001) observes, “PR must retain a broad base in the multi-national, identifying and communicating with all critical publics and not just consumers.
It also must balance these global functions with local strategies that address local demands.
But why should these decisions be left to international marketing or local senior executives who do not understand PR?
The people who can make the best decisions on the correlation of global and local PR are those who are genuinely qualified to practice it at both levels” (Wakefield, 2001).
90 | P a ge  The Table 1 below can help us better.
TABLE1: BALANCE OF GLOBAL AND LOCAL FUNCTIONS Activities At the Headquarters Activities in Host Countries 1.
Work with senior executives to ensure Set up and carry out local PR programs that that they value two-way communication are appropriate for the value systems and logistics of the specific country.
2.
Advise senior executives on all global Ensure that local activities do not directly business decisions that have PR contradict global goals.
implications and carry out PR goals in compliance with corporate missions.
3.
Work with SE to ensure that PR is Establish local research mechanisms to integrated worldwide.
identify publics and monitor potential local issues.
4.
Ensure that all local PR officers work Adapt messages from headquarters into closely with their local executives.
appropriate local messages 5.
Conduct training for all live managers so Advise local SE on business decisions that that they can understand global reputation have public relations implications.
and support integrated PR.
6.
Establish broad but flexible guidelines Help train SE to understand goals and on PR activities and opinion research.
missions of PR and to effectively represent the entity in the host country(with media ad other important publics) 7.
Establish and implement PR training for Participate on the global PR team by all PR officials worldwide.
providing feedback on local issues and helping to exchange ideas and solve potential transnational problems.
8.
Foster teamwork, information sharing, and idea exchange processes among members of global PR team.
9.
Work with global team and senior line executions to build issues anticipation and crisis communication procedures.
10.
Establish and monitor accountability programs for global PR unit.
11.
Ensure that global guidelines allow for important local flexibility.
Source: WAKEFIELD, R.I. (2001).
Effective PR in the Multinational Organization in Heath, R.L.
(ed) Handbook of Public Relations.
California: Sage Publications Inc. 2.
Public Relations in One Unit: In a ground breaking study (Grunig, 1992) cited in Wakefield (2001), Integration was identified as critical to effective PR.
Instead of splitting into various units of the organization, PR is more valuable when it is in a single coordinated department.
Then, the functions can strategically build communication and preserve the reputation of the 91 | P a ge entire organization rather than satisfying the diverse, and often contradictory, whims of managers in separate divisions.
Effective PR, as doubt, combines the best domestic and international programs in one unified worldwide function (Wakefield, 2001).
3.
Horizontal and Team –Oriented Structure: Wakefield (2001) also notes that successful PR in the multinational firms is not “top- down”.
For years, the axiom has been “Think Global, Act Local”.
This recognizes global imperatives and local sensitivities but also implies headquarters strategy and host country implementation- as if the local unit cannot do anything until it receives marching orders.
But what if local factors require distinct strategies?
These should be encouraged as long as they do not conflict with the overall mission of the organization.
And what if problems cross borders?
Headquarters had better act, not just think (Wakefield, 2001).
Wakefield (2001) further says that “The phrase also suggests that only head office people are able to think- that no matter how bright the local officer might be, they cannot benefit the overall planning and problem-solving processes.
Such a situation creates an unfortunate waste of talent.” Morley (1998) cited in Wakefield (2001) proposed the alternative stance of “Think Local, Act Global”.
As such, organizations can avoid perceptions of “imperialism” and address the reality that, in the end, “all public relations is local”.
When local units can think and not just act, they become free to effectively satisfy “local history, customs, rituals, taboos and prejudices” (Morley, 1998:33).
4.
Team Leader, Not Manager: No one in this system has a monopoly on knowledge, and no authoritative manager is dictating procedures.
Rather, there is a team leader who can communicate global perspectives and is capable of building essential camaraderie among team members.
Maddox (1993) cited in Wakefield (2001) calls such a person a cultural integrator.
Kanter (1995) cited in Wakefield (2001) says integrators “have the vision, skills and resources to form networks that extend beyond the home base”.
They “can also see beyond obvious differences among countries and cultures…, resolve conflicts among local ways, and… bring the best from one place to another”.
Kanter certainly did not have PR in mind, but this statement could apply well to a qualified team leader in a global PR program.
5.
Considerations of Agencies: According to Wakefield (2001), “most multinational firms consider whether to use PR firms, and if they do what types best fit their needs.
The major issue here is whether to 92 | P a ge hire external resources on a global, regional, or local basis.
If the need is worldwide, then it is typical to select a global firm that owns offices in dozens of countries or a global agency network that connects independent agencies around the world.” Wakefield (2001) further advices that whatever choice is made, the multinational always should control its global PR programs internally with someone who has daily access to top management and can stay abreast of constant changes within the organization that require PR decisions or counsel.
This senior PR person should work closely with the PR agency but should not abdicate control to that outside resource.
4.0 CONCLUSION From our discussions so far, it is obvious there are many challenges in creating effective PR for the multinational organization.
The issues discussed above are just a few of the major organizational challenges.
It is not as easy as extending traditional domestic activities into the global realm.
To be effective as described, multinational PR presupposes qualified personnel.
A team leader should be well versed in international issues and events, skilled in cultural integration, and knowledgeable about PR strategizing.
Local officers should also be experienced in local PR and also able to make valuable contributions to the overall strategies of a global PR unit (Wakefield, 2001).
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, we discussed about five factors that make for effective Public Relations in Multinational Corporations.
The evolution of Public Relations in multinational organizations was also discussed, all from the perspective of Wakefield (2001) work on “Effective Public Relations in Multinational Organizations”.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the five factors from the perspective of Wakefield (2001) that make for effective Public Relations in a Multinational Corporations.
2.
To ensure effective Public Relations in Multinational Corporations, a team leader instead of a manager is advocated.
Why do you support this position?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 93 | P a ge 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 6.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 7.
Grunig, J.
& Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 8.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 9.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds) (1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
10.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
94 | P a ge  UNIT 2: OPPORTUNITIES OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS FOR THE 21ST CENTURY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Opportunities of International Public Relations for the 21st Century 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit is based on the seminal work by Maureen Taylor (2001) titled “International Public Relations: Opportunities and Challenges for the 21st Century” which appeared in Heath, Robert L. (ed) (2001) Handbook of Public Relations published by Sage Publications.
Because the world is growing smaller everyday due largely to sophistication in ICTs, many small and big firms are waking up to the reality of International Public Relations.
It is therefore wisdom to begin a re-examination of the opportunities the application of International Public Relations holds for the 21st century scholarship.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After completing this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the opportunities inherent in International Public Relations practice for the 21st century 2.
Explain/discuss the identified opportunities and how they can be taken advantage of by International Public Relations practitioners.
95 | P a ge 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 OPPORTUNITIES OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS FOR THE 21ST CENTURY There are many opportunities following the adoption of International Public Relations in Multinational Organizations as well as other smaller industries that get involve in international trade or business.
However, based on Maureen Taylor (2001), three of such opportunities are identified while Ekeanyanwu (2008) adds a fourth one.
These opportunities are discussed below: 1.
Because of research skills in Public Relations, PR serves as the eyes, ears and voice of the organizations (Taylor, 2001).
With Public Relations, organizations are able to follow up on societal perceptions as it concerns the organization.
This also helps such organization to remain competitive as it regularly monitors public opinion on the activities and policies of the organization.
2.
Astute Public Relations practitioners are valuable resources for their organizations because of their ability to save such organizations in times of transitions and uncertainties (Taylor, 2001).
Public relations experts are better leaders during transitions and uncertainties and do help their organizations to maintain sanity and operational capacity during this period.
33..
According to Maureen Taylor (2001), Public Relations also has opportunity to positively affect the developing nations of the world through participation in development communication, nation building and avoiding war between states and amongst different actors on the global political scene.
4. International Public Relations according to Ekeanyanwu (2008) could also be applied by nations and their nationals even in the Diaspora, which are on the brink of image collapse to remedy such a situation.
This is suggested because case studies in this area suggest that International Public Relations strategies have been applied with success in some countries battling negative global image challenges.
96 | P a ge SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4.1 1.
Discuss a fifth opportunity you think International Public Relations has.
4.0 CONCLUSION International Public Relations remains strategic to the growth of Multinational Corporations anywhere they are found.
It is important therefore for the Public relations practitioners in those corporations to take advantage of the opportunities offered to give their organizations a competitive edge.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit focused on the opportunities of International Public Relations for the 21st century practitioner.
Four of such glaring opportunities were identified and discussed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss four opportunities applicable to International Public Relations in the 21st century.
2.
Explain how International Public Relations serves as the eyes and ears of a Multinational Corporations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 97 | P a ge 5.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 6.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 7.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 8.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 9.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
10.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
11.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 98 | P a ge  UNIT 3: CHALLENGES OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS FOR THE 21ST CENTURY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Challenges of International Public Relations for the 21st Century 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit is based on the seminal work by Maureen Taylor (2001) titled “International Public Relations: Opportunities and Challenges for the 21st Century” which appeared in Heath, Robert L.
(Ed.)
(2001) Handbook of Public Relations published by Sage Publications.
Because the world is growing smaller everyday due largely to the reality of the Global Village as envisaged by Marshall McLuhan (1964), many small and big firms are now waking up to the reality of Multinational Public Relations which has been referred to as International Public Relations.
It is therefore vital to begin dealing with the challenges of International Public Relations for the 21st century.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Identify the challenges of International Public Relations.
2.
Discuss the identified challenges and how they are affecting the practice in the 21st century.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 99 | P a ge  3.1 CHALLENGES OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS FOR THE 21ST CENTURY There are many challenges facing the application of International Public Relations in Multinational Corporations as well as other smaller industries that get involve in international business and relations.
However, based on Maureen Taylor (2001), four of such challenges are discussed while Ekeanyanwu (2008) adds a fifth one.
These challenges are discussed below: 1.
Societal culture might be one of the most difficult challenges.
Sriramesh and White (1992) cited in Taylor (2001) suggest that International Public Relations will have to reflect the cultural and societal norms of the host nation.
This will create unique Public Relations situations in every society with marked distinctions in different contexts.
2.
Language will also present another unique problem for International Public Relations practitioners across different countries.
Corporate slogans, marketing and advertising themes, and the translation of original materials will all need to be checked and rechecked for international audiences and markets (Taylor, 2001).
3.
Taylor (2001) also identified the media as one of the core factors that will present its unique challenges to Public Relations practitioners because in many parts of the world, governments continue to dominate media ownership and content.
Thus, organizations might have to pay to have stories published, and this will change the dynamics of media and public relations.
4.
Issues of ethics will continue to challenge Public Relations practitioners in the international arena.
Cultural variation, different norms of conduct, and different levels of socio-political development will all demand different approaches to the practice (Taylor, 2001).
5.
Ekeanyanwu (2008) identifies issues of pedagogies and curricula development as critical factors challenging the practice of International Public Relations in most societies.
Teaching 100 | P a ge International Public Relations has continued to show remarkable differences in various contexts and countries.
Same for curricula development.
Most nations’ PR grew from the US but European PR has continued to evolve beyond what was passed on from the US.
PR in the Middle East remains a challenge to US practitioners and there is a thin line between lobbying, subtle bribery/manipulation and PR in Nigeria.
These marked differences are applicable in other societies not mentioned here.
They therefore remain huge challenges for the 21st century when one begins to conceptualize a globally accepted curricula and teaching models.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4.2 1.
Why does lobbying constitute a challenge for PR practice in Nigeria?
4.0 CONCLUSION The challenges International Public Relations is confronted with in the 21st century are surmountable.
They are, however, critical to the future of International Public Relations in this century.
These challenges may not all be wished away or completely tackled even by the end of the current century!
What is important is a conscious and concerted effort in dealing with the issues they raise so as to move the discipline to the next levels.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt the meaning of style and the implication in broadcast news writing.
You also learnt the broadcast style and how to apply the knowledge in writing and acceptable broadcast copy.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss why Language is regarded as a challenge for the International Public Relations practice in the 21st century.
2.
Do you see Societal Culture changing with perceptions in the practice of International Public Relations?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 101 | P a ge 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds.]
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C.
[Eds.]
(2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 6.
Grunig, J. E.
(Ed.)
(1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 7.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 8.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 9.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
10.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
11.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 102 | P a ge  UNIT 4: PATHS TO THE THEORY AND THE PRACTICE OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Paths to the Theory and the Practice of International Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Taylor (2001) did a comprehensive study on International Public Relations and some of the concerns that affect the practice.
This led to her identification of the four paths to the theory and practice of International Public Relations.
These four paths to be discussed show how the various opportunities and challenges that await Public Relations practitioners as they communicate with international publics.
Each of the four paths of research into International Public Relations is making important contributions to our understanding of the field.
When combined together, the four paths offer a broad picture of what we know and do not know about the practice.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the student should be able to: 1.
Identify the paths to the theory and practice of International Public Relations 2.
Discuss the four paths to the theory and practice of International Public Relations 3.
Discuss how these four paths play out in the development of the practice in the 21st century.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 103 | P a ge  3.1 PATHS TO THE THEORY AND THE PRACTICE OF INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS The four paths to the theory and practice of International Public Relation are: 1.
Public Relations as a Symmetrical Communication Activity: The first line of International Public Relations research extends the idea of Public Relations as a symmetrical communication activity as proposed by J. Grunig.
This path reminds us that the frameworks that guide evaluations of U.S. International Public Relations practices might not hold up in other nations.
2.
Contextualization and Description of the Practice of PR in Different Nations of the World: This path shows that some unique social, political, and economic factors will shape the practices of successful International Public Relations in the 21st century.
The issue now is what are these unique social, political, and economic factors that will shape the practice of International Public Relations in the 21st century?
3.
Ethical And Educational Foundations of the Practice: The path focuses on the ethics of the practice as well as on educational foundations.
The path shows that more education is needed to prepare all practitioners for ethical communication and practice.
4.
Groundwork for Developing new Theories of Public Relations: The final approach lays the groundwork for developing new theories of Public Relations that can transcend national boundaries.
This presupposition path reminds us that every assumption that we make about PR needs to be critically examined when we communicate with international publics.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4.3 1.
Justify the need for the development of new theories of Public Relations.
4.0 CONCLUSION The paths to the theory and practice of Public Relations suggest the current and future issues International Public Relations must continue to address in the growth and development of the practice.
The paths also show that successful Public Relations will require an understanding of theory, context, and ethics as well as a critical look at the assumptions that guide our understanding of the functions and roles of Public Relations.
104 | P a ge  5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you learnt about the paths to the theory, ethics, and context of Public relations as they concern developmental platforms.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify and discuss the paths to the theory and practice of Public Relations.
Are these identified paths realistic?
Please, support your argument with valid points.
2.
Discuss the perceived relationship between the challenges of International Public Relations and the paths to the theory and practice of Public Relations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni (Eds.)
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 6.
Grunig, J. E. (Ed) (1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 7.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 8.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 105 | P a ge  9.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
10.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
11.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 106 | P a ge UNIT 5: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS AND PEDAGOGY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 International Public Relations and Pedagogy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit is based on the work of Doug Newsom, Judy Vanslyke and Dean Kruckeberg (2001) and cited in Wakefield [Ed] (2001).
The Unit considers issues of pedagogy and how International Public Relations training, teaching and research affect the discipline internationally.
Pedagogy is simply defined as the study of the methods and styles of teaching.
Pedagogy is now very important in Public Relations practice because PR is now formally taught in higher institutions of learning worldwide.
This also means International Public Relations has become a classroom affair too!
However, some primary issues do arise, especially when discussing the teaching of Public Relations.
Some of these issues are: What is the subject matter of Public Relations?
Is it an art, a craft, or a Social Science?
Is it pre-professional in nature, or does it require professional training?
2.0 OBJECTIVES The primary objective of this Unit is to consider the pedagogical demands of teaching International Public Relations internationally.
It is therefore my expectation that at end of this Unit, you should be able to describe the pedagogical demands of teaching International Public Relations at the global level in very specific terms as well as identify how these specific demands affect or influence the practice in the 21st century.
107 | P a ge 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS AND PEDAGOGY The pedagogical demands of teaching Public Relations internationally according to Newsom et al (2001) require that PR practitioners and educators consider the following criteria for the profession: 1.
An international body of knowledge 2.
Standards for entry into the field 3.
Shared ethical values of practitioners 4.
Professional competencies that can be taught at different levels 5.
A foundation of knowledge that gives practitioners a reason to turn to universities for continuing education in the same tradition of other professions like medicine and law.
Our arguments in this topic is to encourage the global adoption in teaching of a topical body of knowledge, a topical syllabus, a recognition of cultural-government-media differences, and a research agenda by academics and practitioners that examines research needs created by global environment and a testing of traditional and new research methods to cope with different infrastructures.
We shall therefore briefly examine some of these issues in detail: 1.
Topical Body of Knowledge Ordinarily, having a topical body of knowledge for the profession could have been a problem but thanks to the internet.
The internationalized body of knowledge needs no editor or gatekeeper.
Teachers and students of Public Relations simply need good computer search engines and skills maneuver around the subject matter.
However, the commitment of PR practitioners and educators are needed here to make things work.
They need to be dedicated in sharing information and experiences online on regular basis (Newsom et al, 2001).
This online sharing of topical information and experiences is very vital because previous efforts by International Public Relations Association and the Public Relations Society of America to establish a printed/published body of knowledge or codified body of knowledge for global use have been very unsuccessful.
2.
Topical Syllabus 108 | P a ge Like the topical body of knowledge, the development of a useful and topical worldwide syllabus, according to Newsom et al (2001), must result in an outline that lends itself to adaptation to and explication of specific circumstances without diluting the following specific areas that must be covered: 1.
Definitions of Public Relations and explanation of its use.
2.
Public Relations’ management role and its strategic communication function.
3.
The environment of PR practice in terms of socio-economic, political and cultural characteristics.
4.
The expectations of PR efforts and the measurement of outcomes.
5.
Consideration of cultural differences in the different countries.
According to Hall (1995), cited in Newsom et al (2001), cultural differences have to be addressed on two different levels.
The first is organizational and the second is national and individual.
At the organizational level, it should be noted that certain organizations share an identifiable culture while others don’t.
On the other hand, people in one particular society or nation individually and collectively share a culture different from that of people in another nation or society.
Both differences are critical to understanding the environment in which Public Relations is practiced (Newsom et al, 2001).
On the issue of pedagogy, a consideration as well as an appreciation of diverse cultural values of people is very critical.
The nuances of a culture are an important part of building relationships.
Public Relations practitioners must understand and appreciate cultural differences and be responsive to them.
Teaching students how to discover and appreciate these differences and to use that information in practicing Public Relations is critical (Newsom et al).
3.
Government Organization and the Economics/Politics of Public Relations Practice Understanding a country’s government or leadership structure is the key to grasping both its economic and political structures.
Public Relations practitioners need to know who has the power to do what under which circumstances.
Knowing how and where laws are made and being enforced is essential if an organization expects to function within a country’s borders (Newsom et al, 2001).
109 | P a ge Laws also affect the economics of a nation.
Who owns what and how that ownership is acquired and maintained are essential bits of knowledge which a Public Relations practitioner need to function maximally in a nation.
So, Public Relations education must also focus on this area internationally (Newsom et al, 2001).
4.
Research Challenges for International Public Relations Education According to Newsom et al (2001), preparing Public Relations’ practitioners for the research needs that they will encounter in an international environment means making them aware of the accessibility and reliability of secondary information and help.
It is also important that political implications of such information to the practice of Public Relations internationally be made known to the PR practitioners.
Furthermore, the primary research skills that most US-educated students possess might or might not work elsewhere because of these countries’ limitations in infrastructure and differences of culture.
Yet the demand for research in international settings is increasing (Synott & McKie, 1997, cited in Newsom et al, 2001).
5.
Continuing Education for Public Relations Practitioners Most successful professions like Accountancy, Law, medicine etc usually have their professionals return back to the universities to update their knowledge of the profession.
How many PR practitioners return to universities for such updating?
Recent surveys especially in the US suggest that PR practitioners are using archaic practices because they have not pursued continuing education (Newsom et al, 2001).
It is therefore recommended that PR practitioners take advantage of continuing university education to update their knowledge of the profession as well as attend seminars, symposia, workshops etc.
This also implies that Universities should begin to mount practice oriented postgraduate programmes in Public Relations and allied disciplines so as to give the PR practitioners the reason to return back to the classroom to update their skills and knowledge base.
4.0 CONCLUSION International education for Public Relations is in its infancy but demand for such education is critical especially in this century.
This demand comes from educators throughout the world who want help in determining what to teach and in finding 110 | P a ge resources to do so.
Again practitioners easily find jobs or employment in foreign nations; therefore they need global education in this area to make maximum impact (Newsom et al, 2001).
Furthermore, by creating parameters for an international body of knowledge and for academic study in PR that respects differences across societies, governments, cultures, PR educators as well as practitioners can build a global understanding of PR as an international profession (Newsom et al, 2001).
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit we considered pedagogy as the science of the methods and styles of teaching.
We also considered how International Public Relations is taught internationally and the pedagogical demands of doing this.
Issues such as: an international body of knowledge; standards for entry into the field; shared ethical values of practitioners; professional competencies that can be taught at different levels, and a foundation of knowledge that gives practitioners a reason to turn universities for continuing education in the same tradition of other professions like medicine and law were considered as very vital to sustaining the discipline and practice of Public Relations.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the pedagogical expectations of teaching International Public Relations globally.
2.
Hazard three solid reasons that may have made it impossible to codify a general body of knowledge for International Public Relations teaching.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni (Eds.)
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C.
(Eds.)
(2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 111 | P a ge 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Grunig, J. E.
(Ed.)
(1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 6.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 112 | P a ge MODULE 5: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS: A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS Unit 1: The Development of Public Relations in Nigeria Unit 2: The Development of Public Relations in the United States of America Unit 3: European Public Relations: An Evolving Paradigm Unit 4: Middle East Public Relations UNIT 1: THE DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The History of Public Relations in Nigeria and the Government Sector 3.2 The Growth of Public Relations in the Private Sector 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION A variety of books and authors define public relations differently, but the most comprehensive definition is that offered by the “Public Relations News” (the weekly newsletter of the industry).
PR News says PR is: “The management function, which evaluates public attitudes, identifies the policies and procedures of an organization with the public interest, and executes a program of action (and communicates) to earn public understanding and acceptance.” The history of Public Relations in Nigeria is a good story of a discipline that meant nothing from the beginning and later took its pride of place in business and governmental affairs.
And so, after 27 years of struggling, the Public Relations industry 113 | P a ge in Nigeria had a settled case when the Federal Military Government of Nigeria enacted Decree No.
16 of June 1, 1990, which established the Nigerian Institute of Public Relations as a full-fledged professional body for the regulation of the Public Relations industry in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, it is expected that you should be able to tell how Public Relations started in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE HISTORY OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN NIGERIA AND THE GOVERNMENT SECTOR Nwosu (1990), one of the gifted scholars of the discipline, credited the British with introducing Public Relations in Nigeria in the 1940s.
According to him, organized Public Relations in Nigeria began within Government agencies on January 1, 1944, when the British colonial administrators set up the first Public Relations office in Lagos.
By 1948, as reported by Alozie (2004:244): The Colonial Administration established Public Relations outlets in the regional capitals of Ibadan, Enugu, and Kaduna.
At independence, the government established a full-fledged Federal Ministry of Information and an in-house Public Relations Department at each ministry.
At present Nigeria has thirty-six states.
Each has its own ministry of information, headquartered in the state capital.
Every federal and state ministry, as well as most government department and parastatals, maintains an in-house Public Relations component.
The state governments have information officers posted outside their capitals.
The officers of the federal and state ministries of information and departments are responsible for informing the public of government activities and policies.
They also analyze feedback in order to refine their messages to further promote government policies and to attract favourable responses from the public.
Ajai (2005) also notes that “During the War II in 1942, the Colonial Office established the first Information Centre in Lagos and other cities to handle 114 | P a ge information between troops at the war fronts and their families back home.
Mr. Harold Cooper … worked tirelessly to set up these Information Centres.
It was from this humble beginning the Information Department grew as a government ministry.” In summary, scholars and historians all agree that the Public Relations industry in Nigeria started in government business and affairs before spreading to the private sector were it blossomed.
3.2 THE GROWTH OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR Nwosu (1990) credits the growth of Public Relations in Nigeria among non- governmental and commercial organizations.
He observes that their willingness to use Public Relations tactics and strategies extensively in addressing corporate issues and image/reputation matters helped to establish Public Relations practice in Nigeria.
Pratt (1985) cited in Alozie (2004) notes that various “Nigerian administrations tend to delegate and view Public Relations activities as social responsibilities of the nation’s leading corporation- activities they are encouraged to conduct as their contribution to promoting nation building and development.
Consequently, these nongovernment organizations tend to sponsor and apply sophisticated Public Relations strategies and campaigns, whereas various administrations depend on publicity-related tactics and programs as their primary Public Relations strategies.” Ajai (2005) chronicles the growth of Public Relations in the private sector in Nigeria around the end of the Second World War in 1945 when the London Chamber re-established business relations with West African nations, Nigeria and Ghana to be specific.
The entrance of UAC International, S.C.O.A.
and C.F.A.O.
also had dramatic effects on the development of Public Relations in the private in Nigeria.
The companies were rivals and competitors and so used Public Relations strategies to outwit one another for a greater market share of the Nigerian business environment.
The growth of the banking sector also had its impact.
The rise of the banking 115 | P a ge sector was so phenomenal that the competition became very stiff.
One way each bank tried to outwit the other to gain a greater percentage of the market share was to employ Public Relations specialists and strategies in its operations.
Public Relations became the golden profession helping other professions to achieve their marketing goals and objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION The history and growth of Public Relations in Nigeria have been exciting, remarkable and very phenomenal.
Among top companies and organizations in Nigeria today, 95 per cent have functional Public Relations Departments and Units, compared to only 20 per cent in the early 1970s (Ajai, 2005).
Public Relations has widened its scope of influence and operations and now acts as consultants to government parastatals, ministries, trade associations, tertiary institutions of higher learning, small and medium scale businesses, MNCs, state and local governments etc.
This is a healthy development for the industry.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, we did an overview of the history and growth of the Public Relations industry in Nigeria and reaffirmed the fact that Public Relations was introduced to Nigeria by the British colonial government and commenced in the government sector.
However, the industry flourished when the private sector adopted it as a tool of marketing, image building and corporate advertising.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Trace the history of the development of Public Relations in Nigeria.
2.
Discuss four reasons why the Public Relations industry flourished more when the private sector engaged its services.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
116 | P a ge 3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
6.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
7.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 117 | P a ge UNIT 2: THE DEVELOPMENT OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1: The Growth of Public Relations in the United States of America 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Public Relations and the United States of America have a long history together.
This is the major reason United States is regarded as the birth place of the Public Relations industry.
We will, however, not attempt a “history” of Public Relations in the United States as this way below the purview of this course.
We attempted a little overview here to help us comparatively assess the growth of Public Relations in the US with the other regions discussed in module.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Briefly describe the history of Public Relations in the United States.
2.
Describe the growth pattern of the Public Relations industry in the United States.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1: THE GROWTH OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN THE UNITED STATES According to Seitel (2007), the US Public Relations experience dates back to the founding of the American union.
Public Relations at this level was basically used to influence public opinion, manage communications, and persuade individuals to follow a course of action and support the American Revolution.
118 | P a ge  The efforts leading to the creation of the American Constitution also owed part of its success story to the history of Public Relations in America.
The founding fathers of the American Constitution used the powers inherent in public relations to win support or persuade others to see reasons with their own point of view.
The practice of the discipline continued to percolate in the 19th Century although with evidences of negativism as demonstrated in the “Press agentry”, and “let the public be damned” philosophies that came up during this period.
We shall consider the development of Public Relations in the United States using the Four-stage Model of PR development as captured by J. Grunig and Hunt (1984) thus: First Stage: The Manipulation Stage This is the stage of initial development of Public Relations whereby former journalists acted as press agents with an emphasis on one-way communication and too often an emphasis on unethical media manipulation, propaganda and persuasion.
It is usually regarded that this stage was the antecedent to the modern Public Relations that took hold in the 1880s.
Notorious in the use of this First Stage were names like Amos Kendall and Phineas T. Barnum.
Second Stage: The Upsurge and “Take Off” Stage This stage was less manipulative but hyperbole and exaggerated claims were part of the tools used by PR practitioners as the practice of Public Relations spread in the US.
These problems created the unrealistic expectations by investors leading to the stock market crash in 1929 (Cutlip, 1994).
Third Stage: The Rethinking Stage At this stage, members of the dominant coalition about the roles and functions of PR started having a rethink of some of their earlier positions on issues related to Public Relations.
This stage also saw the rise of professionalism in the practice of PR.
Also, at this stage more managers began placing more emphasis on research and two way symmetric communications.
In-house specialists also began to displace outside consultants in dealing with Public Relations matters.
119 | P a ge Latest Stage: The Stage of Sustained Growth and Increasing Emphasis on Two-Way Communication In the United States, this stage has brought about Integrated communication which is more than IMC because of the emphasis that the former (IC) places on internal organizational communication (Caywood, 1997).
Because two way communication activities are associated with the growth of free markets and democracy, PR has continued to grow in the US.
4.0 CONCLUSION Seitel (2007) argues that Public Relations has a humble beginnings about 100 years ago in the US but the practice today is big business with the following facts: 1.
The Public Relations Society of America (PRSA), formed in 1947, boasts a growing membership of 20,000 in 116 chapters worldwide (Seitel, 2007:37).
2.
The Public Relations Student Society of America, formed in 1968 to facilitate communications between students interested in the discipline, has about 8,500 student members at 270 College Chapters (Seitel, 2007:37).
3.
More than 5,300 U.S. companies, 2,100 trade associations, 187 foreign embassies, and 130 Federal Government Departments, bureaus, agencies, and commissions have Public Relations departments (Seitel, 2007:37).
4.
More than 3,000 Public Relations agencies exist in the United States, with more than 700 Public Relations firms residing in 80 foreign countries (Seitel, 2007:37).
Seitel (2007) also continues to argue that the scope of modern Public Relations practice is very big and that this may have resulted in the various labels associated with PR such as External Affairs, Corporate Communications, Public Affairs, Corporate Relations and a variety of confusing euphemisms (Seitel, 2007:37).
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has introduced you to a brief overview of how the Public Relations industry and practice began in the United States and how it has grown to the big business we now talk about today.
120 | P a ge 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss briefly the history and growth of Public Relations in the United States.
2.
Which stage in the development of Public Relations resulted in the type of boom the industry is experiencing today in the United States?
3.
Discuss the roles of Amos Kendall and Phineas T. Barnum in the development of Public Relations in the United States.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni (Eds.)
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
6.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
7.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 121 | P a ge UNIT 3: EUROPEAN PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 European Public Relations: An Evolving Paradigm 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit is based on the work of Vincent Hazleton and Dean Kruckeberg (1996) titled “European Public Relations: An Evolving Paradigm”.
The Unit evaluates the imprint of Public Relations in Europe generally and hypothesizes that the trend of Public Relations found in Britain is what is usually found in most European member nations.
According to Hazleton and Kruckeberg (1996), Europe is a large and heterogeneous collection of countries encompassing diverse areas with different economies, languages, religions, and cultures.
They could be grouped into three for the purpose of this discourse: a.
The original members of European Economic Community which evolved into the European Union.
b.
The smaller countries like Austria, Finland, and Switzerland that have only recently sought to join the European Community.
c. The countries of Eastern Europe that present unique challenges for Public Relations.
These groupings shall be the focus of this discourse.
However, greater emphasis will be paid to Public Relations in Britain as what is found there usually robs off on most of the other European member nations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 122 | P a ge This Unit focuses on European Public Relations.
At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Conceptualize Public Relations practice in the European Union.
2.
Discuss the evolving nature of European Public Relations.
3.
Identify future trends in European Public Relations practice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 EUROPEAN PUBLIC RELATIONS: AN EVOLVING PARADIGM According to Hazleton and Kruckeberg (1996) cited in Culbertson and Chen (1996), Public Relations in the European Union is an evolving paradigm that lacks a definite shape and structure.
What we find in place is Public Relations heavily tainted by Britain’s philosophy of the practice.
We shall take an overview of this by considering the following points below that define the evolving nature of the European Public relations: 1.
The most sophisticated Public Relations in the European Union is practiced by the British probably because of its close association with the United States.
Literature supports the assertion that there are clear similarities between Public Relations in the UK and the US and what is largely found in operation in the European Union is the UK’s idea of Public Relations.
Second the linguistic and cultural ties between the United States and the United Kingdom have also contributed immensely in the diffusion of US Public Relations practice to the UK and consequently the EU.
All the above implies that the content of European Public Relations is largely United States based.
In other words, European Public Relations is “imported” from the United States through Britain.
2.
The continuing dynamics and formalization of the European Union will strongly influence, if not dictate, how Pan-European Public Relations will evolve because of movements and other socio-cultural issues that cut across Europe’s boundaries.
So, industry watchers are waiting to see how this plays out.
3.
Third, as European member nations continue to evolve, there will be increase in the complexity and turbulence of the environment of Public Relations practice.
This turbulence and complexity is reflected in an increasing demand for Public Relations in Europe and a corresponding growth in the number of Public Relations practitioners there.
123 | P a ge  4.
The EU will place greater economic strain on the existing European Public Relations firms, especially mid-sized ones that do not have resources to invest in the new Pan-European marketplace.
5.
The emergent joint venture arrangements in the EU will create a need for PR in the areas of institutional identity, employee relations and community relations.
6.
Increase in goods and services, and the organizations that produce them will also result in communication goals related to marketing and community acceptance which will invariably increase demand for Public Relations because of the expected competition that comes from increased market.
7.
The EU’s new “Euro-brands” will require that PR contracts be awarded centrally because European companies will want global PR strategies that can provide sub- strategies tailored to national markets (Stoltz, 1991).
8.
Increased business competition will also demand a new of wave of financial Public Relations specialists and strategies for both established and emerging organizations.
9.
The facilitation of technology transfer throughout Europe is another factor impacting the development of Public Relations in the EU member nations.
10.
The EU will ultimately define and unify European Public Relations into a “Pan- European” practice – at least at the strategic macro level.
This may result into something substantially different from what is currently in UK and the US.
11.
No one should assume that other EU member nations will copy and practice British and US dominated kind of PR as it is now.
There are enough room for them to play around brands, trends and thus evolve a unique structure to reflect their situation and environment.
12.
European Public Relations may not develop fully until a common European culture concurrently develops.
This may look impossible considering the cracks that are already manifesting in the political and economic structures of the EU.
13.
Many Public Relations scholars and practitioners conclude that Public Relations practice is socially, as well as culturally and geopolitically specific.
Thus, Public Relations practice and theory can be pan-European or (pan-global) only in so far 124 | P a ge as a concomitant social, cultural and geopolitical commonality evolves throughout Europe (or worldwide).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5.3 1.
Discuss five points that show the evolving nature of European Public Relations 4.0 CONCLUSION The Public Relations industry in Europe is unevenly developed amongst the nations that constitute the European Union.
Part of the explanation for this is the sociopolitical cum cultural differences that exist in these member nations.
Currently, United States and British Public Relations firms dominate the industry in Europe and so the Public Relations practised in America is glaring visible in parts of Europe.
However, lobbying and Public Relations in the European Union have dramatically expanded during the past decade and in the 21st Century.
Billions of dollars have been spent on this too.
This is also partly the reason for the survival or the success story of the PR industry in Europe.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the evolving nature of the European Public Relations industry and raised some points to establish its connection to the American type PR practices.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the current state of the PR industry in Europe.
2.
Some practitioners are of the opinion that the PR industry in the UK is patterned alongside American type and expectation.
Is this true?
If it is, what three factors made this possible?
If not, give three points to argue your position.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 125 | P a ge 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni (Eds.)
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
6.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
7.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 126 | P a ge UNIT 4: MIDDLE EAST PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Middle East Public Relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The Middle East has remained a hot bed of crises for decades now.
The much desired peace between Israel and its neighbours has remained elusive owing to stringent and uncompromising standpoints from both parties.
The other nations who are not directly engaged in war are not at peace either.
There have been many roadmaps to peace but none seem to have worked or likely to work because it does appear that the main actors do not really wish to see the roadmaps work.
In the midst of all these, how does PR play up?
According to Alanazi (1996), cited in Culbertson and Chen (1996), “Public Relations has entered a new era in the Arab world.
In the minds of many, Arab nations use Public Relations as a ‘weapon’ to achieve political goals.
The 1991 Gulf War, pitting the United States and its allies against Iraq, provided many examples.” Alanazi (1996) also observes that the western model of Public Relations has a short history in the Middle East.
He notes for example, that systematic Public Relations came into Saudi Arabia with the arrival of international oil companies to exploit the rich oil resources of the oil rich nation.
This goes to support our earlier thesis that International Public Relations finds best and practical expression in Multinational Corporations, hence our argument that IPR is Multinational Public Relations.
127 | P a ge  Our major concern here, however, is that the focus of Public Relations in the Middle East is a little different from what ordinarily one will expect.
But studies have also revealed that the description of Public Relations practices in the Middle East countries like Saudi Arabia resembles Public Relations in the West.
So, what does these all mean for International Public Relations?
Is globalization of Public Relations real and practical?
And most importantly, is Public Relations in the Middle East really working?
2.0 OBJECTIVES The main objective of this Unit is to discuss the Middle East Public Relations in relation to the others we have looked at earlier.
At the end of this Unit, the student should be able to appreciate what Public Relations is doing in the Middle East quagmire.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MIDDLE EAST PUBLIC RELATIONS The Middle East Public Relations currently focuses on engaging dialogue and bringing peace between Israel and Palestine.
It also focuses on ethno-religious dialogues in the region.
Public Relations practitioners in the Middle East could implement their skills by assuming the role of educating and re-educating the United States public on the Middle East (Samra, 2001).
The need for peace in the Middle East obviously drives the Public Relations practices there.
This has given rise to a lot of peace conferences, religious dialogue, ethnic round tables etc.
These are put together by Public Relations practitioners to engage the public in finding lasting solutions to the Middle East problems or at least ameliorate the adverse effects on the economy and people in those regions.
However, some scholars have observed that planning and organizing for the peace conferences etc could present challenging scenarios for the western trained Public Relations specialist.
It gives such specialists the opportunity to explore new trends and frontiers in dealing with similar issues.
The United States plays a major role in the Middle East conflict as an interested mediator.
Therefore, the resolution of the situation is to the US national interest.
This is the major reason every US Government spends millions of dollars in the region to protect its immediate and future interests.
128 | P a ge However, the average US citizen knows very little of anything else outside of the US.
Geography and traveling are not peculiar hobbies for US citizens.
Therefore, Public Relations practitioners should implement their skills beginning at the local level.
To begin, as noted by Samra (2001:689), cited in Heath (Ed.)
(2001), they could assume the role of educating and reeducating the American public about the real issues involved in the Middle East conflicts and the best practical way to tackle such issues.
According to Samra (2001), the mutual benefits to this include: 1.
A Deeper Appreciation of Middle Eastern History and its Contribution to Western Civilization Such massive reorientation of the US public by PR practitioners will obviously result in a deeper understanding and appreciation of the Middle Eastern history, culture and people.
It will also help to understand and evaluate their aspirations better within the context of the region.
The Middle East’s contribution to modern civilization especially in the West will be further explored through such platforms.
2.
A Better Understanding of the Behaviours of its People and Culture Culture is the touchstone that defines a people and their aspirations.
Until you understand a man, you cannot predict him.
Until we have a proper understanding of the people of the Middle East and their values, every roadmap to the so-called peace will continue to hit the detour or the rocks.
3.
Ongoing Religious and Political Dialogue PR activities towards making ongoing religious and political dialogue more effective will go a long way in redefining the Middle East peace process.
4.
Leadership and Participation in the Peace Process A proper education or reeducation of the American public on the Middle East conflicts will help offer participatory and enlightened leadership on the critical issues on the conflicts.
5.
Financial Gains to Arabs and Israelis by Expanding Economic Ties Financial gains could also be a result of these efforts if well managed.
Thus, the successful completion of the peace process could add to the stability of the region in a multifaceted way (Samra, 2001).
The peace conferences could therefore present a very exciting challenge to Public Relations practitioners as it may provide them the opportunity to exploit new frontiers, next levels and new techniques to address some of the perennial issues.
129 | P a ge  SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5.4 1.
Discuss the current state of the Middle East situation and how PR is helping tackle some of the issues.
4.0 CONCLUSION As we conclude this Unit and Module, the views of Samra (2001) reverberate here, as she notes thus: “For the Western Public Relations practitioner, the Middle East peace process could be taking place right in one’s own community, as was the case in Florida.
Where there are multi-ethnic groups that play a significant role in the religious and sociopolitical spectrum, there is opportunity abounding for the Public Relations practitioners to implement their skills beginning at the local level.” They could do this through education or re-education of the American public on the Middle East situation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this Unit, you were able to do an overview of the Middle East situation with a focus on what Public Relations means for the Middle East PR practitioner.
The US role was also analyzed and the benefits of greater enlightenment to the American public were further explored.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the benefits of greater enlightenment of the American public by the PR practitioners interested in the Middle East situation.
2.
Is Public Relations doing enough to help resolve the Middle East conflict?
Please, support your argument with valid facts.
3.
Discuss the current state of Public Relations in the Middle East and explain what Western PR practitioners could do to move the practice to the next desired level in that region.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 130 | P a ge 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
6.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
7.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 131 | P a ge MODULE 6: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS: ETHICAL ISSUES Unit 1: Ethics in Public Relations Unit 2: International Public Relations Codes of Ethics Unit 3: Transnational Corporate Ethical Responsibilities Unit 4: Relativism versus Universalism UNIT 1: ETHICS IN PUBLIC RELATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Ethics in Public Relations 3.2 The Need for Ethical Controls in the PR Industry 3.3 Schools of Thought in Public Relations Ethics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Generally, ethics is an inclusive term, meaning that it can be understood in a variety of ways.
Ethics is associated with morality and deals with matters of right and wrong.
Ruch (1980) sees it as a set of moral principles or values dealing with what are considered good or bad, right or wrong.
In mass communication, Media Ethics refers to the code of conduct or set of rules and principles which morally govern and guide the mass media and their personnel in the discharge of their functions: Respect for authority, being fair to the audience, quality, equity, moral behaviour and all that constitutes a good life are ethics-orient; and these traits touch on conscience and morality.
The ability to judge and behave ethically or otherwise is the function of our conscience and morality.
The ethical issues that affect the practice of journalism in Nigeria shall be the focus of this unit.
132 | P a ge  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to do the following: 1.
Define ethics, media ethics, and Public Relations ethics.
2.
Identify and explain some ethical theories.
3.
Discuss the need for ethical controls in the PR industry.
4.
Identify and explain some Schools of Thought in Public Relations practice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ETHICS IN PUBLIC RELATIONS The Public Relations Department or Unit in any corporate organization, firm or institution of any type should be the seat of corporate ethics and the highest professional behaviour in all corporate matters.
From the perspective of Seitel (2007:121), at least four ethical theories are relevant to the practice of Public Relations.
These four theories are briefly explained below: 1.
The Attorney/Adversary Model: This model was developed by Jay Barney and Ralph Black and compares the legal profession to that of PR in that (1) both are advocates in an adversarial climate and (2) both assume counterbalancing messages will be provided by adversaries.
Barney and Black suggest that in this model, Public Relations practitioners have no obligation to consider the public interest or any other outside view beyond that of their client (Seitel, 2007:121).
2.
The Two-Way Communication Model: This model was developed by Jim Grunig.
The model is based on collaboration, working jointly with different people, and allowing for both listening and give- and-take.
In this model, Grunig suggests that the Public Relations professional should balance his/her role as a client advocate with one as a social conscience for the larger public (Seitel, 2007:121).
3.
The Enlightened Self-interest Model: This was developed by Sherry Baker and is based on the controversial principle 133 | P a ge that businesses do well by doing good.
This is controversial because that is not always the case about successful businesses.
In this model, however, Baker suggests that companies could gain competitive advantage and more recognition/respect in the market if they act ethically (Seitel, 2007:121).
4.
The Responsible Advocacy Model: This model was developed by Kathy Fitzpatrick and Candace Gauthier.
The model is based on the ideals of professionalism and responsibility.
It argues that the Public Relations practitioner’s first loyalty is to his/her client, but must also have a responsibility to voice the opinions of organizational stakeholders.
In this model, the founders suggest that the PR practitioner’s greatest need for ethical guidance is in the reconciliation of being both a professional advocate and a social conscience of the people (Seitel, 2007:121), which Uthman Dan Fodio ultimately called “an open wound that only truth can heal”.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6.1 1.
How will the Responsible Advocacy Model work for an IPR practitioner?
2.
Put up a one-page argument to support Sherry Baker’s “The Enlightened Self-interest Model” 3.2 THE NEED FOR ETHICAL CONTROLS IN THE PUBLIC RELATIONS INDUSTRY The need for ethical controls in the Public Relations industry cannot be overemphasized.
Any industry without such controls never grows because practitioners can take laws into their hand.
Worst, such an industry will be abused because of its state of anarchy.
Bearing this in mind, ethical and legal controls in the Public Relations exist for the following reasons: 1.
For proper regulation of the activities of the professionals and practitioners in the industry.
2.
To ensure best and exemplary practice in the industry.
3.
To protect the publics of an organization that the PR Department represents.
4.
To ensure and maintain standards and acceptability.
5.
To avoid unnecessary and destructive litigations.
6.
To ensure correct conduct and behaviour amongst the practitioners in the 134 | P a ge industry.
7.
To maintain a high level of professionalism in the industry.
3.3 SCHOOLS OF THOUGHT IN PUBLIC RELATIONS ETHICS 1.
Co-orientation: The Co-orientation Theory is based on the argument that journalists and Public Relations practitioners perform similar roles and therefore should follow similar professional norms.
This model uses teleological reasoning.
According to Broom (1977), Public Relations practitioners should strive to achieve a convergence of perspectives between an organization and its key publics.
Most of the literature in this area has therefore emphasized the media relations functions and thus defined journalists as key public.
How journalists classify PR practitioners differs based on whether the image was formed from the general perception (social norm level) or through personal experience (functional level).
Conversely, PR practitioners typically have a better image of the journalism profession than of individual reporters.
PR practitioners and Journalists define lying similarly and agree that declining comment or being evasive does not equate with telling a lie (Ryan and Martinson, 1991).
2.
Advocacy: Advocacy ethics stems from the Social Responsibility Theory of the press and from persuasion rooted in Greek philosophy as a legitimate means of conveying a position or argument.
The approach, according to Nelson (1994), is primarily teleological, valuing organizational goals, but basic rules-based guidelines may be applied.
PR practitioners serve as organizational advocates, whether presenting the benefits of products, service or designing persuasive healthcare messages etc.
Persuasion becomes unethical, however, when deliberate falsehood, distortion, or deception is used to mask intentions such as in the case of blatantly irresponsible communication campaigns (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
3.
Professionalism: Professionalism typically employs Rule Deontology to determine the scope of acceptable principles through codes, accreditation, and licensing.
Professional associations and a growing number of companies have codified ethics to define daily decision making standards and reflect practitioner responsibility to the public (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
135 | P a ge  Codes may also reinforce ethical expectations to PR novices and deter government intervention, thereby enhancing professionalism.
Codes of PR practice will usually address issues of public interest, accepting gifts, honesty, integrity, accuracy, truth, disclosure, conflict of interest, confidence and privacy, professional reputation, corporate image, and enforcement terms and rights.
The same goes for accreditation which is a way of ascertaining that standards and prescribed practices are duly followed and still ongoing in the industry per time.
Accreditation has a way of validating professional processes in the industry and call organizations to order or to fall in line or be isolated from the industry.
It is a peer mechanism or review model that ensures professionalism (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
Reliance on professional ethics codes leads to criticism that they are vague, unenforceable, or applied inconsistently.
For example, the PRSA code clearly proscribes lying, but it does not give clear guidance on when withholding information is justified, am ethical dilemma experienced by most PR practitioners (Wakefield, 2001).
As globalization has evolved, many professionals have suggested the development of universal or international codes based on the belief that certain moral elements are basic to all humanity despite the cultural differences.
Many cultures, however, do not embrace written codes of ethics, making such a universal code unlikely to gain wide acceptance and necessarily so broad as to lack pragmatic application.
Codes of ethics, then, might be better at providing am image of professionalism than at actually guiding action (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
4.
Game Theory: This theory proposes that social interaction can be analyzed using mathematics to determine beneficial actions.
Applied to PR, the Game Theory expands Ehling’s (1984, 1985) Decision Theory model in which individuals identify possible actions and weigh their outcomes to restore conflicts by placing individual decision strategies in the context of other players (Murphy, 1989).
The resulting theological ethics (a type of cost benefit analysis) weighs the consequences of possible actions by all actors by assigning numerical values to each.
Much as individuals often use simple cost-benefit analysis to make decisions about everyday things such as consumer purchases, proponents of Game Theory stress the ability of this more complex form of cost-benefit analysis to allow PR practitioners to make systematic rational decisions not just based on the organization for which they work but also 136 | P a ge taking into account their publics, particularly in instances where clear-cut choices might not be obvious (Murphy, 1989).
By weighing the “what ifs” for all players, the Game Theory enables PR practitioners to better understand coalition formation and behaviour and to proceed with more confidence in strategic planning (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
Critics of the Game Theory point to the problems inherent in any purely theological approach.
Determining all possible consequences and player beforehand can be difficult (if not impossible).
Also, assigning numeric values to all possible actions and outcomes can be arbitrary at best, and achieving the best outcome might require inherently unethical action such as lying.
If not carefully applied, the Game Theory degenerates into gamesmanship in which personal assertiveness is high, cooperation is low, and other players are disempowered (Folger et al, 1993).
5.
Corporate Responsibility: A corporation recognizes that doing good results in doing well, and being seen as a responsible corporate citizen, benefits the bottom line.
This has become necessary because consumer advocacy and awareness have forced business to be more accountable to the society (Wright, 1976).
Thus, corporate philanthropy represents good action because of the resulting goodwill that it buys for the company or organization.
Ethical action is determined using cost- benefit analysis to further the company’s goals in the belief that what benefits the organization will have wider consequences and eventually will benefit society as well.
This approach described above is the first approach under Corporate Responsibility called Enlightened Self-Interest, which is a restricted form of teleology consistent with Kohlberg’s Stage 3 reasoning (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
Recently, this approach to Corporate Responsibility has fallen in favour of an approach based on Social Contract Theory and the notion that social responsibility goes beyond good business practice; it encompasses the rights of publics and corporations’ duties to those publics.
As such, this formulation combines aspects of Co-orientation, Advocacy, Professionalism and Game Theory, culminating in a form of act deontology in which principles are delineated to guide actions and communications with public.
Public themselves are viewed as stakeholders and are treated as ends in themselves and not as means to an end (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
137 | P a ge In practice, however, this approach is often not easy to achieve, in large part because PR practitioners are frequently left out of organizational ethical decision making, leaving them powerless to enact corporate philosophies (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
6.
Structural/Functional Approach This approach to PR is based on systems theory, which stresses the role of organizational environment and purpose, to delineate differing ethical standards according to job function.
This is further based on Dozier’s (1983) identification of two main PR roles: (1) Communication Technician (2) Communication Manager.
This division results in an ethical decision-making hierarchy in which technicians, functioning as advocate for their organization; first employ rule deontological principles such as codes of ethics.
However, if codes are unavailable or incomplete, then practitioners turn to theological principles.
But because managers function as advisers, they follow the opposite route, as befitting a more autonomous and objective status.
Both approaches fall within Kohlberg’s (1981, 1984) Conventional Level reasoning.
The strength of this approach is its ability to provide a unified ethical system for differing PR functions.
Although the order of application varies, the same principles are used by advocates and advisers, resulting in similar outcomes (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
7.
Accommodation/Discursive Approach: Whereas the Structural/Functionalist Approach emphasizes the strategic goal achievement aspects of systems Theory, the Accommodation/Discursive Approach emphasizes the relational aspects.
Sullivan (1965) outlined three types of PR values: (I) Technical – which he varied as morally neutral (II) Partisan – comprising commitment, loyalty, and trust in the organization, and (III) Mutual – comprising institutional obligations to the public based on principles of mutuality and rationality.
Sullivan placed the locus of ethical issues at the intersection of partisan and mutual values, highlighting the tension that often exists in practice between organizational and broader societal interests.
He also stressed the need for PR practitioners to facilitate communication between the two (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
In addition, the approach employs the discourse ethics of Habermas (1979, 1996) to resituate ethics in the process of communication rather than in 138 | P a ge communication outcomes.
Building on Kohlberg’s typology of moral reasoning, Habermas specified discourse rules ensuring that discussion participants are best able to advance their interests and weigh them critically against those of the larger community.
This philosophy is embodied in Item 7 of the IPRA Code of Ethics, which states that members “shall undertake to establish the moral, psychological, and intellectual conditions for dialogue in its true sense” (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
Under this approach, Advocacy is inherently unethical because it is based on content, not process, and on monologue, not dialogue.
The approach makes moot the question of whether clients are so unethical that a practitioner cannot represent them in good faith because unethical clients often refuse to submit to such a process (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
Critics note that the process requires rational application to procedural rules, yet not all organizations are interested in rational decision making, leaving open the question of whether using persuasion to convince them to enter into negotiation would not be more ethical than simply leaving them outside the bounds of practice (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
8.
Contingency Theory: This is a relatively new development in PR theory because many internal and external factors could constrain relations with publics, contingency theory suggest that organizations weigh these factors to determine which style of PR practice is most appropriate under the circumstances (Curtin and Boynton, 2001).
Accommodation, then, is not always possible or even desirable.
Instead, a large number of factors must be carefully weighed and systematically applied in any given situation.
A decision-making framework consonant with a contingency approach expands on the Potter Box, in which agents prioritize values and publics by defining the situation, identifying values, selecting principles, and choosing loyalties (Mc Elread, 1996).
This approach, rather than forcing a choice, combines deontological and teleological principles in a similar four-step framework: 1.
Confront ethical dilemma 139 | P a ge 2.
Determine individual motivation to act 3.
Consider rules, principles, and duties as well as predictions concerning causes and consequences of actions 4.
Reach decision and take appropriate action.
The result suggests a true situation ethics in which moral decision are based on detailed knowledge of each relevant situation and both principled action and a weighing of consequences (Vasquez, 1996).
4.0 CONCLUSION According to Seitel (2007), ethics should make a great difference between Public Relations and other professions.
He notes further: “In light of numerous misconceptions about the practice of Public Relations, it is imperative that practitioners emulate the highest standards of personal and professional ethics.
Within an organization, Public Relations practitioners must be the standard bearers of corporate ethical initiatives.
By the same token, Public Relations consultants must always counsel their clients in an ethical direction – towards accuracy and candor and away from lying and hiding the truth.” 5.0 SUMMARY This Unit discussed PR ethics as a core factor in Public Relations practice and management.
We also considered the need for ethical controls in the industry and based the argument on some ethical theoretical models and Schools of Thought that define the practice of Public Relations.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss three Schools of Thought in Public Relations ethics and say exactly how they influence the industry.
2.
Should PR practitioners be advocates?
If yes, who should they advocate for?
Please, use valid and sound argument in making your submission.
3.
Discuss the need for ethical considerations in the PR industry.
4.
Discuss five Schools of Thought in Public Relations practice and state how they influence ethical decision making processes.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 140 | P a ge 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni (Eds.)
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Grunig, J. E.
(Ed.)
(1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 6.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 7.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 8.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
9.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
10.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 11.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 12.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 13.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 141 | P a ge 14.
Okoye, Innocent (2008).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: Unilag 15.
Ewelukwa, B.N.
(2004).
Introduction to Nigerian Press Law.
Onitsha: Maranatha Press Ltd 16.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 142 | P a ge UNIT 2: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CODES OF ETHICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The IPR Code of Athens 3.2 The PRSA Member Code of Ethics 2000 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION A code of ethics or conduct, according to Seitel (2007), is a formal statement of the values and business practices of a corporation.
“A code may be a short mission statement, or it may be a sophisticated document that requires compliance with articulated standards and has a complicated enforcement mechanism.” (Seitel, 2007:113).
IPRA is the acronym for International Public Relations Association which was formally established in London on May 1, 1955, with the adoption of a constitution and the appointment of the first IPRA Council.
The association is aimed at promoting exchange of information and co-operation within the profession.
The Code of Athens was established under the IPRA as a set guidelines and instructions to be strictly adhered to by its members like every other profession in the world that uphold value systems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This Unit basically presents two of the numerous recognized Codes in the practice of Public Relations.
At the end of this Unit, the student should be able to identify and discuss some of the critical elements of these ethical codes in the Public Relations practice.
143 | P a ge 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS CODE OF ATHENS The Code of Athens is presented here in full: THE CODE OF ATHENS CONSIDERING that all Member countries of the United Nations Organization have agreed to abide by its Charter which reaffirms “its faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person” and that having regard to the nature of the profession, Public Relations practitioners in these countries should undertake to ascertain and observe the principles set out in this Charter: CONSIDERING that, apart from “rights”, human beings have not only physical or material need but also intellectual, moral and social needs, and that their rights are of real benefit to them only insofar as these needs are essentially met; CONSIDERING that, in the course of their professional duties and depending on how these duties are performed, Public Relations practitioners can substantially help to meet these intellectual, moral and social needs; And lastly, CONSIDERING that the use of the techniques enabling them to come simultaneously into contact with millions of people gives Public Relations practitioners a power that has to be restrained by the observance of a strict moral code.
On all these grounds, all members of the International Public Relations Association agree to abide by this International Code of Ethics, and that if, in the light of evidence submitted to the Council, a member should be found to have infringed this Code in the course of his/her professional duties, he/she will be deemed to be guilty of serious misconduct calling for an appropriate penalty.
Accordingly, each member: SHALL ENDEAVOUR 1.
To contribute to the achievement of the moral and cultural conditions enabling human beings to reach their full stature and enjoy the indefeasible rights to which they are entitled under the “Universal declaration of Human Rights”; 2.
To establish communications patters and channels which, by fostering the free flow of essential information, will make each member of the group feel that he/she is being kept informed, and also give him/her an awareness of his/her own personal involvement and responsibility, and of his/her solidarity with other members; 144 | P a ge 3.
To conduct himself/herself always and in all circumstances in such a manner as to deserve the confidence of those with whom he/she comes into contact; 4.
To bear in mind that, because of the relationship between him/her profession and the public, his/her conduct – even in private – will have an impact on the way in which the profession as a whole is appraised; SHALL UNDERTAKE 5.
To observe in his/her professional duties, the moral principles and rules of the “Universal Declaration of Human Rights”; 6.
To pay due regard to , and uphold human dignity and to recognize the right of each individual to judge for himself/herself; 7.
To establish the moral, psychological and intellectual conditions for dialogue in its true sense, and to recognize the rights of these parties involved to state their case and express their views; 8.
To act, in all circumstances, in such a manner as to take account of the respective interests of the parties involved; both the interest of the organization which he/she serves and the interests of the publics concerned; 9.
To carry out his/her undertakings and commitments which shall always be so worded as to avoid any misunderstanding, and to show loyalty and integrity in all circumstances so as to keep the confidence or his/her clients or employers, past or present, and all of the publics that are affected by his/her actions; SHALL REFRAIN FROM 10.
Subordinating the truth to other requirements; 11.
Circulating information which is not based on established and ascertainable facts; 12.
Taking part in any venture or undertaking which is unethical or dishonest or capable of impairing human dignity or integrity; 13.
Using any “manipulative” methods or techniques designed to create subconscious motivations which the individual cannot control of his/her own free will and so cannot be held accountable for the actions taken on them.
Author: Lucien Matrat, Member Emeritus (France).
Adopted by IPRA General Assembly, Athens, May 1965, and modified at Tehran, April 1968 145 | P a ge 3.2 THE PRSA MEMBER CODE OF ETHICS 2000 This section presents the Public Relations Society of America (PRSA) member Code of Ethics that was passed in 2000 as one of the standard codes the Public Relations industry has looked up to.
Some other codes merely mimic this particular code in its articulation of its own standard codes.
The PRSA Member Code of Ethics 2000 is presented below (without editing): PRSA MEMBER CODE OF ETHICS 2000 PRSA MEMBER STATEMENT OF PROFESSIONAL VALUES This statement presents the core values of PRSA members and, more broadly, of the Public Relations profession.
These values provide the foundation for the member Code of Ethics and set the industry standard for the professional practice of Public Relations.
These values are the fundamental beliefs that guide our behaviours and decision-making process.
We believe our professional values are vital to the integrity of the profession as a whole.
ADVOCACY We serve the public interest by acting as responsible advocates for those we represent.
We provide a voice in the marketplace of ideas, facts, and viewpoints to aid informed public debate.
HONESTY We adhere to the highest standards of accuracy and truth in advancing the interests of those we represent and in communicating with the public.
EXPERTISE We acquire and responsibly use specialized knowledge and experience.
We advance the profession through continued professional development, research, and education.
We build mutual understanding, credibility, and relationships among a wide array of institutions and audiences.
INDEPENDENCE We provide objective counsel to those we represent.
We are accountable for our actions.
146 | P a ge  LOYALTY We are faithful to those we represent, while honoring our obligation to serve the public interest.
FAIRNESS We deal fairly with clients, employers, competitors, peers, vendors, the media, and the general public.
We respect all opinions and support the right of free expression.
The Public Relations Society of America, 33 Irving Place, New York, NY 10003- 2376 147 | P a ge SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6.1 Is honesty a virtue the average Public Relations practitioner is really interested in?
Please, support your stand with valid argument.
4.0 CONCLUSION The practice of Public Relations becomes meaningless if there is no form of standardization of the practice.
Professionalism is a function of standardization.
To standardize therefore, the discipline requires a set of rules and guiding principles that every practitioner must adhere to.
These rules are what have been codified as ethical codes.
They help maintain sanity and professionalism in the Public Relations industry.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit discussed two of the well known and generally accepted Public Relations Codes of Ethics in the industry to give the students a hands-on understanding of what a Code means, should contain, and should aim at.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss three issues or areas that the PRSA member Code of Ethics 2000 converges with the Code of Athens.
2.
Discuss the relevance of three carefully selected items in the IPRA Code of Athens to the practice of International Public Relations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 148 | P a ge 5.
Grunig, J. E.
(Ed.)
(1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 6.
Grunig, J. and Hunt, T. (1984).
Managing Public Relations.
New York: CBS Public Publishing 7.
Skinner, J. and Von Essen, L. (1991).
The South African Handbook of Public Relations.
Johannesburg, South Africa: Southern Books 8.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 9.
Okoye, Innocent (2008).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: Unilag 10.
Belch and Belch (2001).
Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective.
Boston: McGraw-Hill 149 | P a ge UNIT 3: TRANSNATIONAL CORPORATE ETHICAL RESPONSIBILITIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Transnational Corporate Ethical Responsibilities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION True International Public Relations is certainly undertaken at the level of Transnational Corporations (TNCs) or Multinational Corporations (MNCs).
We have in the earlier Units discussed what makes for effective Public Relations in the Multinational Corporations; one of such that was left till this Unit is corporate ethical responsibilities.
The nature of transnational businesses makes it imperative that such corporations that operate at that level maintain a structure that respects corporate ethical responsibilities so as to continue to enjoy a healthy and cordial relationship with its numerous publics across all the nations where such corporation operates.
According to Seitel (2007), “an individual’s or organization’s ethics comes down to the standards that are followed in relationships with others – the real integrity of the individual or organization.
Obviously, a person’s ethical construct and approach depend on numerous factors – cultural, religious, and educational, among others”.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 150 | P a ge This Unit will enable you to appreciate the overriding need for transnational corporate ethical responsibilities in Multinational Corporations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TRANSNATIONAL CORPORATE ETHICAL RESPONSIBILITIES The subject matter of ethics has remained controversial and debatable.
The reasons are obvious.
Individual, cultural, and corporate differences will continue to interpret ethics differently depending on the context.
Seitel (2007:111) captures this situation more vividly when he noted thus: “No issue is solely black or white but is rather a shade of gray – particularly in making Public Relations decisions.
That is not to say that ethical distinctions don’t exist.
They do.
Philosophers throughout the ages have debated the essence of ethics”.
Seitel (2007:111) goes ahead to give a brief insight into some of these classical distinctions thus: • Utilitarianism suggests considering the “greater good” rather than what may be best for the individual.
• To Aristotle, the golden mean of moral virtue could be found between two extreme points of view.
• Kant’s Categorical Imperative recommended acting “on that maxim which you will to become a universal law.” • Mill’s Principle of Utility recommended “seeking the greatest happiness for the greatest number.” • The traditional Judeo-Christian ethic prescribes “loving your neighbour as yourself.” Indeed, this golden rule makes good sense as well as in the practice of Public Relations.
Notwithstanding these distinctions in ethical issues, the imperative for Transnational Corporate Ethical Responsibilities cannot be overemphasized.
According to Dean Kruckeberg (1996), the following arguments suffice: 1.
There is need for ethics and mutually agreed responsibilities because of the ever increasing social, political, and economics impact of transnational corporations.
Since they operate in different countries and context, a guiding ethics will be a welcome development to address individual differences found in the different operational branches and countries.
2.
Elfstrom (1991) argues that corporations have the requisite qualities for moral agency but not as elegant as/and more complex as found in individual humans.
It 151 | P a ge is expected that corporations are able to control their actions and make rational decisions when they adopt such ethical values and practices.
3.
Questions of “at which level is moral accountability?” remain controversial with the plethora of opinions that are highly contradictory.
Should Transnational Corporations become morally accountable at their home countries (Corporate Headquarters/Office) or held accountable using the host nation’s moral expectations and idiosyncrasies?
Will it be acceptable then to prescribe different ethical values for different employees of a single company because they work in different countries and context?
An attempt to answer these questions will obvious get one into trouble of misjudging the situation or being accused of insensitivity with regards to others cultural ethos and values.
This controversy then leads to issues of relativism and universalism, the theme of the next Unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION True professionalism devoid of ethics is a farce.
No organization could survive or sustain growth outside of professionalism in all areas of its operations.
This makes it imperative that Transnational Corporations must be guided by standard ethical considerations in every place of operation.
Anything short of this will be anti-growth and conflict-prone.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit x-rayed the need for Transnational Corporate Ethical Responsibilities in International Public Relations.
It also considered some valid arguments about relative ethical issues and prescribed possible alternatives and courses of action for Transnational Corporations faced with the dilemma of Headquarter politics and their ethical responsibilities in their operational bases.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Critique Dean Kruckeberg’s arguments on Transnational Corporate Ethical Responsibilities.
2.
Discuss the need for Transnational Corporate Ethical Responsibilities in corporate bases of Multinational Corporations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 152 | P a ge 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Grunig, J. E.
(Ed.)
(1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 153 | P a ge UNIT 4: RELATIVISM VERSUS UNIVERSALISM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Relativism versus Universalism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous Unit, we discussed the need for ethical responsibilities in Transnational Corporations.
The argument led to a brief mention of relativism and universalism as possible theoretical outlets to satisfy the demands of Transnational Corporations.
Relativism is like Situational ethics.
An issue is not morally bad or good until the circumstances surrounding that event are duly considered before passing judgment on the morality of the action or the actors behind the action.
Relativism, like Relativist ethics, permits that some moral standards could vary according to cultures, circumstances and times.
Relativism is also like Situational ethics which considers the rightness or wrongness of an action based on the particular situation or circumstance in which the doer finds himself.
On the other hand, Universalism or Universalist ethics is the idea of having a common set of ethics guiding members of the same profession where ever they may be in the world.
An advocate of ethical universalism, Callahan (2003), cited in Okoye (2008), argues that since all human beings have a common human nature always and everywhere, and share universals such as language, reason, emotions and family systems, there should be a common morality that would ensure societal continuity and uniformity.
The debate about the applicability of Relativism and Universalism in International Public Relations circles remain fluid.
Multinational Corporations have always been drawn in that debate because of the need to maintain professionalism in their operational bases.
154 | P a ge  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Describe Relativism or Relativist ethics.
2.
Describe Universalism or Universalist ethics.
3.
Explain the argument between Relativism and Universalism as it relates to Transnational Public Relations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 RELATIVISM VERSUS UNIVERSALISM While some Executives of Multinational or Transnational Corporations argue for universal ethical standards others argue that “When in Rome Behave like Romans”.
This is really debatable.
Should ethical standards change for individuals because of environmental or situational forces?
Should employees of the same MNC or TNC be treated differently by the same body because their actions were performed in different locations?
Would a wrong behaviour or action suddenly turn “right” because of the “location” or “situation” or “circumstances” of the behaviour or action?
Attempt to answer these questions would most likely prolong the debate or join us to the fray!
The following are earlier arguments on the debate: 1. Who is really right or wrong between Universalism and Relativism?
Literature suggests there are grave dangers in zealous moral imperialism of a type that may underlay radical universalism.
According to Donaldson (1989), as cited in Culbertson and Chen (1996), a large part of the confusion between universalism and relativism and a suspected primary reason for some people’s apparent attraction to a supposed relativism, is that Cultural Relativism and its subset, Ethical Relativism, are frequently confused with cultural tolerance.
In truth, cultural relativism bears resemblance to cultural tolerance.
2.
The next argument is that Vulgar Relativism is easily refutable.
Even those who recognize true cultural relativism have difficulty defending their position.
For example “right” can only apply to a given society because it is wrong to condemn others from different cultural context who do not share similar values with you.
However, according to Universalist arguments, this respect for other people’s culture leaves our own abused (Culbertson and Chen, 1996).
155 | P a ge 3.
In another related platform, some vocal Universalists have maintained that Radical Relativism demeans human beings.
Scholars like Donnelly (1989) and Christian (1989) are critical of Radical Relativism because it holds the concept that human beings have no moral significance.
This means that one is irrelevant to one’s moral status.
Christian (1989) also reported another dilemma the Relativists cannot escape called “Mannheim’s Paradox” thus: Truth, says the cultural relativist, is culture-bound but if it were, then he, within his own culture, ought not to see his own culture-bound truth as absolute.
He cannot proclaim cultural relativism without rising above it, and he cannot rise above it without giving up.
Arguments for Ethical Universalism in Transnational Corporations 1.
It is suggested that Universalism should be considered in the determination of Transnational Corporate ethics, although this may be tempered, according to individual cultures and the social climates of the host community (Culbertson and Chen, 1996).
2.
Donnelly (1989), as cited in Culbertson and Chen (1996), has also argued that “if human rights are literally the rights everyone possesses simply as a human being, such rights would seem universal by definition”.
3.
It is also argued that while respecting the belief of host cultures and host nations, guest TNCs must also insist upon reciprocal respect, toleration, and accommodation for their own values (Elfstrom, 1991).
In addition, although TNCs certainly may not be able to reform the nations where for example bribery is widespread, it may be sometimes possible for these TNCs to avoid participating in practices that they consider morally suspect (Elfstrom, 1991).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6.3 1.
From a practitioner point of view, defend Relativism against Universalist arguments.
156 | P a ge  4.0 CONCLUSION According to Okoye (2008), when you see two otherwise respected individuals taking opposing sides in an issue such as bribery or receiving gifts from persons you are in a position to influence a decision in their favour, for instance, you can now understand that their ethical orientation may be responsible for the way they think.
Of course, three important factors are responsible for different people’s ethical development.
They are cultural background, individual differences and situational contingencies (Okoye, 2008).
A good understanding of these things will make for better understanding of people and their ways, and enhance peace in the world.
However, we should note that notwithstanding every attempt carried out in good conscience to respect the unique cultural values of a particular society where a Multinational Corporation operates, nothing outside of this should justify the passing off of a universal wrong as good no matter the situation, circumstance, or environment.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit focused on the ongoing debate between Relativism and Universalism and how Transnational Corporations are drawn in the battle in their quest to maintain professionalism through ethical responsibilities.
In this Unit, we explained Relativism like Relativist ethics which permits that some moral standards could vary according to cultures, circumstances and times.
On the other hand, Universalism or Universalist ethics is also explained as the idea of having a common set of ethics guiding members of the same profession where ever they may be in the world.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
In what situations or circumstances will you justify Relativism as a right course of ethical action to take?
2.
Discuss the argument that Relativism dehumanizes human beings.
3.
How can Universalist principles be implemented in all operational offices of Transnational Corporations without abusing or disrespecting the culture of such host communities?
157 | P a ge  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni (Eds.)
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Health, R.
(Ed.)
(2001).
Handbook of Public Relations.
Houston: Sage Publications.
3.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 4.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 5.
Grunig, J. E.
(Ed.)
(1992).
Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management.
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 6.
Okoye, Innocent (2008).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: Unilag 158 | P a ge  MODULE 7: INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS AND NIGERIA’S IMAGE IN FOREIGN CONTRIES: A CASE STUDY Unit 1: What Led to Nigeria’s Image Problems?
Unit 2: How Did this Image Become an International Issue?
Unit 3: Efforts of Past Nigeria’s Government and Eminent Citizens at Enhancing Nigeria Global Image Unit 4: How to Apply International Public Relations Strategies in Dealing with Nigeria’s Image Problems UNIT 1: WHAT LED TO NIGERIA’S IMAGE PROBLEMS?
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What Led to Nigeria’s Image Problems?
3.2 Nigeria’s Image Abroad Self Assessment Exercise 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Nigeria is the most populous black nation in the world but with a terrible, poor global image.
This case study approach is meant to take a professional look at the Nigerian situation to identify the issues that caused her to have negative global ratings.
159 | P a ge 2.0 OBJECTIVES This unit is about the factors that led to the negative image Nigeria has in the global community and the state of such image.
In essence, we shall consider how the international community perceive Nigeria and Nigerians everywhere they are found.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT LED TO NIGERIA’S IMAGE PROBLEMS?
Adlai E. Stevenson, an American Democratic politician and one-time Governor of Illinois, notes thus: “We can chart our future clearly and wisely only when we know the path, which has led to the present.” In the 70’s, the oil boom in the country gave rise to high standards of living amongst Nigerians.
This gave birth to rural-urban migration of mostly school leavers in search of white-collar jobs in the urban cities.
As a result, agriculture, which was the mainstay of the nation’s economy, was neglected.
The white-collar jobs anticipated were not there in the urban cities.
Frustration set in, the only way out to survive was crime such as robbery, theft, prostitution and other fraudulent practices.
As the economic recession became difficult the Shagari Regime introduced Austerity Measures from 1979-1983.
Part of this measure required the devaluation of the Nigerian currency - the Naira.
This led to open market system for obtaining foreign currency, which became very high, especially the Dollar and the Pound Sterling.
Getting these currencies became a very lucrative business and as a result, some criminally-minded Nigerians both at home and abroad became drug barons and pushers.
The fraudulent practice popularly called 419 became the order of the day in order to amass foreign currency.
To wash our dirty linen in the public, the mass media were publishing these activities without inhibition.
Atwood and Bullion (1983) write: “Mass media are the central instruments in determining maps of the world beyond our immediate sensory experience.” The way the mass media emphasize an event influences the way the audience will perceive such event – whether important or unimportant.
Okigbo (1990) supports this view when he notes that: The way a country is reported in the media can influence the kind of image the audience or public will have about the particular country because the media sometimes set the agenda for the audience.
160 | P a ge  In summary, the following points led to Nigeria’s negative global image situation.
1) Oil boom in the 1970s This was the period Nigeria made so much money from oil that how to spend it became a national issue.
2) Rural-urban migration of school leavers in search of white collar jobs Youths heard about so much money in the cities and they decided in large numbers to go look for this greener pasture.
Unfortunately, the so-called white collar jobs where nowhere to be found.
3) Abandonment\neglect of agriculture When the youths left the villages for the cities, the agricultural sector was left in the lurch.
4) Frustration from unemployment which led to crime The youths that migrated from the villages to cities suddenly came face to face with reality - no white collar jobs to match the number that required them.
They needed to survive and crime became one easy alternative.
5) Economic recession in the 1980s Suddenly, the oil boom led to inflation and the subsequent economic recession that stepped in was so catastrophic.
6) Devaluation of the Naira (making it a weak currency) and over- valuation of the dollar, pound sterling (seen as hard currencies) Getting hard currencies became a very lucrative business.
7) Drug pushing, criminal activities and foreign prostitution to obtain hard currencies became the order of the day.
3.2 NIGERIA’S IMAGE ABROAD Due to the activities of a small percentage of the Nigerian population, some of them in high positions of authority and influence, we have incurred a bad name in the international community, especially North America and Western Europe.
Many of the drug traffickers and their barons, using the most unlikely methods to carry out their illegitimate businesses and fraud, have been caught and jailed in those 161 | P a ge foreign lands where they operate.
Others who are being hunted at home have sought asylum in Europe under false claims of being political refugees.
These desperate Nigerians see their actions as the only way of earning a decent living.
But I ask, can a decent living come out from an indecent activity or business or pursuit?
I doubt.
Umezurike Oji, in the Guardian of March 31, 1993, succinctly captures Nigeria’s image challenge thus: Nigerians are now suspected in many western countries as potential drug traffickers and deceitful people.
At international airports, Nigerians are readily picked out of queues for special searches while their luggages are inspected with the greatest suspicion.
The experiences of Nigerians abroad is the opposite of hospitality and respect with which foreigners, especially from the west, are treated by Nigerian officials and the general populace.
History has it that in 1993, a minister of justice of Nigeria was stripped naked in New York at the port of entry during a special search of Nigerians.
Though then recent records show that there is a considerable and drastic reduction in the number of Nigerian drug traffickers and fraudsters through the vigilance of the law enforcement authorities and other security agencies; the harassment and intimidation of Nigerians still continue abroad.
The picture I am trying to paint here is that Nigeria’s image abroad is so battered that Nigerians there and at home are now very bitter with themselves at the way and manner the country’s name is being soiled daily by unscrupulous Nigerians just for the sake of dollars and pounds.
Nigeria, our pride and nation, has become a source of shame and laughing stock of the world.
Those who travel frequently come back with news of hurt, humiliation at foreign embassies and at entry points in the foreign lands.
This is an unhealthy development that points to all Nigerians as deceitful people both at home and abroad.
It will take a very long time before we as a people and a nation can redeem our image and be trusted again by the international community.
Ladies and gentleman, I am very positive and happy to say that all hope is not lost yet.
With IPR and Advertising strategies, Nigerian’s battered and bruised image will surely be redeemed.
But, first, let’s have an overview of some of the efforts of Nigeria’s past and present governments’ efforts and results towards this.
162 | P a ge  In summary, Nigeria is usually regarded as follows: 1.
A corrupt nation and people 2.
A nation of drug traffickers, users and barons 3.
A nation with so many cheap, local and international prostitutes.
4.
A crisis and conflict ridden society and majority of its citizens refugees (they are always applying for residences with this claim).
5.
A nation of fraudsters (419 news) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6.4 1.
Discuss how the action of 419ners negatively worked against Nigeria’s global image rating.
4.0 CONCLUSION Nigeria’s image situation is a combination of many factors.
However, the oil boom of the early 1980s and the migration of young school leavers from the villages to the cities contributed a lot to the damning condition the nation found itself.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in this unit what led to Nigeria’s global image problems and how this affects the current image situation.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss a possible 10-point-factor that led to Nigeria’s image problems.
2.
Is it possible to deal with the current Nigeria’s global image situation?
163 | P a ge 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds] (1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 3.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 4.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
5.
Nwosu, I.E.
(ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
6.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 7.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 8.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 9.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 10.
Okoye, Innocent (2008).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: Unilag 11.
Ewelukwa, B.N.
(2004).
Introduction to Nigerian Press Law.
Onitsha: Maranatha Press Ltd 164 | P a ge UNIT 2: HOW DID THIS IMAGE BECOME AN INTERNATIONAL ISSUE?
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How Did this Image Become an International Issue?
3.2 Effects of Nigeria’s Global Image 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Nigeria’s global image situation could have been better managed if the way and manner it was portrayed in the international media was professionally handled.
This is the major focus of this session.
We shall also consider the possible effects of the global image challenges.
2.0 OBJECTIVES In this Unit, you are expected to know how Nigeria’s image problems became an international issue and the effects of Nigeria’s Global Image on the body polity.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HOW DID THIS IMAGE BECOME AN INTERNATIONAL ISSUE?
1) Through the activities of our leaders who stash stolen funds away in foreign banks.
2) Through the activities of private citizens in Diaspora who engage in illegal businesses and crimes.
3) Through the actions of Nigerians who seek asylum in foreign lands.
165 | P a ge 4) Through the activities of Nigerians who dupe foreigners at slightest opportunity.
5) Through the Nigerian mass media.
3.2 EFFECTS OF NIGERIA’S GLOBAL IMAGE 1) Foreign humiliation and shame at embassies, airports, foreign lands etc.
2) Wrong perception of Nigerians as mostly fraudsters, deceitful people, prostitutes, common\big time criminals and unpatriotic elements.
3) Wrong perception of Nigeria as a corrupt, poverty-stricken, conflict\crises ridden and materialistic conscious nation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Nigeria’s global image during the 1980s became a core topic in international media circles because of the tactless manner it was handled by the local/national media.
More worrisome is the effect of this negative image on Nigerians generally.
As noted here, humiliations at embassies and high commissions in Nigeria are testament to the fact the negative global image was something no one desired for this great nation.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been exposed to how Nigeria global image of early 80s became a real global concern and the potential outcomes of attempts to remedy the anomaly.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss in details the role the media played in getting our dirty linen in company.
2.
Is the global community’s reaction to Nigeria’s global image justified?
166 | P a ge 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni [Eds.]
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 3.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 4.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
5.
Nwosu, I.E.
(ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
6.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 7.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 8.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 9.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 10.
Okoye, Innocent (2008).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: Unilag 11.
Ewelukwa, B.N.
(2004).
Introduction to Nigerian Press Law.
Onitsha: Maranatha Press Ltd 167 | P a ge UNIT 3: EFFORTS OF PAST NIGERIA’S GOVERNMENT AND EMINENT CITIZENS AT ENHANCING NIGERIA GLOBAL IMAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Efforts of Past Nigeria’s Government and Eminent Citizens at Enhancing Nigeria Global Image 3.2 Why These Efforts Have Not Paid Off Completely SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION The Nigerian Government and some eminent personalities have taken concerted steps towards giving Nigeria a new face in the comity of Nations.
These efforts range from international travels by Government officials to hosting of international events.
These efforts were primary meant to reintroduce Nigeria into the comity of nations as a good member.
However, due to certain obvious reasons, some of the dividends expected have failed to arrive.
These are part of the issues we will highlight in this Unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES This Unit focuses on efforts of past Nigeria’s government and eminent citizens at enhancing Nigeria’s global image and why these efforts have not paid off completely.
At the end of this Unit, you are expected to be able to: 1.
Identify the various efforts of past Nigeria’s government and eminent citizens at enhancing Nigeria’s global image.
168 | P a ge 2.
Discuss why these efforts have not paid off completely.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 EFFORTS OF PAST NIGERIA’S GOVERNMENT AND EMINENT CITIZENS AT ENHANCING NIGERIA GLOBAL IMAGE Nigerians have never been so concerned about their image abroad as in recent times.
The efforts of past Nigerian governments and eminent Nigerians to maintain a clean image for the country has not had a positive effect on the international community because there has not been systematic and continuously persuasive techniques and knowledge to make others see Nigerians as people with respect for humanity and human dignity, for legitimate authority and the dignity of labour, respect for positive morals and as a people who shun social ills in any form (Nwosu, 1990).
At the inception of the Obasanjo’s administration in 1999, the President embarked on numerous foreign/oversee trips.
When queried by human right groups, opposition parties and the general public, the administration claimed that such trips were necessary because of Nigeria’s battered image.
The president and his men argued relentlessly that the travels were necessary so that Nigeria’s pariah status could be changed.
There was no week the President and his men were not in one foreign nation or the other.
This, however, attracted some positive image to the nation.
Since the then Obasanjo administration took off, Nigeria hosted the US President, the British Prime Minister and a host of other notable politicians and world leaders who shunned Nigeria some few years back because of our undemocratic tendencies (Nwosu, 1990).
Many other conferences have also been held on the Nigerian soil.
The country hosted the Commonwealth of Nations Summit, several AU Summits, and others.
These signified the re-admission or re-acceptance of Nigeria in the international community.
Nigeria being in the forefront of the quest for a permanent seat (representing Africa) at the UN Security Council is clearly indicative of the country’s present global acceptance, status and image (Nwosu, 1990).
In summary, the Nigerian Government and eminent individuals have done the following to help readmit Nigeria into the international community: 1.
Embarking on numerous foreign tips by the then Nigerian President, Chief Olusegun Obasanjo, political leaders, and top government officials to integrate the nation back into the comity of nations; represent Nigeria in the international media; and have opportunity to address Nigerians in Diaspora.
169 | P a ge 2.
Invitations to and successful hosting since 1999 of world leaders like two United States Presidents, a British PM, Her Majesty the Queen of England, the Royal Family from England, an Australian PM and a host of others.
The effects of these visits are far reaching and positive.
3.
Successful hosting of international events like the 1999 Under-20 FIFA World Cup, Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting (CHOGM), All-Africa Games etc.
4.
Leadership of African Union and other affiliates since 1999.
5.
Bid to become a Permanent member of the UN SECURITY COUNCIL.
6.
Bid to host the 2014 Commonwealth Games (which eventually failed).
7.
The fight on corruption.
8.
Payment of Nigeria’s Debts\Debt Relief.
9.
Winning of the FIFA Under 16 World Cup 10.
Undertaking of international advertising projects and other image laundering efforts using the international media as channels.
11.
Launching of a Rebranding Nigeria project.
12.
Etc.
3.2 WHY THESE EFFORTS HAVE NOT PAID OFF COMPLETELY Notwithstanding the efforts of the various Nigerian Governments since 1999, much still needs to be done to make Nigeria completely accepted in the international community without suspicion.
According to Walter Lippmann, in his book “Public Opinion”: The development of the publicity man is a clear sign that the facts of modern life do not spontaneously take shape in which they can be known; they must be given a shape by somebody.
Perhaps it was this reason and more others that prompted Professor Jerry Gana when he called for the urgent assistance of PR practitioners in redeeming Nigeria’s badly battered 170 | P a ge image abroad.
Whether the call was a mere political talk or backed up with necessary required efforts, it could be clearly seen when one considers the qualification of the president’s men who are running his information and public affairs unit (Nwosu, 1990).
The fire brigade approach to issues and non-investment in PR activities to make known to the world the effort of Nigerian government and some eminent Nigerians laudable efforts to eradicate all anti-social elements of some Nigerians abroad and at home should be discouraged (Nwosu, 1990).
A lot is going on but little is being said and even when the saying is done, they are done in most unprofessional manners.
PR is not just about doing alone, it is also about talking.
Professor Wole Soyinka, Professor Chinua Achebe, Chief Emeka Anyaoku and a host of others are eminent Nigerians whose impact in the international community has brought some positive image for the nation (Nwosu, 1990).
But how much of their activities and personalities are craftily and professionally communicated to the larger world?
The answer is obvious: very little indeed!
Why?
The immediate reason is that International Public Relations principles and professionals are seldom involved in government and public communications efforts.
This anomaly has to be redeemed because no matter the effort made to redeem the country’s battered and bruised image, and the success achieved; if such efforts and successes are not properly or professionally communicated to the public, they will amount to nothing and the wrong impressions will persist.
In summary, however, the following reasons are suggested as the main issues why the various efforts of different Governments prior to 1999 had failed to get the desired results: 1.
We are still doing some of the things that led us to the present situation.
Take a look at the charade called April 2007 General elections organized by the Obasanjo administration.
This alone has the capacity to return us back to the dark days of Nigeria’s diplomatic quagmire as a nation of corrupt leaders, election riggers etc.
2.
The efforts have not been systematic, well structured and well executed.
Therefore, it is not yet well with our image.
3.
The efforts have not been continuously sustained.
In other words, consistency and continuity are always lacking.
4.
Some of the techniques are not persuasive enough.
171 | P a ge 5. International Public Relations strategists and experts have not been duly consulted in the formulation of the plans\programmes and so their skills, knowledge and experience have not been duly exploited.
6.
The executors and implementers of these programs are not knowledgeable in IPR management.
This means government hardly makes use of IPR strategists and professionals to achieve the positive image hope.
7.
The use of the Fire Brigade approach.
Waiting for an issue to get out of hand, and become a real challenge before it could be addressed or handled.
Do you know why Nigeria may never win the FIFA senior World Cup?
We have never had a minimum of a solid four-year action plan for our football and the World Cup comes up every four years!
4.0 CONCLUSION Building and sustaining favorable national image is not an easy task.
The situation is even worse when the image of that nation has been dented for over a period of time.
But with the use of IPR programmes or strategies as stated in the next topic, the image of this nation called Nigeria is bound to change to a positive one.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit discussed the Nigerian global image problems with particular reference to the various efforts of the Nigerian Government since 1999 to remedy the situation.
The Unit also focused on the suggested reasons why some of these efforts have not worked well perfectly.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss 10 solid steps Nigeria has taken since 1999 to address its poor image situation.
2.
Discuss seven possible reasons why efforts of government to address negative image challenges may not work well.
172 | P a ge 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni (Eds.)(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C. [Eds] (2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 3.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 4.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
5.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
6.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 7.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 8.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 9.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 10.
Okoye, Innocent (2008).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: Unilag 11.
Ewelukwa, B.N.
(2004).
Introduction to Nigerian Press Law.
Onitsha: Maranatha Press Ltd 173 | P a ge UNIT 4: HOW TO APPLY INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS STRATEGIES IN DEALING WITH NIGERIA’S IMAGE PROBLEMS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How to Apply International Public Relations Strategies in Dealing with Nigeria’s Image Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION International Public Relations strategies are not magic wands that solve all problems.
However, when they are consciously and consistently applied to identified image situations they work like magic wand.
Understanding is therefore very vital to effective application of such principles and strategies.
Since we used Nigeria as our case study here, we would customize the strategies to address the Nigerian image situation.
The same strategies could also mean doing something different if the case study scenerio changes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to identify and apply IPR strategies to solve image problems of organizations, institutions and nations.
174 | P a ge 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HOW TO APPLY INTERNATIONAL PUBLIC RELATIONS STRATEGIES IN DEALING WITH NIGERIA’S IMAGE PROBLEMS Nigeria’s image problems and challenges could be enhanced through the following programs and ways: 1.
Through the Establishment of Cultural Centres: Cultural centers should be set up abroad and maintained.
Within these centers, different types of cultural activities should be displayed.
Dr. G. G. Darah defines culture as, “the philosophical touchstone of every development.
It is the aggregate and state of the experience, thought, science, efforts and technical equipment of people with which they define their relationships and negotiate their transactions with the rest of the human community.” Admanson Hoebel on his part defines culture as “the integrated sum total of learned behavioral traits which are manifested and shared by the members of a society.” Culture Policy for Nigeria, published by the Federal Ministry of Culture, defined culture as: The totality of the way of life of a people in their attempts to meet the challenge of living in their environment, which give order and meaning to the social, political, economic aesthetics and religious norms and modes of the organization thus distinguishing a people from their neighbors.
Note: More definitions could be cited in Ekeanyanwu (2008) as listed on the resources section.
Culture from these definitions is not merely a return to the customs of the past.
It embodies the attitudes of a people to the future of their traditional values faced with the demands of modern technology, which is an essential factor of development and progress.
This will give foreigners an opportunity to get a better picture of our nation (Nwosu, 1999).
In summary, cultural centers should be set up abroad to specifically showcase the rich cultural values of our great nation so that foreigners or nationals of such countries could appreciate and understand us better (Nwosu, 1999).
175 | P a ge  2.
Organizing International Trade Fairs: International trade fairs like Lagos and Kaduna international trade fairs organized yearly is another IPR strategy to project Nigeria’s image in the eyes of foreigners in the quality and technological development of the country.
This has the potential/or may lead to bilateral talks between Nigeria and other countries.
International Trade Fairs offer opportunity of interaction with foreign participants to sort out the way of enhancing the technological and societal development of both nations in the bilateral talks and fairs.
3.
Organizing Seminars Locally And Internationally: Seminar is another potential tool of IPR because it offers the participants the opportunity to rub minds together and share ideas and knowledge.
During the Babangida administration, a very effective seminar was organized under the auspices of the Nigerian Institute for Cultural Orientation (NICO).
The theme of the seminar was “Perspective in Nigeria’s Cultural Diplomacy”.
This seminar drew participants from the academia, private/public sectors of the economy, Embassies/High Commissions in Nigeria and other international organizations (Nwosu, 1999).
The then minister of Information and Culture, Professor Jerry Gana, used the opportunity to appeal to diplomats in Nigeria to strive to acquire better knowledge and understanding of Nigeria’s diverse cultures in view of their proximity to and daily interaction with the people.
He said that a perfect society exists only in theory books and that every society has its own share of anti-social elements.
That our society places a high premium on such values as honesty, fair play, justice, the love of good name and brotherliness.
He urged the foreign participants at the seminar to convey to their peoples and governments the positive realities about Nigeria and her people (Nwosu, 1999).
These kinds of fora acquaint foreign participants with the finer qualities of the country and personal interaction with the people and with their warm hospitality.
This will make them to understand Nigeria and the various efforts to grapple with problem of national development.
4.
Periodic Organization of Press Conferences: 176 | P a ge Press conferences as IPR tools give a government functionary the unique opportunity to meet the public, especially the international public and media in person in order to correct misconceptions and policies and programmes of the nation.
It also offers opportunity of feedback from the public to the government.
For international press conferences, the public and the international media get a first hand opportunity to see Nigerian realities.
At press conferences held in public relations spirit, wonders always happen.
A fool could even give a wise man counsel.
This presupposes that every conference is result-oriented and essentially Omni-directional, if not multi-purposeful (Nwosu, 1999).
5.
Use of Conference Centres: Conference centers could be used as talking shops where ideas are freely exchanged or marketed for public welfare.
It transforms the lives, reshaping the collective destiny through the creation of better perspective for peace, equity and cultural understanding.
By and large, mutual understanding and cooperation will be established.
6.
Effective Community Relations Application Using this strategy as IPR tool, Nigerians abroad should be encouraged to participate in community development and seek acceptance on such occasions from those who never accommodate them.
Nigerians should identify themselves with hopes and aspirations of their immediate locality abroad.
This will help to correct misconception and answer criticism and repel attacks by foreigners who are misinformed about Nigeria and her people.
It helps convince foreigners or nationals of a particular foreign country where Nigerians reside, that Nigerians are capable of maintaining laws and order in any society they find themselves.
This is inferred from a basic PR rule that doing good is a basic requirement for a PR campaign to succeed (Nwosu, 1999).
7.
Effective Media Relations The media are central points on which a community’s interpersonal and inter- organizational relations hang.
Because of the vital role of the media in modern society, it is impossible to successfully perform PR duties without the media.
In this respect, PR professionals and practitioners must, as matter of priority and strategy, maintain a cordial relationship with them and use their services to facilitate the flow of information to the greater generality of the people.
Open door policies should be established where press men and women at all our foreign embassies and high commissions could come in and ask questions to clarify issues concerning our nation’s activities and her nationals.
This IPR tool will ensure in the long run that information about Nigeria is not distorted in the global media.
177 | P a ge Nigerian embassies and high commissions should give all the necessary assistance to any medium that is out to correct any distorted or misconceived information about Nigeria and her people (Nwosu, 1999).
8.
Sponsorship of Sports Activities: This also helps to enhance Nigeria’s image abroad.
Because sports activities are now political weapons in the international arena, their use as an IPR tool is now common amongst nations.
After the Nigerian Dream Team won the football events of the Atlanta 1996 Olympic Games, Nigeria’s image shot up positively in the global media.
It will amount to sheer ignorance after that superlative victory at the Games for any European or American to ask a Nigerian where the hell is Nigeria?
9.
Sponsorship of Literary Works The Nigerian government’s sponsorship of literary works of well known/internationally acclaimed personalities like Professors Chinua Achebe, Wole Soyinka, Chimamanda Adichie and many renowned others will go a long way in polishing our tarnished image abroad.
Professor Skid Gates, at Wole Soyinka’s birthday celebration in 1993 said that Nigeria should be proud of producing such a prolific and patriotic writer whose works will endure for a long time to come.
According to the scholar, Harvard University in US has opened Wole Soyinka Archives at Houghton Bare Book and Manuscript Library.
This will tell foreigners that there are still some Nigerians who are honest and dedicated to their professional calling in life.
Everybody in Nigeria is not a 419niner or fraudster or trickster (Nwosu, 1999)!
10.
Film and Documentary Film Production: The government should encourage films that are centered on our culture and some of them should also be taken abroad to be aired in some selected media abroad to give Nigeria a true and realistic image representation overseas.
Documentary films that package Nigeria’s image positively should also be sponsored by the government and distributed abroad.
For instance, a documentary on the Nigerian Drug Law Enforcement Agency (NDLEA), was aired on NTA in July, 1993, and centered on the activities of the agency against drug traffickers.
When such a documentary is aired abroad, it will enable those foreign nations know the Nigerian government’s stand on drug trafficking and other related issues (Nwosu, 1999).
The EFCC is currently on a crusade against all forms of financial crimes in Nigeria.
Is the international community adequately informed about the activities of this agency with regard to issues of financial corruption?
Documentary productions 178 | P a ge could be one sure way to get the message out that Nigeria as a nation is fighting corruption head-on (Nwosu, 1999).
11.
Advertisements in the International Media Advertising in the international media especially on topical and contemporary issues and policies about the behavior of its citizens in Diaspora and at home will go a long way in exposing Nigeria’s stand on such issues.
This will erode misconception about the nation.
It can also be done through a public information series, which should appear in volumes under paid columns in newspapers and magazines to offer the reader as much information as possible about the reality concerning Nigeria (Nwosu, 1999).
12.
Crisis Management In spite of well-organized PR programmes as stated above, the ability to manage crisis must be ensured when there is an attack by foreign media and government on some Nigerian behaviors or misconstrued government policies or action which may be blown out of proportion.
In some cases, such crisis will end up as a blessing because they will give us the opportunity to fight back and in the process do what, we might have overlooked, through explanations.
On some occasions, there will be need to quietly educate the people concerned or the governments concerned instead of generating these crises through open confrontations.
The ability to manage crisis of international dimension goes a long way to tell about our national image.
This is the reason it is adopted here as an IPR tool (Nwosu, 1999).
4.0 CONCLUSION Enhancing Nigeria’s image abroad through IPR must be backed by a high moral standard in behavioural attitude of Nigerians living abroad.
As image makers and sustainers of a nation’s image, PR is to articulate principles and enlarge understanding of the national, inspire all members to do their best cheerfully, and influence or restrain other members from doing or saying anything detrimental to the nation’s welfare.
Bringing to public attention though appropriate media significant facts, opinions and interpretations which will serve to keep the public aware of government’s or the nation’s policies, actions and priorities (Nwosu, 1999).
The continuous striving to win recognition has given rise to a deepened sense of social responsibility among entrepreneurs or organizations or governments.
It is PR that facilitates and ensures an inflow of representative opinion from an organization’s several publics so that its policies and operations may be kept considerably compatible with diverse needs and views of these publics.
179 | P a ge  I am of the opinion that if these selected IPR strategies are carried out throughout our embassies and high commissions abroad, the attitude of host countries towards Nigerians abroad will change automatically.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Discuss two ways two of the IPR strategies could be applied in dealing with electoral offences and violence n Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY This Unit customized the IPR strategies already discussed in previous Unit to address the Nigeria’s image challenges.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss how you can practically apply IPR strategies to solving a nation’s image challenges.
2.
Are the strategies discussed here workable for Multinational Corporations?
Please, support your response with valid argument.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.
Culbertson, Hugh M. and Chen Ni (Eds.)
(1996).
International Public Relations: A Comparative Analysis.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associate (LEA) 2.
Tilson, Don J. and Alozie, Emmanuel C.
(Eds.)
(2004).
Towards the Common Good: Perspectives in International Public Relations.
Boston: Pearson 3.
Cutlip, S., Center, A. and Broom, G. (1985).
Effective Public Relations.
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall 4.
Nwosu, I.E.
and Idemili, S.O.
(Eds.)
(1990).
Public Relations Speech, Media Writings and Copy.
Enugu: Acena Publishers.
5.
Nwosu, I.E.
(Ed.)
(1990).
Mass Media and National Development: Perspectives on Communication Environments of Development in Nigeria.
Aba: Frontiers Publishers.
180 | P a ge 6.
Ezeukwu, G. (1999).
Understanding International Relations.
Enugu: Gold Publishers 7.
Okoro, C.O.
(2000).
International Relations and Diplomacy Since the World Wars.
Enugu: Feloks Communications 8.
Ekeanyanwu, N.T.
(2008).
International Communication.
Canaanland, Ota: Covenant University Press 9.
Seitel, Fraser P. (2007).
The Practice of Public Relations (10th Edition).
Boston: Pearson 10.
Okoye, Innocent (2008).
Nigerian Press Law.
Lagos: Unilag 11.
Ewelukwa, B.N.
(2004).
Introduction to Nigerian Press Law.
Onitsha: Maranatha Press Ltd 181 | P a ge
