 Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MAC 332 ADVERTISINGLAYOUTS AND DESIGN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA, LAGOS 1  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MAIN WORK MAC 332: ADVERTISING COPY AND LAYOUT COURSE TEAM COURSE DEVELOPER/WRITER Mrs. Agbana, Olubunmi Kogi State University, Ayingba.
08036255411 Bunmiagbana2013@gmail.com CONTENT EDITOR Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos +234-806-9395-473 aliedeom@yahoo.com HEAD OF UNIT Dr. Jonathan E. Aliede National Open University of Nigeria Victoria Island, Lagos +234-806-9395-473 aliedeom@yahoo.com \ 2  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 NATIONALOPENUNIVERSITY OFNIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.5 Dar es Salam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2013 First Printed 2013 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by 3  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 CONTENTS PAGE MODULE 1: PRINCIPLES OF ADVERTISING Unit1: Advertising: Meaning and Definitions Unit2: Types and Classification of Advertising Unit3: Process of Advertising Unit4: Research in Advertising MODULE 2: PREPARING AND PRODUCING ADVERTISING MATERIALS Unit1: Concept of Advertising Copy Unit2: Concept of Advertising Layout Unit3: Stages of Preparing Advertising Materials Unit4: Advertising Campaign Planning Unit5: Developing and Executing the Advertising Plan MODULE 3: PRACTICAL PRODUCTION OF ADVERTISING COPY Unit 1: Design and Illustration of copy in Advertising Unit 2: Creative and production Tactics in Print Advertising Unit 3: Preparation and Production of Television commercials Unit 4: Guidelines for Evaluating copy outputs MODULE 4: ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING AND STRATEGY Unit 1: An Overview of Media Planning Unit 2: Advertising Media Objective Unit 3: Media Planning In Advertising Agency 4  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MODULE 1: PRINCIPLES OF ADVERTISING Unit1: Advertising: Meaning and Definitions Unit2: Types and Classification of Advertising Unit3: Process of Advertising Unit4: Research in Advertising Unit 1: Advertising: Meaning and Definitions 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The concept of advertising 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor – marked assignment 7.0 References and further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is meant to introduce us to the concept of advertising, giving us an understanding of what advertisements are, and basically the components of advertisements.
This will serve as a baseline information necessary in further studies on advertisements.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to;  Summarize the different views in the definitions of advertising.
 Give a clear cut definition of advertising.
 Describe the components of advertising.
 Describe the relationship between the human communication process and advertising.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Advertising Manufacturers use a wide variety of communication tools to initiate and maintain contacts with the prospects and customers.
These tools include solicitation letters, newspaper / radio / television advertisements /commercials, event sponsorship, publicity, tele-marketing sale calls, statement stuffers.
All of these are marketing communication tools and so is advertising.
Advertising is a marketing communication tool aimed at causing sale of any product, idea or service.
Definition of advertising The nature of advertising has attracted different definitions to it as a 5 concept.
Journalists may define it as a communication or public relations or a persuasive process; sociologists and economists may view its social  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 significance or it economic importance; philosophers and moralists may want to view it from its ethical perspective and impact on behaviour.
These perspectives are very important but a clear cut definition of advertising must be given for direction in this study.
W. Arens, M. Weigold& C. Arens (2008) define advertising as ‘a structured and composed non-personal communication of information, usually paid for and usually persuasive in nature, about products (goods, services and ideas by identified sponsors through various media’.
Components of advertising (a) Advertising is actually made up of a message to be communicated in a structured and composed manner.
It puts to use both verbal and non-verbal elements usually composed to fill specific space and time formats usually pre-determined by the sponsor.
(i) A paint advert is composed of pictures and words usually put on a specific page and space in the newspaper or printed material usually paid for by an identified sponsor.
(ii) A television commercial is usually made up of pictures, spoken and written words with songs transmitted at a given broadcast time for a specific duration usually paid for by the advertiser or sponsor as the case may be.
(b) Advertisements are directed to a group of people usually but not necessarily large and heterogeneous.
If not usually directed at individuals therefore it is a non-personal or mass communication.
These audiences can be consumers who already know of the product or prospective who already know of the product or prospective, who are to be brought to the knowledge of the product.
Example: (i) MTN’s slogan ‘Your best connection’ refers to the over 3 million customers of theirs even when the ‘your’ seem to be an individual.
(c) Advertisements are usually paid for by identified sponsors.
We must note that some advertisements, like public notices are not paid for.
They are structured, non-personal, and persuasive communication.
Example: A commercial or advert for 7-up, MTN, Joy soap, etc.
are usually paid for by the manufacturers or producers of such products but public information on ‘…Good people, Great nation….’ For instance is not usually paid for.
(d) The intension of most advertisements is to persuade their customers or prospects to patronize their product.
However, depending on the type of advertisement, it may just intend to inform otherwise as against persuasion.
Example: MTN is persuading its consumers to migrate to its ‘family and friends’ product with its advert but NAFDAC is informing it’s audience to buy 6 drugs from the right places to prevent usage of fake drugs.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 (e) In advertising there must be a product to be advertised.
The product is either good, service or an idea.
Consumers or prospects are exposed to a product through advertising.
Example: Products can be tangible; goods like soap, food, clothes, phones, etc intangible services; Bank services, access to calls, courier services, etc; ideas like knowledge gained from trainings etc are products.
(f) Advertisement messages are definitely sent through a medium.
Since it is a non-personal communication, the mass media is the most likely channel.
Examples: Radio, newspapers, televisions, magazines, the internet etc.
Advertising and the communication process Communication is no longer new to us; we have been studying it for some time now.
We also know now that advertisement in communication.
It therefore requires the communication process.
It is important that an advertiser gets really familiar with the human communication process because it is needed to creatively and truthfully present their product in the best ways to achieve its advert aim.
We shall therefore remind ourselves that the communication process according to J. Pearson, P. Nelson, S. Titsworth and L. Harter,(2003) involves a source who is the message initiator, the receiver who is the message target, the message which is the idea, thought or feeling which the sender wants to communicate, the channel which is the means by which the message moves from source to the receiver and feedback which is the receivers response to the message.
While we relate this advertising, we will see that the source is the sponsor made up of the persona who pays for the advert copy as well as the team who created the advert.
The receivers are the target audience which is said to be a wide range.
The message is the advert copy itself projected through a channel, broadcast or print, or even the new media.
Feedback is measured usually by sales, phone enquiries, visiting the products website and so on.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Define advertisement and state its components.
4.0 CONCLUSION Advertising is seen differently by different professional as the case may be.
The angle from which an economist sees advertising differs from how a communicator sees it.
More so, a marketer sees advertising as a toll to help it sells its product or service very quickly.
Adverts caappear in different forms, sometimes as publicity; which is a non-paid awareness of a brand.
Advertising sometime may be view as marketing, public relations and so on.
The general consensus about advertising is the fact that it is a 7 communication tool used to create sales messages to a target audience.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 5.0 SUMMARY In summary, the major points treated in this unit are: (1) Advertising definition in line with its components described in terms of: (i) Structured and composed non-personal communication process (ii) With a persuasive message paid for by an identified sponsor.
(iii) About a product (good, service or an idea) (iv) Through a specified mass media (2) Advertising using the communication process of sender – message, receiver, channel and feedback.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT  What is advertising?
 Describe the human communication in advertising.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Arens W. (1999), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Arens W. (2002), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Arens W. (2008), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Anyacho R. (2007), Advertising; Principles and practice- The Nigerian Perspective.Nigeria, Tee jay Enterprises.
Bovee C. and Arens W. (1992), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin Inc. Ibrahim G. (2000), Advertising: A Definitive Approach.
Ibadan, Stirling- Horden Publishers.
Okunna S. (2002), Teaching Mass Communication: A Multi-Dimensional Approach.Enugu, New Generation Books.
8  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MODULE 1 MAC 332 UNIT 2: TYPES AND CLASSIFICATION OF ADVERTISING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Functions of Advertising 3.2 Types and Classes of Adverts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 6.0 References and further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit brings you to the knowledge of the functions, various categories and classes of advertising.
This is a follow-up to the concept of advertising.
It will help in the knowledge of relating the nature of the product to the advertisement audience.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, students will be expected to:  Identify the functions of advertising  Identify the classes which different kinds of advertisements fall and,  Note the types of advertisements at his disposal as a copy designer.
3.1 Functions of Advertising The functions of advertising vary and are relative to the advertiser.
Advertising can render the following functions; marketing, information, persuasion, education and reminding.
Marketing Advertising is used to creating awareness for a product to be marketed.
It is 9 a link between the advertiser and the target market.
Anyacho (2007) notes  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 that advertising supports marketing and it helps a company reach it marketing objectives.
Information Information as a function of advertising gives relevant details about the product to the consumer or its product.
It highlights the existence of the product, benefits, location, price, etc.
It is useful to build a positive brand image for the product.
Education This establishes the basic knowledge about the availability, usage and other alternative to the product.
It can offer the right choice and open the consumer’s mind to the quality of products available to improve their standards of living.
Persuasion Persuasion in advertising is used to ensure a change of attitude in a consumer or prospect in favour of the product.
It serves to motivate the consumer to try the product or keep using it as the case may be.
Reminding Advertisements serve to keep the product in the mind of the consumer.
a continuous display of advertisements on the media helps to keep consumer in constant reminder that the brand is available and can be purchase at sales spots.
Cultural transmission / entertainment Above these, advert serves to transmit culture as well as entertain its audience.
Parts of the primary roles of advertising is to entertain its targets audience, where advertising fails to achieve this, he may lose its sales message therefore turning off target consumers from purchasing the products.
Advert that mixes work with play, gets the votes of the audience.
Also, culturally, advertising should reflect the culture of the target audience which is directed towards.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  List seven function of advertising.
 _________function of advertising, provides details of the product to the consumer.
3.2 Types and Classes of Adverts The types and classes of advertisements will be treated as one here because 10 in discussing the classes of advertising, the types of advertisements will be  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 considered.
Arens (1999) and Anyacho (2002) have classified advert into four (4) groups.
They are: (a) Target audience (b) Types of media (c) Geographical area covered (d) Purpose of the advert.
Classification by target audience / purpose Classification of adverts by target audience is strongly tied to the purpose of the advert.
This is so because the purpose of the advert determines its target audience.
The manufacturer of any product usually determines the purpose of the products.
The position of the product in the product life circle also determines the purpose of the advert.
Different forms of advertisement suits the different stages of the product life circle.
They include: i.Information advertising ii.Consumer advertising iii.Trade advertisements iv.Public relations advertising Classification by types of media This classifies adverts according to their channels of exposure.
They are; (a) Newspaper adverts (b) Magazine adverts (c) Television commercials (d) Radio commercials (e) Direct mail (f) Out-door advertising These and more can further be divided into the theme (above – the – line) media and the scheme (below – line media).
Examples of the above the line-media include; radio, television, newspaper and magazine adverts while below – the – line media include stickers, posters, calendars, pamphlets and so on.
Classification by geographical area This class identifies the advert by the location of the target audience.
They are: (a) International adverts 11 (b) National adverts (c) Regional adverts  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 (d) Local adverts SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the types of advertisements you know (at least 10).
4.0 CONCLUSION The classification of advertising has helped to streamline or narrow advertising to a simple and comprehensive discipline.
With this breakdown, any advertiser could choose what kind of advertising he wishes to disseminate his sales messages through.
This division can also help advertiser to choose from various available media in-order to reach-out to prospective consumers.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has identified the functions of advertising from the view point of allied disciplines and concepts like: (a) Marketing (b) Information (c) Persuasion (d) Reminding (e) Education as well as cultural diffusion and entertainment.
The classes and types of adverts have also been identified to include: (a) Classification by target audience and purpose.
(b) Classification by media used (c) Classification by geographical location The types of adverts are derived from these classes, they include: (a) Information adverts, (b) Consumer adverts (c) Trade advert (d) Local advert (e) International adverts, etc.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT  State the difference between a commercial and an advertisement.
 Discuss above – the – line and below – the – line media of advertising.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Arens W. (1999), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Arens W. (2002), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. 12 Arens W. (2008), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Anyacho R. (2007), Advertising; Principles and practice- The Nigerian  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Perspective.Nigeria, Tee jay Enterprises.
Bovee C. and Arens W. (1992), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin Inc. Ibrahim G. (2000), Advertising: A Definitive Approach.
Ibadan, Stirling- Horden Publishers.
Okunna S. (2002), Teaching Mass Communication: A Multi-Dimensional Approach.Enugu, New Generation Books.
MAC 332 Module 1 UNIT 3: PROCESS OF ADVERTISING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The advertising process 3.2 The advertising agency 3.3 The media of Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References/ Further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is poised to examine the process of advertising which goes from the advertiser to the advertising agency through the suppliers then to the media before it will reach the target audience.
This unit would show the various process an advertisement would go through before reaching the stage of completion.
Advertising is not done haphazardly; hence, a team of experienced professionals is required to produce an effective one, such that can drive the sales message to audience.
13 2.0 OBJECTIVES The aim of this unit is:  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 (1) To expose students to the players in the advertising process.
(2) To identify the role of each player in the advertising process 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Advertising Process Just like most other endeavours, advertising is a process that involves different players.
Different units contribute its’ quota to achieve advertisements.
These units or players as we may call them play individual but vital roles which are linked such that the absence of one affects the entire process or output.
These players are the advertisers, the advertising agencies, the suppliers and the media.
The Advertiser We can also call them clients; advertisers according to Arens et al (2008) are companies, manufacturer, patenters, developers, firms or any out fit that has a product to advertise.
They sponsor advertising for themselves and their products.
Their sizes differ and range from small independent businesses to huge international multinational companies.
So also do they differ in type.
Companies can offer services, goods, or ideas like banks; a social manufacturing company or a consultancy firm.
Advertisers have been classified into four; local, regional, national and international advertisers.
Local Advertisers Also known as retail advertisers, local advertisers are advertisers who advertise directly to consumers.
Usually they employ personal selling, publicity sales promotion and other marketing strategies to get sales for their product.
Four types of local advertisers have been identified to include; dealers or major distributors of big national or international firms; stores that sell a variety of products e.g.
a provision store; specialty businesses and services like banks, insurance brokers etc and; governmental and non-profit organizations.
Three types of local advertising are product advertising, institutional advertising and classified advertising.
Regional Advertisers Regional advertisers are companies who operate within a certain region usually made up of some states put together.
Example is ‘Baby Rising Powder’ produced in south-south Nigeria and common in south-south states and adjunct states to the south-south region.
Usually, adverts are extended only to areas where their market reach.
National Advertisers These are larger than the regional advertisers because usually they cover 14 many more states or at least more than one or two regions.
Ideally, their markets cover and entire nation.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 International Advertisers Also called trans – national advertisers, international advertisers are companies or firms who extend their product market to foreign countries.
Examples are Toyota, Honda, Google, Microsoft etc.
3.2 The Advertising Agency These are organizations that help advertisers produce their advert copy.
You may be curious and want to know why companies will not just create its own advert copy by itself and save costs or why an advertiser will rather use an agency over another despite the exorbitant bill of the former.
The role of advert agencies will give an insight to this.
Arens (2008) quoting the American Association of Advertising Agencies has defined an advert agency as ‘an independent organization of creative people and business people who specialize in developing and preparing marketing and advertising plans, advertisements and other promotional tools’.
Nwawenne (2003) adds that the advertising agency also purchases advertising space and time in various media on behalf of different advertisers or sellers to help them find customers for their products.
These definitions give an insight to the role of advertising agencies.
Because advert agencies are independent, that is they are not owned by the advertisers or its’ managements, they stand to view the product objectively and can bring in objective view points to advertisers’ businesses.
Secondly, they harness different business people and creative people to carry out production jobs for advert copies.
They also carry out research for advertisers (their clients) to determine a most suitable media for advertising their products.
Usually, they negotiate, contract and arrange for commercial space and time with various media including digital media for their clients.
Advertising agencies are loyal only to their clients, (the advertisers).
Their obligation morally, financially and otherwise is to their clients.
Advertisers in turn rely on them to create more effective advertising and select more effective media than they can themselves.
They employ the services of advert agencies in their own interests.
Types of Advert Agencies Advert agencies are usually classified by their geographic range, the types of services they offer and the types of businesses they do.
Hence, they include: Geographically, advert agencies are grouped into local; regional and national agencies; and international agencies.
By what services they offer, 15 advert agencies are grouped into full service agencies and specialized service agencies.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Full service advert agencies offer both advertising and non-advertising services to their clients.
Advertising services offer includes planning, creating and producing adverts; carrying out research and selecting media while non-advertising services include packaging, public relations, producing sales promotion materials, annual reports and so on.
This kind of advert agency is either a General consumer agency or Business to Business agencies.
Specialized service agencies offer specific services to their clients such as creative boutiques, media buying services and interactive agencies.
In-house Agencies These are advert agencies fully owned by advertisers.
Usually, they carry out the same function as an independent advert agency would but they are under the directives of the management of the company.
Advertising Suppliers Suppliers are organizations or people who produce specialized services to the advertising business.
These services may not be peculiar to advertising only; advertising certainly cannot do without them.
They are a very wide range depending on the nature and type of advert copy to be produced.
They include: art studios, web design houses, artists, film and video production, production houses, and research companies.
3.3 The Media of Advertising The media in advertising refers to vehicles through which advert messages reach its target audience, the customer.
They are an important link between the manufacturer or organization and their customer or prospective consumers bringing them the advert messages intended to create or maintain sales.
The media in advertising are also a very broad range from prints, electronics, and digital interactive media to out – of – home, direct mail and other media.
Sometimes, advertisers or advert agencies use foreign media which are actually the local media peculiar to different countries or cultures.
This is because adverts must be carried in a way the audience will understand and identify with.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain the advertising processing and mention the key players.
 Briefly explain the differences between an In-house and independent advertising agency.
 Can an advert copy be disseminated on more than one media?
Explain.
16 4.0 CONCLUSION  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Advertising process involves an army of creative professionals.
These professionals are specialist in a particular aspect of the advertising process, this makes the job however interesting.
The input of an individual is never enough to get the copy to a desired destination.
Just like manuscript needs to be proofed and edited back and forth until it is free of errors, so is advertising copy.
The advertising process involves professionals like: graphic artist, public relations expert, marketing executive, illustrator, engineer, writer, artist, etc.
The peculiarity of an advertising copy has great impact on whether to engage independent or in-house advertisers; also, the geographical location of the advertisement would as well affect the appropriation that would be allocated to the campaign.
A locally made advertisement would cost less than a regional and national advertising respectively.
The media of advertising vary and broad, hence, various means of advertising abound, and all an advertiser need to do is engaged professionals that would identify the right media for the campaign he is sponsoring.
5.0 SUMMARY The advert copy begins from the minds of the advertisers through the office of the advertising agency either in-house or independent, with the help of the suppliers through the media, print, electronic, or interactive media to the customers or consumers.
This unit x-rayed the process of advertising, pointing at the key players, types of advertising based on geographical disparities; advertising agency was quickly examined with emphasizes on the independent and in-house varieties.
The unit was concluded with brief explanation on what advertising media is.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT  With a diagram, present the advertising process.
 Discuss the role supplier’s play in producing an advert copy.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Arens W. (1999), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Arens W. (2002), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Arens W. (2008), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Anyacho R. (2007), Advertising; Principles and practice- The Nigerian Perspective.Nigeria, Tee jay Enterprises.
Bovee C. and Arens W. (1992), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin Inc. Ibrahim G. (2000), Advertising: A Definitive Approach.
Ibadan, Stirling- Horden Publishers.
Okunna S. (2002), Teaching Mass Communication: A Multi-Dimensional 17 Approach.Enugu, New Generation Books.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MAC 332 MODULE 1 UNIT 4: RESEARCH IN ADVERTISING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is advertising research?
3.2 Applying research to advertising decision making 3.3 Steps in the research process 18 3.4 Important issues in advertising research 4.0 Conclusion  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Research in most endeavours is expedient.
In advertising, why do we need to carry out a research?
How is this research applied to advertising decision?
What process must be followed in carrying out the research and what important issues exist in advertising research?
These are the areas to be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this study, students are expected to;  Know what advertising research entails.
 How to apply research to advert decision making.
 Identify and follow the important steps in the research process.
 Identify important issues in advertising research and ways to combat them.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is advertising research?
Advertising research provides the needed information for advertising decisions.
It helps manufacturers or advertisers know how people perceive their products, how competition is viewed, what image or brand of the company is most credible and what advertisements offer the greatest appeal.
This information will help to develop an effective advertising campaign.
Arens (2005) defines advertising research thus, ‘… it is the systematic gathering and analysis of information to help develop or evaluate advertising strategies, individual advertisements and whole campaigns.’ 3.1 Applying research to advertising decision making The purpose of advertising are enormous depending on the advertising objectives and strategies.
Generally Arens has grouped this purpose into four categories; they are: a.
Advertising strategy research 19 b.
Creative concept research, c. Pre-testing and d. Post-testing.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 (a) Advert Strategy Research Advertising strategy research is used to seek information about the creative mix, which elements are usually blended to achieve advertising strategy.
The elements of the creative mix are; product concept, target audience, communication message and creative message.
In other words advert strategies are created by a blend of all or some of these elements, we shall consider them briefly: (i) Product Concept Studying the product concept helps the advertiser know how consumers perceive their brands, what qualities lead to initial purchases of their products and eventually to brand loyalty.
Also, research will help the advertiser objectively build a unique product concept which aim at highlighting the values of the product to the customer at every level- Distributor/wholesaler and retailer.
In advertising, each brand and product categories responds differently.
Therefore, each advert created must be based on a specific template formed from an understanding of it consumers’ wants, needs and motivation.
Effective research will aid effective positioning strategy for any brand or product then leave advertising to shape and inanity the specific brand’s position and image over time.
(ii) Target Audience Selection There is definitely and audience for any product.
No product is ever targeted to ‘everybody’.
Research is therefore needed to identify who exactly the advert should go to and to develop a rich profile of the brand’s target audience.
Research will also help differentiate customers who are primary users from the secondary users and also study them properly to understand their demographics, geographics, psychographics and purchase behaviours especially to identify specific factors that affect the purchase behaviour.
In most cases however, the dominant concept of research is employed because of limitations like finance, manpower, and so on.
The dominant concept describes the situation where researchers are carried out among pre-determined markets (geographic, demographic and others) that are identified as the most important to product sales and targeting those where it can focus its resources to achieve advertising dominance.
(iii) Media Selection In this area of advertising research, media research is the most patronized.
Media research is the systematic gathering and analysis of information on 20 the reach and effectiveness of media vehicles.
Here, other research agencies  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 especially those that deal specifically with the mass media vehicles, their effectiveness among their diversified audiences.
(iv) Message to Selection Findings from research helps to determine the direction an advert copy will take.
By studying consumers, advert messages are actually developed.
Their likes and dislikes about the product is identified, components that determine preference for a particular product especially about another brand is identified and advert messages are designed to highlight product components that will suit the target audience.
(b) Creative Concept Research Having designed the advertising strategy in research, the creative concept for the advert is the next phase.
The creative concepts actually describe the presentation or appearance of the advert copy.
It answers the question, how can the advert copy be presented to appeal or attract to the audience?
The make-up of the copy must be able to attract the audience attention.
At every state of developing the copy research is relevant.
Once a concept is developed, research helps to identify flaws in the concept e.g.
a focus group discussion can be organized to discuss the pros and cons of the concept.
When a conclusion is reached, the copy is produced and tested.
This leads us to the next purpose of advertising research.
(c) Pre-Testing and Post Testing Since advertising cost is huge, advertiser will always want value for their money.
One way to identify the presence of this value they seek is by testing the copy among a small group of the advert audience.
Where copies are tested and desired values are not achieved, a re-strategy or review of the copy is done.
Testing is categorized into two – testing before and after the target audiences are exposed to the copy.
Testing helps the advertiser make decisions especially as it refers to the product concept, product market, the consumer motives (by ensuring that the product are presented to suit consumer motive for consumption), message performance and media decisions.
Also, testing helps the advertising assess overall performance of the advert copy.
3.2 Steps in the Research Process There are five basic steps in advertising research, they include the followings among others: 1.
Analysing the situation and defining the problem.
2.
Conducting explanatory research (usually informally).
3.
Establishing research objectives.
4.
Conducting formal research.
21 5.
Interpreting and reporting the findings.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 (1) Situation Analysis and Problem Definition This is the first and most important step in research because it is upon the identified problem that the research itself is based.
In other words, the research is solving the problem you have identified.
Therefore this step requires that every stage of the product be evaluated and results be properly analysed to recognize a challenge or problem.
Big companies or advertisers achieve this using the marketing information system (MIS), a procedure designed to generate continuous, orderly flow of information for use in making decisions.
(2) Conducting Exploratory Research At this stage, informal research is used to learn more about the market, the competition, and the business environment with the aim to better defining the problem.
Here primary and secondary data can be used.
Primary data are information collected from the target market about a specific problem while secondary data are information previously collected or published usually by the firm or other organization and are meant for some purposes other than the current research aim.
Many a times, these secondary data exposes the researcher to a possible problem not previously identified.
(3) Establishing Research Objectives More often than not identify the problem calls for primary research to be able to solve the identified problem.
To carry out this primary research, specific research objectives must be set.
In establishing your objectives, you must be specific (i.e.
straight to the point), the objectives set must be one that can be achieved (i.e.
they must be achievable), they must be measurable.
These objectives form the basis for research questions who answers must provide the needed information to meet their advert aim or research objectives.
(4) Conducting Formal Research This is the process of executing the primary research, where data are gathered primarily.
Two ways of conducting a formal research are; qualitative and quantitative methods.
(i) Qualitative methods Using the qualitative methods, the researcher wants to know value of advertising to the product.
This is usually determined by consumers’ response to the advertisement.
Consumer responses usually are determined by their thoughts and feelings about the product.
Therefore, where consumer impression is sought, qualitative research is very useful.
It helps elicit in-depth open ended responses rather than yes or not answers.
22 Methods used in qualitative research are usually either the projective or intensive techniques.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 The projective techniques help the advertiser to understand audience subconscious feelings, attitudes, interests, opinions, needs and motives.
Usually direct questions are asked using a sentence like “what kind of biscuits are common around here” to get information.
The intensive technique helps researcher identify respondent’s deeper feelings.
The most common used are interviews and interviewing techniques like focus-group discussions.
(ii) Quantitative methods Quantitative methods of research help gain hard statistics about market conditions and situations which are reliable, and dependable.
The observation, experiments and survey are useful here.
(5) Interpreting and Reporting Findings Here findings are presented usually using tables and graphs and worded explanations for easy understanding.
3.3 Important Issues in Advertising Research Some issues common in advert research is centered around accuracy of the findings.
This is usually determined in quantitative research by the validity, we mean that the research must be objective and reflect the true status of the product market.
Reliability of findings on the other hand is determined by the repeatability of the finding.
This is to say that the findings must be similar if research is conducted among a lower number of respondents over and over again.
Reliability and validity is measured by the sampling methods used, the way questionnaires are designed, and the tabulation and analysis of the data.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Define and explain the term “Advertising Research”.
 Mention and explain the ways of applying research to advertising decision making.
 Explain the five steps of advertising research.
4.0 CONCLUSION Research is one crucial element in advertising.
Any advertising campaign embarked upon without adequate research would result in a futile mission.
Advertising agencies, after receiving brief meeting spring into actions as to probing and investigating the problems of the advertisers, when this is thoroughly done, the agency start to suggest possible solutions to them.
Though, it is not spelt out during advertising contact meeting that the agency would have to research on the brief given to it, however, it is 23 inevitable to do such, less, the agency would be shooting aimlessly and hitting nothing thereafter.
Hence, I called it “a trial and error syndrome”.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Research is incorporated in the advertising process; it is a necessity for every agency to perform its rituals in-order to get the best out of its creative efforts.
5.0 SUMMARY We saw in this unit that advertising research is a systematic way of gathering and analyzing information that will help develop or evaluate advertising strategies, individual advertisements and the whole advert campaign.
We saw also that research is relevant designing your advert strategy which elements are made the product concept, the target audience selection, the media selection and the message selection.
Research as we saw is also applicable to the creative concept where the most appealing presentation of the advert copy to the audience is determined.
Finally, research is then used to carry out either a pre-test or post test of the advert copy to determine its effectiveness.
The steps in the research process were then identified to include analyzing the situation to determine the problem, conducting exploratory research to define the specific problem, establishing the research objectives from the problem identified, conducting formal research with the view of getting the problem solved and then interpreting and reporting findings.
Accuracy, validity and reliability have been a recurring challenge in every research endeavour.
This is not different in advertising research.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Present a research proposal for advertising ‘Lota Beauty Soap’.
 How would you use research to advertise ‘Pillar Insurance Company?
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Arens W. (1999), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Arens W. (2002), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Arens W. (2008), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin.
Inc. Anyacho R. (2007), Advertising; Principles and practice- The Nigerian Perspective.Nigeria, Tee jay Enterprises.
Bovee C. and Arens W. (1992), Contemporary Advertising.
USA, R. Irwin Inc. Ibrahim G. (2000), Advertising: A Definitive Approach.
Ibadan, Stirling- Horden Publishers.
Okunna S. (2002), Teaching Mass Communication: A Multi-Dimensional Approach.Enugu, New Generation Books.
24  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MODULE 2: PREPARING AND PRODUCING ADVERTISING MATERIALS Unit1: Concept of Advertising Copy Unit2: Concept of Advertising Layout Unit3: Stages of Preparing Advertising Materials Unit4: Advertising Campaign Planning Unit5: Developing and Executing the Advertising Plan.
UNIT1: CONCEPT OF ADVERTISING COPY 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Advertising Copy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Copy is an integral aspect of advertising campaign, without it no advertising agent is acknowledged; besides, without a creative and persuasive copy, an advertising campaign becomes futile.
Copy makes up the sum of the business of advertising, it is why advertising business is evolving and succeeding.
A copy gives a good return to the advertiser.
Where an advertising agency care less about creativity in the preparation of a copy, such would pack up from business.
The creative department is responsible for the writing and development of copy in any advertising agency.
In this unit, we shall examine the totality of a copy concept, afterward we shall look into other area that would enable us appreciate this concept the more.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, students would understand what a copy is and be able to explain it in the light of advertising.
Also, the understanding of this 25 concept would enable students to better appreciate advertising as a professional discipline.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 3.0 MAIN CONCEPT 3.1 Advertising Copy Advertising copy is the sum of all the elements of a creative work.
These are elements annex to produce a ready-to-disseminate advertising message.
The elements that make up a copy include: Headlines, sub-headline, text, pictures, sounds, and every other thing that would make the success of the advertising campaign; be it, electronics, print or social media.
Ucheanya (2013:60) opines that “advertising copy is to perform the function of development of familiarity with the brand name, shapes, motive and desire to build believability and to provide a reason for selecting a particular brand over all other competing brands.” The existence of a copy is the reason for why most advertising agency craves for excellent copy writers.
Copy writing is a painstaking and herculean task which requires critical thinking and application of ideas to the briefs received in order to produce a salesmanship content that can provoke purchases from target audience.
Many product are competing earnestly for large market shares, as a result, they invest heavily on advertising to enable them enough publicity that would drive traffic to them as much as possible.
According to Ucheanya(2013), it is the function of a copy to high the unique selling point so that the target audience would begin to get attracted to the brand, patronize it and maintain patronage for as long as it exist in the market.
The person who writes the copy is known as a copywriters.
The copy writer concerns himself with every element that will appear in the complete advertising massage.
He ensures that all the copy elements are correctly and creatively interplayed to ensure successful sales return after the campaign is launched.
A copywriter is an individual who is professional trained in advertising and who has good years of experience in an advertising agency.
There are no rules that state how copy elements should be applied; this is why advertising is regarded as a highly creative job.
Ucheanya (2013) support this by saying “it does not matter if advertisement begins with an illustration”.
The expression of copy elements is the sole responsibility of the creativity of a copy writer.
Copy writing is also a variety in advertising copy.
It is the process or art of annexing those elements that will project a brand to its audience in order to get patronage in return.
John-Kamen (2006) posits, “Since advertising space is very valuable, the copy writer must convey his massage without waste of words.
He must condense a bridge and revise what his reader 26 thinks in a thousand way.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERICISE  Explain what you understand by advertising copy.
Elements of an Advertising Copy There are Seven (7) basic elements of an advertising copy.
Some advertisement may contain almost all or while some may contain two or three elements, the most important to the copy, is its ability to deliver and get desired result.
As said elsewhere, no rules guide the application or usage of copy elements; it is solely the creative responsibility of the copy writer to determine that.
The followings are the basic elements of an advertising copy, these are: 1.
The headline 2.
The sub-head 3.
The body copy 4.
The caption 5.
The blurb of balloon 6.
The box and panels 7.
Slogans, logotype and signature.
1.
The Headline: This is the first copy interface which anyone would come in contact with, it is usually written in large type face.
Also referred to as caption, the headline is designed alongside a catchy illustration to capture and attract attention to the advertisement.
It drives prospective buyers to further investigate the brand.
2.
The Sub-Head: This goes after the headlines often, sometimes some copy writers, display the subhead first before the headlines, this is basically for a purpose which they deemed would drive in audience to the entire copy.
The subhead is written in a smaller type face lesser than headlines but larger than the body text.
3.
The Body Copy:This is the illustration text, always in the smallest type face in the copy than the headline and the subhead.
The body copy explains a brand in a few and concise but creative words that stick faster in the mind of the audience.
It explains a brand in the best possible ways.
4.
Captions: These are written in a smaller type face than the body copy to represent sales points by illustrating and explaining them at the same time.
Captions are less important to the main selling points in the advertisement than the body copy 5.
The Blurb or Balloon: This is term used in advertising to represent that the illustration of an advertising copy is coming out from mouth of one of the 27 characters used in the advertising campaign.
At times they are used as headlines and displayed in large size.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 6.
Box and Panels: These are elements in a copy which display unique and special information other than those already displayed by the advertisement.
They are use in such features as coupons, special offers and contest rules 7.
Slogan, Logotypes, Trade – Mark and Signatures: These elements often show themselves in every advertisement.
They are companies identifying tags; they differentiate one organization from another especially when they offer competitive brands.
For instance: MTN, GLOBACOM, ETISALAT, and AIRTEL, all these organizations offer telecommunication services, if they have none of these elements, they might just confuse customers in a bid to identify with their preferred brand.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Mention and explain the elements of an advertising copy.
Vital Question to Ask Before Displaying a Copy Copy writing is not done haphazardly; it requires critical thinking, meditation and experimentation of creativity.
It does not matter the media variety you are writing for, the common consensus is that a copy writer must be skillful in words, and have good understanding of his target audience to which the communication is directed.
John – Kamen (2006:163) says “copy writers often do more than writing headlines and text.
They are frequently called upon to help plan the layout and illustration for the print advertisement or to develop the idea on which it is based”.
For an advertising copy to appeal to its audience, it must stimulate the five sense organs of man, hence, our actions and reactions are predetermined by these organs.
These are the vital questions that must be answered by a copy writer before displaying his creative work or copy.
These include: a.
Can this copy attract attention?
b.
Can it arouse desire c. Is it capable of creating interest?
d. Can it provoke purchases action?
a.
Can this copy attract attention?
: The first purpose of a copy is to catch attention, if it fails here, it would fail in other stages of the campaign process.
Attracting consumer’s attention is the best bet of a copywriter.
So every creative measure to enable this should not be compromised.
b.
Can it arouse desire?
:If a copy succeed to attract attention, the next is to 28 determine whether it stirs interest in the audience.
To arouse desire is to make one long for something or someone.
This stage of the copy is crucial  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 and should not be jeopadise by non-availability of the brand as promised in the advertisement.
The desire of consumers to purchase a product is the key to achieve an advertising objective.
c. Is it capable of creating interest?
:Desire gives birth to interest, if the desire to have a product or service is there, automatically, the interest to purchase would follow.
If a copy moved to create an interest in the brand, it is almost successful.
It is a different scenario, if interest persist and will to purchase the brand is not there, hence, that does not mean the goal of the copy is defeated.
This lead us to the last question that need to be self-asked by a copy writer before showing or displaying his creative work.
d. Can it provoke purchasing action?
: the bottom line of an advertising copy is to encourage the sales of a brand.
A copy should above all other vital question be able to provoke buying attitude of consumers toward the brand displayed to them, by so doing, the advertiser would do more to advertise his brands in the agency.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Mention and explain the first four vital questions needed to be asked by a copywriter before displaying his copy.
4.0 CONCLUSION Understanding advertising copy and its function in the total advertising process is vital to a successful advertising campaign.
Copy as critical element of advertising process should be given enough time to be produced, tested and disseminated to the right audience in order to achieve the basic objective of salesmanship.
So many quacks parade the advertising industry, clamming what they are not, they manage copy jobs and mess them up.
We often see some substandard advertisement on the media and wonder why such is displayed in the first place.
Sometimes, it is because advertisers want cheap publicity; as a result, they mess up their brands and so de- market themselves ignorantly.
It is better not to advertise a brand than projecting a killer-advertisement that can disrepute an organization.
5.0 SUMMARY Advertising copy was enumerated in this unit, the concept of copy , copywriting and who a copy writer is were explained explicitly.
This unit started with the definition of the advertising copy, touching contributions from advertising experts, it further considered the seven elements of the copy writing in brief.
Afterwards, the unit was concluded with the vital question needed to be asked before the display of an advertising copy.
29  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT.
 Define advertising copy  List and explain the four question of copy writing  List the seven basic elements of an advertising copy.
7.1 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING John-Kamen, A.U (2006).
Advertising: Genesis, Evolution, Principles, Practice.
Snaps press Ltd., Nigeria, Enugu.
Ucheanya,C.C (2013).
Principle and practice of advertising: a new perspective.
Jubes- Evans Books and Publications, Nigeria, Niger state.
MODULE 2 MAC332 UNIT 2 THE CONCEPT OF ADVERTISING LAYOUT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Advertising Layout 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Market Assessment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Layout in advertising is in identical category with advertising copy.
One may not be able to totally isolate both copy and layout in the production of advertising campaign.
While copy is the integration of copy elements to produce a superb message, layout is the physical show or sketch of the 30 outcome of a copy work.
Layout is primarily concerned with the finished work of an advertising copy.
It displays the aesthetic of a copy and presents  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 it for assessment and acceptability.
George et al (1995: 306) define layout as “The physical arrangement of various parts of the advertisement, including the headline, subhead, illustrations, body copy, and any identifying marks”.
The position of where each part of an advertisement would be place is shown by the layout.
Layout is usually in rough format.
This unit would examine and explore what advertising layout is as a concept in advertising.
We shall exhaust explanation on definition, types of layout format, layout plan and any other matter relevant to this subject.
2.0 OBJECTIVE This study would ensure understanding on the concept of advertising layout.
It shall explain various layouts formats and plans that would equip students with practical tools for professional practice in advertising.
3.0 MAIN CONCEPT 3.1 Advertising Layout Ucheanya (2013) citing Dennis and Jenkins (1983: 37) defines layout as the “Arrangement of all the units or elements into a printed useable format”.
Ucheanya furthers that the combination of ideas or concepts used in planning and designing advertisement is critical to the functions of an advertising layout.
According to him, layout is a work-drawing which is usually pencil sketched to show the positions of copy elements, sizes of text, typefaces, colors of different units or items that are put together to inform a complete advertising campaign John – Kamen (2006) sees advertising layout as “a part of sales promotion”….
he posits that advertising layout shows how finished advertisement will look; this look consists of drawing, product illustration or painting that can later be reproduced in the advertisement.
A finished advertising layout according to John – Kamen (2006: 171) is compared to the blue print of a building drawn by an architect.
The following layout indicators are stated for printers to note: i.
Shape ii.
The size and location of the illustrations iii.
Type style, size, space and mass to be occupied iv.
Border style (if any) v. The width of the margins of white space vi.
Any additional direction that may help the printer to execute the plane of the designer vii.
Color combination in type, border and illustration.
31 The creative officer that produces advertising layout is known as layout designer.
A layout designer is the visualizer of the entire copy output.
He  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 projects his concept of how the copy would appear before the target audience.
He is usually experienced and professional in the job.
Often, he is a creative and aesthetic personality.
John – Kamen (2006) opines that “Before an advertising layout designer proceed to work on his design, he must first consider a number of principles of layout design elements, which control the finished design’’ The layout designer observes the following guidelines to enable him perfect a layout procedure.
Hence he should note that: i.
Layout design space allocation, size, amount of figures and copy to go into the media are well arranged.
ii.
The designer knows the brand very well enough to give it an excellent layout.
iii.
He should know the advertising policy of company.
iv.
He should be able to adapt his layout design to fit the publication in which the advertisement is to appear.
The Importance of Layout Layout displays the components of an advertising campaign on the media to be used for dissemination.
It laid them originally on line format to determine their respective slot in the advertisement.
The work done by the layout designer make the job easier for printers, clients and agencies to view and understand with accepting the output of the advertisement.Ucheanya (2013: 58) states the followings as the purpose why advertising layout is necessary and important.
These are: 1.
It enables the advertiser to see in advance before printing what the exacts picture of the advertisement would be like 2.
It gives the printer a guide on what to do 3.
It provides to the printer in advance picture of the complete work and how it will look like when printed.
4.
It eliminates arguments and misunderstanding between the advertiser and the printer in the areas of marginal notations.
5.
It gives a concrete proposal to the agency to make a bold presentation to its client’ 6.
It gives the advertiser / client an opportunity to examine what the agency submitted for approval.
A carefully prepared layout makes the tasks of decision making easier.
32 SELF ASSESSEMENT EXERCISE  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013  Explain what you understand by advertising layout, stating the SIX importance of layout.
Advertising Layout Formats Advertising layout format explain the look or appearance the layout designer envisage for a particular campaign.
He also considers the copy sheet to determine the form which is expected to take.
For instance, he ask himself if the layout would be on a single sheet, a folder, a label, a double sheet, a sticker, and so on.
When this question is satisfactorily answered, then he moves to work properly.
John – Kanem (2006) and Ucheanya (2013) agreed that there exist three basic formats of advertising layout.
These include the followings: i.)
Thumbnail or Miniature Layout: Here the designer sketches his mind’s picture in a sheet to help him develop on it.
This experimental stage allows the layout designer to demonstrate his intentions practically.
He uses wavy lines to show and represent each copy element.
It is the pictorial form of a layout designer’s idea.
Furthermore, thumbnail layout format presents the ideas the words will represent, the elements to be used, the relative importance of the ideas and elements and the order of presentation which can be any size.
Diagram 1 33  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 ii.)
The Rough Layout: This formats exceeds the thumbnail, it is in a large format but carries more information than it is, in a thumbnail.
Rough layout carries the resemblance of a finished work, it consist of the features of a proposed advertisement.
In it several draft may be called out for re – work on them, to take care of revisions and changes.
The final rough bears resemblance of the finished advertisement but the elements are lettered in hastily and incompletely written.
The elements positions are so precise that printer can work with it to compose and make up the advertisement without problem.
Diagram 2 34  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 iii.)
Comprehensive Layout: This is the finished version of the rough layout.
It shows the precise positions, colors, sizes, shapes etc of the layouts.
The ready to launch position of this layout makes it comprehensive.
Proofs of composed types are positioned for clients who may want a closer representation of advertisement than is offered by rough layout.
Diagram 3 35  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Figure 1:2.
SAMPLE LAYOUT SHEET ART 1 36 ART 2  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Harland E.S and William T.P (1992) summerise that thumbnail sketch, as it often is called is simply a sketch of few lines and shapes to show placement of the advertisement’s elements.
It is a miniature layout of the headline, copy, illustration, price, and logo type is developed to try out ideas about how the advertisement might be laid out.
In making sketch, their concern is to proportion the space appropriately.
According to the Harland et al (1992) six basic layout plans accomplish the object of the every print layout format.
These are expressed diagrammatically.
Figure 1:3 Layout 1 This area is divided by a horizontal line into two equal parts.
The line may be created through the use of while space or drawn border.
Layout 2 37  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 This areas is divided by a vertical line two equal parts.
Often, illustration is placed one side and other advertising element on the other side.
Layout 3 The vertical line left or right, divides the space into one fifths segments.
This layout is often used when several related items can go with a major item featured in the larger space.
Layout 4 The horizontal line at either the top or bottom divides the space into one – fourths segments.
Items advertised here may not be related.
Usually, a bottom division is preferred.
38 Layout 5  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 A diagonal divides the space into halves.
This layout plan is used when an illustration is of a shape that will not fit into layout plans 1 or 2 Layout 6 In this plan, several vertical and horizontal lines are drawn to make several (6, 9, 12, or more) areas of nearly equal size.
This plan is used in omnibus advertisements that include many items which may not be related.
Source: Harland and William (1992: 79 – 80) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain what advertising layout format is, with the aid of diagram.
4.0 CONCLUSION Advertising layout is crafted in design.
Design points to the figure or shape the advertisement is projecting in terms of aesthetics.
Layout assessment is not complete without its aesthetic appraisal.
“A good advertising layout is a combination of a number of advertising design elements such as illustration white space, logo type, trademarks, boarders etc.
the elements are blended into a unit of comprehensive advertisement that the maximum effect is achieved” John – Kamen (2006: 177).
A layout is prepared to suit the purpose of a guide to printer and other creative team member and whose duty is to produce a complete advertisement.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit x – rays the concept of advertising layouts; hence, definitions, 39 importance and types of layout were examined to give a comprehensive understanding of the subject matter.
The types of layout that were  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 considered are: Thumbnail or miniature layout, the rough layout and the comprehensive layout.
These three varieties are layers of improvement in the layout process.
A diagrammatic example of a typical layout was drawn to aid quick understanding of the concept.
Ultimately, six basic layout plans that helps to achieve the objective of every print media, especially, newspapers and magazines were explained with the aid of diagrams.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSESSMENT  Define advertising layout  List and explain 3 formats of advertising layout  Sketch a sample of an advertising layout 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995).
Introduction to advertising and promotion: An integrated marketing communications perspective, McGraw – Hill publication, U.S.A Harland E. Samson and William T. Price Jr. (1992).Advertising planning and Techniques.
South – Western publishing Co., U.S.A, Cincinnati.
John – Kamen, A.U (2006).
Advertising: Genesis, Evolution, Principles, Practice.
Snap Press Ltd. Nigeria, Enugu.
Ucheanya, C.U (2013).
Principles and Practice of Advertising: A new perspective.
Jubes – Evans Book and publications.
Nigeria, Niger - State.
MAC 332 MODULE 2 UNIT 3: STAGE IN PREPARING ADVERTISING MATERIALS 40 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Preparing and Producing Copy Materials 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 Reference/ Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit shall explain the various steps needed to be taken to actualize the production of an advertising copy.
As said elsewhere, copy is crucial to every advertising campaign, the more time and resources invested on it, the better the quality of the output.
We have exhausted theoretical frame work that surrounds the concept of advertising copy and layout, let journey into this action plan to keep ourselves abreast of the guidelines that ensure proper preparation and production of a quality advertising copy.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, students would learn and understand the step involved in preparing and producing a durable and acceptable advertising copy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Preparing and Producing Advertising Copy To prepare and produce an advertising copy is solely the decision of the advertiser.
The organization which sees a need for its brands to reach a wider audience and also desire to achieve this through advertising must take the step to visit an advertising agency, this step is the conception of copy idea.
When copy idea is conceived, the advertising agency contacted is thereby require to proffer solution to the need of the brand (s) brought before it.
Advertising agencies are copy producers, the kind of copy they produce for an advertiser is peculiar to the need of the advertiser or the problems or need they were briefed about.
The copy produced for brand X may not solve the problems or meet the needs of brand Y. by this, every advertising need have its own solution.
Ucheanya (2013:65) posits “the journey of preparing a copy starts with the organization that has articulated its advertising need for a given period.
It 41 is therefore directed to the agency requiring them to specifically propose solution”.
As it stated, the journey to birth a copy start from the  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 organization that needs the copy to promote its brands in order to provoke buying behaviors in its favors, thereby increasing market share.
The Procedures Involved In Copy Preparation and Production The first step in the preparation and production of advertising copy is the meeting between the advertiser (organization) and the agency that would carry on the job.
This meeting would provide the platform for both parties to appreciate the problem or needs of the advertiser in order to have a sense of direction for the campaign.
The meeting will allow for a brief to be given by the advertiser, afterward the agency would make suggestions that both parties would deliberate upon and arrive at a conclusion by consensus.
This stage is called Advertising brief.
Advertising brief simply refers to “advertising” problem of the organisation that requires solution” Ucheanya (2013:65).
This brief could be in the form of statement which consist the organisation’s problems and at the same time serves as some background information that would help agency in working out a solution.
The second step after the advertising brief is the Contact report.
The agency representative produces the contact report and distributes to concerned officers.
The contact reports represents the minutes of the meeting except that it is set out rather differently.
John – kamen (2006:132) opines that “The right-hand side being ruled off as an action column with remark such as “MR J.K. to supply prices or MR. P.K to submit layout” contact report shows the confirmation that some matters were agreed upon.
It further necessitate quick action that must be taken by both parties.
Preceding this, the account excutive would give verbal report to the account director and agency head to emphasise his position in the copy process.
Once this is done, the agency swings into action to produce the copy.
Every department in the agency takes up its responsibility to ensure everything work well as planned.
When this is religious and meticulously done, the next stage is embarked upon.
The third step of the campaign requires the advertising agency to return to the organization with a sample copy which has solution to the organization to the brief presented to it.
This stage is called the Agency’s response to the brief.
This response consists of what the agency is suggesting to the advertiser or organization to do during the campaign period in order to achieve its objectives.
The suggestions provided are supported with reasons necessitating them.
More so, it is the proposal of the agency that is the comprehensive document of the advertising plan for the brief given by the organisation.
This proposal is called a response to the brief, after 42 wards the agency presents the proposal to the organisation which goes through it and shows it satisfaction or not.
The agency’s representative  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 does the agency’s presentation for the purpose of attending to questions which may arise after presenting the proposed solution to the brief.
The contents of the agency’s presentation are the procedures of preparing an advertising copy.
When these processes are achieved, the advertising agency draws up a copy platform.
This consists of the researched items which would necessitate quick and qualitative production of the copy.
Copy platform contains figures, facts and other information necessary for preparing an advertising copy; this evolved from the research endeavours of the agency while providing solutions to the brief given to it.
The copy platform has in it both vital and non – vital information.
This could be: facts about the organisation, the brand, and media to be used, techniques of message delivery, prospective buyers, competitors, qualities, strengths and opportunity in market.
These information are listed in a paper sheet to enable whoever would produce the copy to do an excellent job.
In other words, copy platform as stated by Ucheanya (2013:66) “is a list of facts that must contain comprehensive, quite useful and related materials to the visualization .
This is actual creative writing that starts the production.” The copy platform process is responsible for the final copy that would be disseminated in the proposed medium.
At this points, issues that would give the creative writer a sense of direction are raised, because his job requires, deep thinking, imaginations and decision making.
The creative writer ensures he avoids using copy limitation and where such limitation is necessary, a high level uniqueness should be spelt out in order to give the advertiser a successful copy.
Some decisions that a creative writer might take according to ucheanya (2013) includes the followings: 1.
Whether to include product element or not 2.
Whether to you picture of humans to promote the products or graphics.
Where humans are settled for, the question of whether a celebrity or just a model comes to lime light 3.
Typography varieties to be used for the copy elements like: Headlines, subhead and text.
4.
Highlighting some elements to meet the paths of the eye 5.
Other elements to be included 6.
The decision to use white space and the proportion required 7.
The medium of dissemination.
8.
Production space to be used.
43 9.
The kind of appeal approach to be used  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 10.
The structure of the copy which create the type of thumbnail to sketch.
Having provided reactions to these decisions, the copy writer begins to visualize the picture of the proposed copy.
Hence, advertising copy is conceived.
The final stage of the copy preparation is the copy sheet.
This process involves the actuality of the final copy which is capable of going through the right medium to the consumers.
The structure of the advertising copy is determined; what the copy write does is to unleash the big idea, this is the unique sales proposition that will project the copy for the product sake.
At this stage the copy writer does visualization to structure the copy elements and starts to translates them into illustration in-order to communicate the big idea.
Here, the agency’s team is solely to consume the outcome in-order for them to criticize and make input that would further improve the purpose copy sheet.
This sheet is not the final advertising copy, but how well scrutinize and done it is, would be seen in the success of the final copy.
SELF ASSESSEMENT EXERCISE  Discuss the process involved in producing an advertising copy materials.
4.0 CONCLUSION In the preparation of copy materials, plan board meeting is called.
This meeting involves a date which allows each member of the creative team to study the account executive report, compare notes and carry out some fundamental investigations.
The minimum of five copy planning experts are expected to attend this meetings, their role is to discuss the campaign of the advertising copy and ensure the copy has solution to the brief given to it by the advertiser.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit considered the preparational steps of an advertising copy.
The study explained the steps in detail and showed some advertising terminologies used at every stage of the copy preparation.
The contribution of Ucheanyan (2013) and Prof. John – Kamen (2006) were relied upon for understanding.
Terms like: Advertising brief, contact reports, agency’s response to the brief, were among the terminologies used to explain the copy preparation stages.
More so, the decision options of the creative writer were enumerated 44 to enhance reader’s knowledge of creative process requirement.
The unit was concluded with action of plans board; this board consists of five or six  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 personnel’s who are experts in copy preparation process.
Their job is to scrutinize the account executive copy in order to actualize the success of the advertising campaign.
Members of the plans boards included the followings; Media planner, copy chief, studio manager, public relations manager and marketing manager.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSESSEMENT  What do you understand by copy preparation and production?
 Explain the steps involved in preparing / producing a copy  List the decision areas that a creature writer has to consider when writing a copy.
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS John – Kamen A.U.
(2006).
Advertising: Genesis; Evolution; Principles and Practice.
Snap Press Ltd. Nigeria, Enugu.
Ucheanya C.C (2013).
Principles and Practiceof Advertising: A new Perspective.
Jubes – Evans Books and Publications.Nigeria, Niger State.
45  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MAC 332 MODULE 2 UNIT 4: CAMPAIGN PLANNING IN ADVERTISING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Campaign Planning in Advertising 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/further readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Planning for advertising is like preparing a meal.
The process of campaign planning requires systematic approach which must be followed religiously and devotedly.
When the decision to launch an advertising campaign is made a great deal of creative armies are engaged, they straighten their mind’s ammunitions and attack every brief set before them by advertisers or organizations.
This unit shall consider why planning campaign is necessary in advertising.
It shall journey through the aims, considerable factors, and appropriation etc of advertising campaign.
A goodly planned advertising campaign can help create immediate sales and profits as well as develop long term customer goodwill.
For an advertiser to achieve this successful feat, he must be very careful in thought and develop an excellent advertising plan.
A perfect advertising campaign is like a master piece or good road map that shows the best route to follow to get to a desired destination.
2.0 OBJECTIVE The purpose of this unit is to help students: 46  To understand what advertising campaign is  To know the aims of advertising campaign  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013  To identify factors to consider when planning an advertising campaign.
3.0 MAIN CONCEPT 3.1 Campaign Planning in Advertising “Campaign” is a word that has affinity with war or military operation.
Campaign, when embarked upon is directed towards achieving a particular end using all the means available to it, whether favorable or not.
However, all campaigns require a carefully thought-out plan or activities which purpose is basically to attain a definite objectives or goals.
In like manner, it is with advertising campaign because ammunitions of research, co-ordination with sales plans, co-operation with retailers, public relations, Media planning and so on will be used to attain the ultimate goal of the campaign.
John – Kamen (2006:126) defines advertising campaign as “an organized and carefully use of paid publicity for the achievement of a definite purpose”.
He furthers by opining that most advertisement in the national magazines, radio, newspapers and television, is part of a campaign that has been carefully planned and laid out well in advance.
Campaign Planning A primary and definite goal is the purpose in the mind of a successful advertiser when planning a campaign.
Also, acknowledging the fact that every business entity primarily exists for the goals of profitability and growth through sales among other things.
Hence, that is not precisely enough to guide its advertising campaign.
However, businesses must carefully scan their operation environments; analyze them via their strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats (SWOT) indices, afterwards, scrutinize the entire situation and decide the best approach to launch their campaigns.
The campaign principle that ensures result is to launch sales messages in the best convincing and provoking ways that can endear customers to purchase the brands sold to them through advertisement.
Objectives of Advertising Campaign An objective of advertising campaign varies in line with the function of advertising.
The primary objective of every advertisement is salesmanship.
Increasing brands awareness and developing a reputable image for an organization, and adding to the core objectives of advertising campaign.
The followings are other objectives of advertising campaign: 47 i.
To Secure New Dealer: An organization may want to increase its brands in the market by seeking distributors to do this for it by  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 advertising on media, inviting them to take advantage of the offer it is giving at less sales percentage.
Also, new dealers can walk to an organization to help promote its brands after discovering the brands are worth promoting.
ii.
To Secure New Customer: with a good advertising campaign, an organization is capable of attracting more customers to its brands.
Some customer tries new brands of product when they see or hear of their existence and what they have to offer.
Most customers are alternative oriented that they seek a product that can offer them the same or similar satisfaction as the one they currently use.
iii.
To Increase Use Per Capita: The joy of every advertiser is to see its brands being purchase in the market, not only that, it seek to increase supply and demand of the brands in such that per capita usage is on the highest.
iv.
To Increase Insurance of Business: Advertising campaign helps to insure and increase the life span of a business organization.
When advertisement about a brand continues in the media, customers keep in mind that the organization producing the brand is very well in existence.
For instance, the advertisement and promotion of “Gala” sausage keeps in our mind that UAC food company lives.
More so, the quality of a brand determine how insure a business would be in the market place and in the economy of a society.
v. To protect against the expiration of patents: Advertising campaigns are launched to help advertiser sell off the bulk of products they have in their warehouse.
When goods stays in the warehouse for long without being purchase.
It gets expires and therefore becomes a loss for the organization financially.
vi.
To Inspire Sales and Dealers: With advertising campaign, dealers are motivated to know that their brands are publicized to endear more customers and increase sales simultaneously.
Every dealer of brand wants their brands to be known and identified with a large market in the economy.
Important Criteria for Considering Planning an Advertising Campaign To plan for a successful advertising campaign, these factors must be considered; 48 i.
Goals of campaign ii.
Cost Implication  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 iii.
Action plan for achieving the result.
iv.
Media Selection v. Techniques of information packaging.
i.
Goals of Campaign: The goal of a campaign is pre-requisite to the success of the campaign.
Where purpose or goal is not defined, abuse is inevitable.
An advertiser must decide what he wants to accomplish by his advertising campaign before starting the process.
ii.
Cost Implication: In planning a campaign, it is crucial to enmark a budget for it.
The magnitude of the campaign would influence the budget that would be allocated for it.
More so, the objective or goal of a campaign has great effect on the cost of advertisement.
The cost of an advertising campaign also means the appropriation allocated to achieve the advertising goal of the advertiser.
iii.
Action Plan for Achieving the Result: The way to bring about the purpose or the campaign would be spelt out to ensure error free procedures in the actualization of the campaign exercise.
A step by step approach outline is stated to guide the preparation and production of the campaign process.
This stage becomes functional when the purpose of the campaign and budget are determined.
iv.
Media Selection: The success of an advertising campaign cannot be de-associated from the media.
Media are vehicles that convey advertising messages to the target audience.
Knowing the best media that suit a campaign is a criterion for consideration.
Factor like media credibility and wide reach has significant role to play to ensure successful campaign launch.
Media varies in types, reach, and quality.
The one which suit a campaign would be best advised to be used; whether, electronic, print or social media.
v. Techniques of Information Packaging: Most of the time, it is not always the media nor message that were disseminated to audience that endear them to patronize a brand, but the manner or strategy used to convey the message in the media which performs the miracle.
Some advertiser can choose to use drama, songs, commentaries, documentaries, speeches, etc as communication techniques.
The techniques to be used by any advertising agency 49 should be in alignment with the target audience disposition to understand and appreciate it.
This requires research and  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 creativity.
When this factor is considered, then the campaign would be good to go.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain campaign planning in the light of the objectives, definition and criteria for consideration.
4.0 CONCLUSION Campaign planning in advertising is a vigorous process; hence, it should be meticulously observed and carried out.
There is no successful campaign in advertising that does not engage an army of creative team who understands the Nitti-gritty of the advertising war.
These armies, specializing in different fields of advertising ensure optimum professionalism is expended to achieve success in the campaign exercise.
They include: copy executive, writer, public relations executive, graphics specialist, media planner, marketing manager, etc.
Most appropriate is for an advertiser intending to launch a campaign to understand what it would take to launch a successful one.
The aim of the campaign, the criteria in making decisions for the campaign and the benefits of the campaign to his brands and organization.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit is brief and concise with pre-advertising campaign planning processes.
This unit x-rayed what campaign planning in advertising is, with emphasis on the objectives, definition and criteria to observe before launching a campaign.
The aims that were examined include: To secure cost, to secure new customers, to protect against the expiration of patents and to inspire sales and dealer.
The unit further explained important criteria for considering planning an advertising campaign.
Points like: Goals of campaign, cost implication, action plan for achieving the result, media selection and techniques of information packaging were enumerated and explained.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT  Define in your own words what you understand by advertising campaign.
 List and explain five objectives of an advertising campaign.
7.0 REFERENCE/ FURHTER READING 50 John-Kamen A.U (2006).
Advertising: Genesis, Evolution: Principles and practice.
Snaap Press limited, Nigeria, Enugu.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MAC 332 MODULES 2 UNIT 5: DEVELOPING ADVERTISING PLAN 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Advertising plan and Promotion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assessment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Developing advertising plan and special promotion is interesting but daunting for a professional advertising agency; it requires deep thinking and high level of creativity.
The development process involves examining different alternatives and options that will help the advertiser attain his purposes.
51 This unit will exhaust the concepts of special promotional and advertising plan with consideration for developing a six month and a  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 month’s advertising plan.
With this plan example, student would use their initiatives to plan a 10 month or a year’s plan that would be superb and result oriented.
Having understood the objectives of campaign planning in advertising, I believe this practical approach to developing an advertising plan would suffice.
2.0 OBJECTIVE In this unit, students would learn how to develop a six and a month’s advertising plans.
Students would also learn how a special promotion is planned and executed.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Advertising Plan and Promotion.
After an organization or advertiser had decided on its advertising proposal In terms of what to advertise, where to advertise, when to advertise, why the advertisement is needed and how the advertising would fit into the promotional event allotted for it, it immediately begins to develop an advertising plan that will deliver the campaign objectives.
Advertising plan is what a master piece is to an artist.
It is an architectural design of the steps to be taken per month or at a particular point in time to achieve the purpose of an advertisement.
Advertising according to Harland et al (1992:27) is “the blue point for the firm’s promotional advertising activity for the months ahead”.
A most successful advertising plan of an organization is usually a six month plan.
This period is enough to disseminate information and get result as well as providing time for evaluating activities.
Harland et al (1992) uphold that experience with retailer has shown that 6-months advertising plan has proven to be the best.
In their word “most retailers also find that the minimum for good planning is two 6-month segments.
The current six month plan can be dealt with in very specific term; the upcoming 6-month plan will start in general terms and becomes more specific as the beginning of that period approaches.” This simply means that no sooner an organization completes the execution of six month advertising plan, than plans for the next advertising campaign should commence.
Most people believe in the lengthy sustenance of advertisement.
In fact, the longer a particular advertisement stays on the media, the more effective it is to provoke purchase from target audience.
52 Developing the Six - Month Plan  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Building a 6-month plan involves two advertising activities.th initial activity is concern with the basic day to day and weekly advertising dissemination.
The later activity involves promotional events that will occur simultaneously with the initial program.
Days or weeks embarked for promotional event would be tagged in order to reduce or discontinue the daily and weekly advertising program.
Harland et el (1982:28) opine “during those days or weeks that the promotional events is being advertised, the usual basic advertising of the firm may be reduced or even discontinued”.
More so, while six months plan continues, the advertiser should ensure there are one to four major promotional events; with this, feedback can begin to be assessed and the success of the plan would be glaring and obvious.
The plan shown in this unit represents a furniture and small house wares appliance store as presented by Harland et al (1992).
The first plan shows the balance between regular advertising and special promotions, while the second shows the more detailed plan for the month of February.
A SIX-MONTH ADVERTISING PLAN MONTH MERCHANDISE FEATURED IN MERCHANDISEING REGULAR ADVERTISING FEATURE IN SPECIAL PROMOTION FUBUARY Upholstered furniture bedding-sheets, None pillowcases, pads, and covers.
MARCH Wood furniture, including beds fabric Kitchen tables and chairs dinette floor coverings sets.
APRIL Fabric and vinyl floor covering None draperies and curtains MAY Outdoor furniture, regular and gas Annual warehouse sales of trade- grills in furniture and appliances 53 JUNE Refrigerator, window air, Small appliances-blenders, conditioners and fans.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 toasters, sandwich grills JULY Dehumidifiers window air None conditioners A six month advertising plan can be a simple listing of what to advertise in each month.
The list of featured merchandise should be divided into those items that will be carried in regular advertising and those items for which a special promotional effort will be made.
Figure 5.2 ONE-MONTH ADVERTISING PLAN FEBRUARY Upholstered Living Room Furniture WEEK 1 Feature mid-range prices on daven ports and wing-backed chairs.
Stress choice of fabrics on customer orders.
(Newspaper and radio).
WEEK 2 Upholstered and Vinyl Lounge Chair Emphasize the recliner chairs and wide choice of fabrics and colours.
Use cooperate advertising with two national brand of recliners.
(Newspaper and direct mail to store list of customers.)
WEEK 3 Sheets and Pillowcases Feature both fitted and flat sets in single, full, queen, and king sizes.
(Newspaper and special display in both window and bedding alcove).
WEEK 4 Bed Covering and Pads Use the homestead line for the main items.
Stress new patterns and quality for fabrics.
Tag in all advertisement “sizes for all beds”.
(Newspaper and radio).
From the 6-month plan, a more detailed plan can be made for each month.
For most businesses, the monthly plans are developed about 6-months ahead to ensure that merchandise and display materials (if needed) are on hand when that week or the month arrives.
The idea of building a six-month plan is depended on the size, finance and nature of the organization or business involved.
Companies vary in operations and needs; so to determine whether an organization would develop a six-month or one-month advertising plan is totally up to their decision.
A small scale company that has small advertising needs could just 54 itemize its advertising needs on the pages of a calendar by page.
Items like what to be advertised and when it should be advertise would be the key  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 point to scribe.
Larger organizations or businesses that has more advertising needs could do a work-sheet with advertising needs clearly stated.
This work-sheet serves as action plan for meeting the advertising needs of the organisation.
Frank Jefkin’s six honest men must indicate some of the questions that should be answered before progress is made in the process.
At least three of the six basic questions must always be answered, that is, what to be advertised, when, and where to advertised and in what media should the advertising be made known.
Planning a Special Promotion Longer planning times usually precedes a special promotional events.
The needs for such events especially when they are internally oriented e.g.
trade fair.
In this case needs like buying trips to foreign countries, clearance for foreign visitors, store displays preparation and special advertising; all could take from one to three years to plan.
Harland et al (1992) highlight some point to be considered when planning a special promotion.
These points are guidelines that can be applied to almost any type of merchandising businesses.
These points include the followings among other: 1.
For each promotion, a plan and budget must be set up aside from the regular advertising plan and budget.
2.
Tag the promotion with a name and set duration for it to run.
3.
Draw up a written schedule of activities and distribute copies of the schedule to all employees.
4.
Work out some coordination between other promotional efforts like sales personnel, display, and publicity.
5.
Share responsibilities to personnel at various phases of the events.
e.g.
: Advertising, signs, inventory check/buying, housekeeping, pricing, decoration, display, handouts, door prizes etc.
6.
Device evaluation records to keep track of the effectiveness of the promotion on a daily basis.
Harland et al (1992) posit that as plan for special promotion is made, suppliers and media representative should be carried along to ensure that proper publicity is given to it.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain what you understand about developing advertising plan and promotion.
55 4.0 CONCLUSION  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 When special promotion plans are made, media should be kept abreast of their evolvement in order to ascertain proper coverage.
Supplier representative should be informed of the events, when this is done, cooperation would come in terms of special values placement or support in advertising.
Suppliers can give away product available or in-store demonstration of products.
As for the input of the media; representative from the media can advise on theme or copy slogans, the sequence and time of advertisements, mailing dates for direct mail, and preparation of News stories.
When diligently planned in advance, special promotion will have a maximum impact on sales.
5.0 SUMMARY The prerequisite of advertising plan is the decision of the advertiser to advertise.
Where the decision is absent, advertising effort would not commence.
Advertising plan answers the following questions; what to advertise, why, whom, where and how to advertise.
The period the plan is completed, execution commences almost immediately.
This unit considered advertising plan and promotions of special events.
Definition was given to the topic, afterwards sample of 6 and 1 months advertising plan were presented in tables.
Afterwards, guidelines for planning a special promotion were stated and explained.
These guidelines were action plan for an event manager to organize a successful program that can increase sales tremendously if planned in advance.
This unit came to conclusion with the suggestion to carry along suppliers and media representatives when planning special promotion; these agents can play significant roles in ensuring the success of the program.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSESSMENT  Define advertising plan  State the six guidelines of planning a special promotion  What contributions can the supplier and media representative make to ensure a successful promotion?
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Harland E. Samson and William T. price Dr.(1992).
Advertising & Planning and Techniques.
South-Western Publishing Co. U.S.A, Cincinnati.
56  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MAC 332 MODULE 3: PRACTICAL PRODUCTION OF ADVERTISING COPY 57 Unit 1: Design and Illustration of copy in Advertising Unit 2: Creative and Production Tactics in Print Advertising  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Unit 3: Preparation and Production of Television commercials Unit 4: Guidelines for Evaluating copy outputs UNIT 1: DESIGN AND ILLUSTRATION OF COPY IN ADVERTISING.
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Defining Advertising copy 3.2 Approach to Advertising copy writing 3.3 How to prepare and producing Advertising Materials 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Copy is the reason for the existence of advertising agencies.
Any Advertising agency lacking a good copy team is sure to pack up its business in no long time.
The heart of advertising agency is creative department, and the absence of it is comparable to being human without a life.
To write or develop an advert copy, a lot of quality and creative inputs needs to be made.
Advertising processes are pain staking, but knowing how to inter play these processes would enable a product, service or idea receives optimum supports, patronages or sympathy that the advertiser actually anticipates.
A good copy write up is enough to earn an organization goodwill and reputable image, especially when it is well projected and directed to the target audience on the platform of redundancy principle.
John-Kamen (2006:141), in his assertion holds strongly that language has through ages been used by people to stir actions, good or evil; he posits that words whether spoken or written which are skillfully used are essential in advertising.
This simply means that copy is a communication platform used by advertisers to provoke the buying behaviours of their target audience.
It could be to purchase a product or support an idea.
Whatever the aim is, it is very important to know that understanding the concept of copy can help one become 58 a better advertising practitioner.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Understand what advertising copy is  Define copy writing and its elements  Know and explain different approaches to advertising copy  Practically produce an advertising copy.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Defining Advertising Copy and Copy Writing Advertising copy means differently to different persons, the biases they hold on it tend to inform their definition of what it is.
Some people define it as salesmanship-in-print.
John-Kamen (2006:144).
Some rational thinkers disagreed with that definition; their argument was predicated on the ground that some advertising copies have nothing tangible to offer the public, hence, nothing concrete to sell.
This group holds that any advertising copy that does not present a product to the public for purchase and does not presents reasons why buyers must purchase it, is not salesmanship, but propaganda and impression development.
John-Kamen (2006:145) shares that others maintain that the definition of salesmanship-in-print is too narrow and myopic; hence, it reduces the advertising personnel to the role of merchandise peddling.
He furthers his opinion by saying these people pointed to advertiser’s prominent position, the total marketing process, and called it a force for mass consumer education and a tool for effecting social change.
Ucheanyan (2013:60) defines advertising copy from a functional perspective, thus he says “advertising copy is to perform the function of development of familiarity with product or service brand name, shape, motives and desires to build believability, giving reasons for selecting a particular brand over other competing brands.” Ucheanya assertion agrees with the school of thought that defines advertising copy as salesmanship-in- print and putting into consideration the advertising elements which he stated in his definition.
Putting these two viewpoints together, one would say advertising copy is aimed at stirring up a feeling which can either be to sell, or buy something or sympathize and support a cause which is directed to enhance better lives for the public.
For instance, an advertising copy projected on HIV/AIDS or polio campaign is to endear better life for the public.
Critically, it is rare to question that the overall objective of advertising copy is to sell something.
Most advertising copy have sales motive.
Even if the salesmanship tendency is inactive, the end is to endear 59 patronage whether physically or emotionally.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Therefore, advertising copy can be define as any creature write up or sketch which is meant to build a feeling of good will, strengthen public opinion or to break down a possible negative public opinion and to sell a product or service for the purpose of goal accomplishment.
There are two basic type of advertising copy according to John-kamen (2006:145); these are: (a) Product–selling copy: This is a copy type which is basically designed to sell a product to a particular target audience.
(b) Service-selling copy: This copy design primarily aimed at promoting services and ensuring the advertiser get optimum reward for it.
Principles of a Good Copy In preparing an effective advertising copy, some vital principles need to be adhered to.
These principles are guides towards launching a successful advertising campaign.
John-kamen (2006) enumerates these five principles, they are: 1.
You must make people see it 2.
You must make people read it 3.
You must make people understand it 4.
You must make people believe it 5.
You must make people want it.
1.
You must make people see the advertisement: Your advertising copy must be aesthetic enough to capture the sight of your target audience.
The use of colours such as red, blue and green catch attention more.
It is practically the duty of the copy developer to ensure this is achieved.
2.
You must make people read the advertisement: Every human is a rational being.
He tends to look for things and situation that is favourable to him.
To get your audience to read your copy, you must make sure you project more of the benefits he would derive from the products or ideas you are selling.
Again, showing concern for your target audience endeared their interest toward your products.
A quote goes thus “people don’t care how much you know, until they know how much you care”.
3.
You must make people understand your advertisement: Your copy is expected here to be clear, distinct and intelligible enough to the type of audience you designed it for.
How comprehensive your copy is to your audience matters a lot; if care is abused, your audience may not give you a 60 second chance, so understand your audience to determine the language and words you can reach them with.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 4.
You must make people believe it: Believe is a mental attitude, it can motivate or demotivate a person.
Most people believe aid them in life to either achieve success or become failure.
In the bible, romans 10:10 to be precisestates that man believes with his heart before he confesses his support for or against a faith.
As creative personnel, if your copy lacks the trust of your audience, it aims automatically is forfeited.
It is therefore your job to package messages in a way that would provoke sympathy or patronage for your products or service, making it truthful and simple.
This principle according to John-Kamen (2006:149) calls for the principles of truth and restraint moderation in advertising copy.
“These principles are unfortunately and frequently disregarded.
Some copy are full of extravagant claims and superlative statements, which are far from convincing.
As a matter of rule, over statement is less powerful than understatement.
Make fewer promises to your audience but deliver more.
With this, you would win their loyalty for a long period of time.
5.
You must make people want it: It is not all advertisement that leads to immediate sales.
Some advertisements are projected with the aim of creating goodwill and friendliness.
It aim is to register its presence in the mind of the audience to provide them with different choices of product or service.
Hence, providing consumers with substitutes.
For example, Coca- Cola and Pepsi can operate on this level.
As an advertising copy writer, your copy must stir up the desire of your audience to want and desire the product or service being sold.
John-Kamen (2006) finalizes that a copy writer must uphold these five principles with utmost sacredness.
He points that “if a copy has been seen, read, understood and believed, if it leaves the reader cold, nothing has been achieved.” Elements of a Copy Having exhausted the principles of an advertising copy, it is necessary to know and understand the various elements that characterize a copy.
These elements are rarely lavished on a particular advertising campaign, Ucheanya (2013) posits that copy elements are inputs in an advertising copy which direct and ground the objective of a copy to its target audience in such a way that patronage would be given in return.
John-Kamen (2006:155) supports the position of Ucheanya, by itemizing the elements of a copy.
An advertisement will be made of two to three of the common elements.
Certainly, there is no rule governing the use of these elements.
The peculiarity of an advertising campaign is pre-requisite to which 61 elements to be used.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 The followings are the element of an advertising copy according to Kanem- John (2006).
i.
The headline ii.
The subhead iii.
The body copy iv.
The caption v. The blurb or balloon vi.
The box and panels vii.
Slogans, logotype and signature.
1.
The headline: being the first element of a copy, it is the first contact element to target audience.
It is displayed in large type face than the rest texts.
It is designed with illustration to capture the attention of the reader.
The headline usually presents a selling idea which intrigues prospects to further read the advertisement.
2.
The subhead: This is displayed below the headline, it is written in small type face than the headline but larger than the body text.
In some cases, sub-head are placed before the headline because of the role it has to perform in the advertising copy.
It usually consist some crucial information the advertiser wants his audience to know before the copy illustration.
Research has shown that people reads the headlines and subhead and quit reading the advertisement.
It is not all advertisement that requires subhead.
For instance advertising an institution does not need it, because it has no selling points to get across like a product.
Subhead is useful only when full text reading is not needed.
3.
The body copy: This is the part which tells the story of the advertisement.
All details that the advertiser wants to get across to his audience are exhausted in this element.
In the body copy the writer gets down really to the important facts and business with the readers.
John-Kamen (2006:156) explains that “some advertisement copy do not have body copy from a technical stand point.
They contain no major unity type.” Advertisement built around a cosmic- strip style, picture, and caption advertisements, fall into this category.
4.
Captions: They are small unit of types, used with illustrations, 62 coupons and special offers.
They are generally less important to the main selling points in the advertisement than the body copy.
They  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 are set in type sizes smaller than body text.
Captions are used in representing sales points by both illustrating and explaining them at the same time.
5.
The blurb or balloon: This is an advertising term used to set up a copy illustration in the month of a character illustrated in the advertisement.
It is usually used as captions to portray a secondary feature in the story.
At times, it can constitute a body text as in the cosmic-strip style.
They are sometimes used as headlines and in such cases they are not changed in any way except to be displayed in large size type and place at the head of the advertisement.
6.
Box and panel: A box is a caption around which a rule has been lined by an advertiser; singling it out from other copy.
A panel on the other hand, is a solid rectangle of black or colour in the centre of which is the caption, either in white or black type.
Box and panel are both used in advertisement in features such as coupons, special offers and contest rules.
7.
Slogans, logotypes, trade-marks and signatures: These are insisted by companies to appear in every advertisement they disseminate.
They logically demands that the company’s name be displayed in its familiar form.
This display practice is called a logotype which is often abbreviated in advertising jargon or slang to “logo”, “sig” or “sig cut”.
Trademark is a design, placed on goods by a manufacturer or merchant to distinguish his products or service from those made or sold by other competitors.
A trademark is usually called a “Trade name”.
Also, the copywriter’s notice required for legal reasons is included in all the copy prepared for such advertisers.
3.2 Approach to Advertising Copy Writing We have learnt what a copy is and the elements that make it up.
Copywriting on the other hand is the process of actualizing an advertising copy.
The preparation of the copy and all it takes to bring it to lime light as a formidable instrument of an advertisement.
Copy writing is concern with every element that would appear in the completed message.
It does not matter if the advertisement begins with an illustration or ideas expressed in words or actions supported by illustration.
Ucheanya (2013:60) defines copy writing as “the art and act of putting together those elements that will project a product or services 63 to achieve its objective.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 John- kamen (2006) explains that a copy writer has 26 alphabets as work tools, the same parts of speech, figures of speech, grammar rules and tenses to guide him in actualizing a realistic goal getting and persuasive copy.
He posits that every copy writer must revise their copy until they are able to say a hundred words and make their copy readers thinks a thousand (Brisbane).
John-kanem (2006:151) enumerates 3 basic forms of writing a copy.
These 3 basic forms of writing enable us to make our choice when preparing a copy.
They are: a.
Description b.
Narration c. Exposition a. Descriptive Form: The copywriter picks a word or picture of the product by means of description.
He describes in details the features of a product or service with the aim of creating a mind picture in his audience.
Characteristics like: sizes, colours, materials, appearance, and construction are commonly expressed.
A descriptive copy could be objective, or subjective or both.
An Objective Description: Obtains when the physical attributes of a product is described and explained in such that would create a mental picture in the audience.
A Subjective Description: Is aim at given the audience an impression of excellence rather than picture of details.
This description presents a product or services from the point of the satisfaction, pleasure, benefits or advantages its possession has to offer its users.
It draws upon the imagination of the users to enable them see it as desirous and worth patronizing.
b.
Narrative form:This type of copy writing is also referred to as ‘story copy’ it presents a product or service by narration.
It digs into the interest of its audience to provoke their support and sympathy of the products it is selling.
This copy form is written to highly accommodate human interest.
The advertisers employing this form must apply a vivid human-interest appeal to emotional feelings as taste, or individual side of reader.
This appeal is usually built around some simple interesting situation which the reader might experience himself.
This form of appeal is usually written in the first person, having the 64 copywriter as the narrator.
It can be written inform of a monologue or dialogue; where a user of the product is relating his experience to a  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 prospective buyer.
With this, the story will be tied more closely to the reader’s situation or experience.
This form of appeal should be full of human interest, imagination, intimate with personal need in nature and carefully built to correspond with the selling fixed rules or formula, attention, interest, desire and action.
Narrative copy is best used in the advertisement of food products, automobiles, home-building materials, furniture and everything that has affinity with human interest.
c. The Exposition Form: This appeal explains formations, construction, operation, uses and tells about the superiority of a product or service over others.
It is suitable for advertising commodities that appeal to reason or business sense or the reader’s interest.
This copy appeals posits with style the weaknesses of other products and services and thereafter pushes its mouth-watering offer to its target audience afterwards leaving them to be the judge of their choices.
3.3 How to Prepare and Produce Advertising Materials.
Preparing and producing advertising materials is not a mean task.
It is pain staking and equally interesting to those who have passion for advertising.
At this stage people know you are working out something which they expect should appeal to their sense of patronage.
A careful step is required to ensure the process is clean and worthwhile.
Ucheanya (2013:56) states the various stages of preparing advertising materials for the divers mass media.
These stages are as follows: i.
Planning ii.
Research iii.
Brain storming iv.
Contact reports v. Designs and illustration vi.
Layout vii.
Storyboard.
i.
Planning: This refers to the various steps to be taken by an advert professional in-order to achieve his advertising aim.
Planning is a crucial element of an advertising process.
At this stage the professional considers all it would take him to actualize an advertising copy.
He considers elements like; finance, time, materials needed, experience, target audience, media to be used, strategies, approaches and so on.
Where he fails to count the cost of projecting a successful campaign, he has automatically planned 65 to fail”.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 ii.
Research: This process requires an advert professional to enquire into the nature of the advertising campaign he desires to embark upon.
He must know who his population (audience) is, the geographical location, demographics, the media that can reach them, language of communication, strategy to use, challenges, e.t.c.
when he get answers for all these, he can proceed to the next stage.
Also, all materials needed for the advertisement should have been collected here.
iii.
Brain storming: The most crucial element of this stage is that every material collected from the research is put to work towards producing the advert copy.
What material to use and how to use them becomes a brain work.
At this stage, experiences counts, exposure matters and the objective is decided.
iv.
Contact report: According to Ucheanya (2013:55) contact report is the basic document that enables the clients’ service executive realizes his work.
Keeping each meeting or contact report helps to solve any eventuality that might arise from the client.
When requested for the services of an advertising agency, and issued a brief of its problems, the agency takes the minutes of the contact or meeting.
Contact report in a layman understanding is a minute of meeting with a client of an advertising agency, whether the meeting is informal or formal, provided the contact has relationship with the work at hand, it must be reported.
For instance, a client may think of new idea towards solving her problem which she never thought of in the meeting.
Assuming the report of that meeting is not taken; such client might claim to have said it and then have his way, which may stall the agency’s time and effort.
ILLUSTRATION OF A CONTACT REPORT PUBLIC RELATIONS MIX CONTACT REPORT Name of client:----------------------------------------------------------- Representative of client:------------------------------------------------ 66 Representative of agency:---------------------------------------------- Date of contact:----------------------------------------------------------  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Date of report:----------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------- Client Service Executive cc : Client: General Manager Agency: Managing Director.
v. Design and illustration of Copy: By design, the picture of drawings and outlines from which something can be made begins to come to mind.
The assumption of planning the advertisement is considered as well as pattern, arrangement of lines, spaces, shapes, elements or details of decoration are annex to develop a suitable advertising copy for client.
Design is part of journalism; when design principles are applied, image is created.
It is pertinent to note that before you create an advertisement, there must be space to actualize it.
Ucheanya (2013:58) quoting Dennis and Jenkins (1983:47) state the five basic principles of design, thus: “page proportion balance, contrast, unity and rhythm”.
These are usually applied to get the required layout that an advertisement needs.
To achieve the basic design principles, layout needs to be created; when this is done, it became an illustration copy of the intended advertisement.
Illustration is therefore a pictorial arrangement of the elements that explains or clearly shows the practical ideas conceive for a product or services.
vi.
Story board: This stage is concern with series of actions and movements of the camera in order to ensure a proper interpretation.
Story board is much pronounced in television advertisement production.
The story board is a visual translation of the script.
This is simply because in television, concepts are scripted and afterwards translated into story board.
Ucheanyan (2013:59) holds that “the story board presents the sequential order of movements, actions, picture and visuals that make up an advertisement.” The story board is made up of frames with each containing instruction pasted below the action within the frame.
Television script in its initial form is arranged in a single 67 column format called the rehearsal script.
This rehearsal script contains location, stage, instructions, action, character and dialogue  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 afterwards, the script is perfected to become a master piece for the advertising process, the script therefore contain basic details of all the camera and sound direction and when the concept is finally put on paper, it is then scripted to suit the television medium.
A running order is prepared from the script after the technical planning contact.
The result of this meeting then produces a script breakdown of the whole operations.
Millerson (1975:187) in Ucheanyan (2013:59) described the script breakdown as an operation guide that contains the “moves and timing involved which can be seen at a glance”.
vii.
Production: At this stage we consider the final output of the advertising process.
What we achieve at this level would surface for all to evaluate, criticize and appraised before it gets to the final consumers.
Whether the advertisement would achieve it aim or not is going to be determined at this stage.
It should be noted that the quality of input in advertising process will surely equate the output quality.
4.0 CONCLUSION The design and illustration of copy in advertising requires experience, exposure and high level of creativity.
Advertising is not a profession for everyone but a profession for every creative and artistic personality.
Copy writing in print or electronic media demands skillful use of words and understanding of audience or consumer to which the communication is to be directed.
Also, the motive which causes them to act in the desired direction should not be ignored, John-kamen (2006:163).
Design and illustration of copy also requires the skills to present the advertisers message forcefully and in good taste.
5.0 SUMMARY As stated in the beginning of this unit, copy accounts for why advertising process is required.
A good copy can translates to an excellent and continuous patronage.
Creating lasting impression on our advertising audience is a mandate we must all execute.
We considered the principles of a good copy, which informs that they must be seen, read, understood, believed and wanted by the target audience.
The elements of a copy were enumerated and duly explained.
68 We also looked into the approaches to writing an advertising copy, this topic explains the basic forms of writing as proposed by John-kamen  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 (2006:151).
This unit was concluded on the process of preparing and producing advertising materials where the stages of the process were listed and explained explicitly.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Define an advertising copy and explain the five principles of a good copy.
 List and explain the stages of preparing and producing advertising materials.
 Explain the 3 forms of copy writing.
7.0 REFERENCE /FURTHER READING John-kamen A.U (2006).
Advertising: Genesis, Evolution, Principles, Practice: Snaap Press Ltd Nigeria, Enugu.
Ucheanyan, C.C (2013).
Principles and Practice of Advertising: A new Perspective.
Jubes-Evans Books and Publications: Nigeria: Bida Module 3 UNIT 2: CREATIVE AND PRODUCTION TACTICS IN PRINT ADVERTISEMENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Planning and utilizing printed media 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/ further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Advertising like other areas of business involves making choices.
When decision is made to use print media, it is therefore the responsibility of the 69 advertiser to choose which printed media to use.
This choice of medium would actually determine the allocation of advertising resources; whether  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 man power, finance or equipment in a way to generate the best possible promotion for the business.
Once the type of printed media to be used is determine, the actual development and production of printed advertisement would to be implemented.
This unit would present information about two major types of printed media which are: Newspaper and Magazine, and later focuses on one of them, precisely the newspaper because of its multi-dimensional feature.
Afterwards, the fundamental principle related with planning for development and production of printed advertisement would then discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVE The goal of this unit is to help students:  Collect fact for planning printed advertisement.
 Understand creative tactics and characteristic of an effective printed advertisement.
 understand the size, location and positioning of advertisements in Newspaper, and to know the fundamental principles associated with selecting an appropriate type and illustration for a printed advertisement.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Planning and Utilising Printed Media.
Printed media is usually referred to as the elites media.
It is not an all- audience media.
Though it accommodates pictures and diagrammatic illustrations that non-elites can comprehend easily; this situation most often obtain in advertisement of products or services like; obituaries, events, graph, and so on.
Notwithstanding, the inability of a person to read could be an obstacle towards his effective utilization of these types of media.
Two of the major types of printed media are Newspapers, and magazines.
The third is direct mail; this accommodates the other printed form of media which can be used to disseminate information to target audience.
Newspapers are the largest single group of all advertising media and are absolutely beneficial to local advertisers.
Harland E. Samson and Williams T. Price (1992:63), give statistics of Newspaper’ Circulation in America during this year, hence, in 1992, it was recorded that there was 1700 daily papers with a circulation of about 62,600,000 copies.
There were 840sunday papers with circulation of more 70 than 61, 000,000 and 7,600 weekly papers with a circulation nearly 38,000,000.
In addition, they record that, there were unknown numbers of  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 neighbourhood shoppers or advertising papers which were available for free to interested readers.
Harland et al (1992) posit the circulation of magazines as well, considering it wide reach as compared to newspapers.
Magazines are different from newspapers in many respects.
Though some local advertiser uses it, but often national firms primarily utilize it.
The numbers of magazines in United State in 1992 were close to 5,000 with an approximate total circulation per issue of 260,000,000 copies.
Many advertisers prefer to use magazines than television because it comparatively cost less.
Besides, the three major forms of printed advertising media, several other forms are available to businesses.
They include: 1.
Advertising specialties, 2.
Out-of-home advertising, and 3.
Point-of-purchase advertising.
Newspaper Advertising Newspapers are crucial to virtually every state across Nigeria and it is a major spread across national boundary.
They help develop a sense of identity for communities and are also generally acceptable medium, keeping people informed on daily events around them.
Newspapers are so important to local people within a country geographical location, as a result of this; local firms place more adverts on it than any other medium.
Types of Newspapers Newspaper varieties are five majorly, these are: i.
National Newspaper ii.
Daily Newspaper iii.
Weekly Newspaper iv.
Shopper Newspaper v. Special Audience Newspaper I National Newspaper: This variety of newspaper is categorised by it national reach.
This has its presence in every state, and local government of Nigeria.
E.g.
The Punch, The Guardian, The Sun, Vanguard etc.
II Daily Newspaper: this majorly originates from a particular city with circulation concentrated in that city.
71  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 III Weekly Newspaper: this variety is usually provided and published in a smaller communities like say, local government which is direct to a limited geographic area.
IV Shopper’s Newspaper: this is often published weekly.
It consists basic advertisement which is directed to a limited geographic area.
V Special Newspaper: as its name implies, this newspaper is a focus group newspaper.
It target minority in the society, such as university students, religious group, foreign language audience and fraternity group.
The most important thing in having types of newspaper in the fact that it’s provide advertiser option withy reaching a target audience.
Types of Newspaper Advertising There are just two broad division of newspaper advertising, these are : (i) Display Advertising (ii) Classified Advertising.
(a).
Display Advertising: this advertising category combines the elements of an advertisement to give the advert a balance and professional positioning in the newspaper with various amount of white space.
It is the type many corporate organizations most often use.
Display advertisement comes in different sizes, ranging from 1 column by 1 inch deep to full- page.
The 3 types of display advertisement are: local, general, or national and cooperative.
Harland et al (1992).
Local advertising posits a specific product or service you can purchase at a particular store or firm.
They are local because the advertiser is within the locality where the advert is displayed.
E.g., Political candidate, land lord association etc.
General or national advertising: This advertising points out item and service that can be bought at a particular store or firm.
However, it basically point out features and benefits of an item, such as brand of soap, car model, mobile phone service, insurance services etc.
Cooperative Advert: this advert category is a combination of both local and national advertisements.
It functions for the purpose of promoting both the brand name item and the local firm (s) that carries the item.
Cooperative advert is purchased by a local business, but the advert is designed partially paid for through the local business by a national supplier.
72 (b).
Classified Advertising: this category of advertising uses only the body copy of an advertisement.
Usually limited, they are grouped in categories  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 like: change of name, employment, household, rentals and company registration.
Figure 2.1 shows both a display and classified advertisements.
DISPLAY ADVERTISEMENT CLASSIFIED ADVERTI VACANCY!
VACANCY!!
VACANCY!!!
We are looking for the best hands to fit the following positions: Advert Manager- Bsc Mass Com., APCON Public Relations Manager – Bsc PR, NIPR Admin Officer – HND/Bsc Bus.Admin.
Marketing officer – OND,SSCE.
If you are the right candidate, kindly send your CV to advertcopylayout@noun.com CHANGE OF PROPERTY NAME.
FOR SALE!
I Miss Christiana A 2 storey Fashakin wishes to building along be address Awolowo way henceforth as MRS Victoria Island is CHRISTIANA selling for 10 ADEX, all previous million naira.
For documents remain info call, valid.
080300021101 Advantages of Newspaper Advertising To all businesses, newspaper presents meritorious advantages over other media types for the following reasons: 1.
The newspaper has a low price tag that enables reader to purchase it, extensive market coverage and easily attract quick feedbacks.
2.
In advertisement, newspaper allows for flexibility in size, style, and format.
3.
Newspaper advertisement can easily be changed, deleted or inserted on short notice, at times within publication hour, if necessary.
4.
It can provide a great deal of information and details when necessary.
The referral factors or number of times the advertisement is read is also crucial.
73 5.
Newspapers reach a large business audience or business market in almost all communities.
Broad circulation in a specific trading area  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 provides the best possible coverage by a single medium for most firms.
Characteristics of an Effective Printed Advertisement In getting facts for an advertisement; whether it would be design by a staff of an advertising agency or by oneself.
Four basic questions would need to be answered, these questions are: a.
What item(s) should be advertised?
b.
What fact should be included about the item to be advertised?
c. What should be the price tag for the item to be advertised?
d. How many unit of the product will be available for purchase?
After providing answers to these questions, then the print advertising copy would commence production processing.
To know if an advert copy enhance the goal of an advertising campaign, the following 3 characteristics should be looked out for: 1.
Characteristic of Competitive Edge For an advertisement to have a competitive edge, the elements of advertising must be well integrated in such that can captivate audience and provoke their patronage.
These elementary questions must be answered: According to Harland et al (1992:67).
(a) Is the headline noticeable and big enough to stand up against the noise of other headlines?
Headlines should be large enough so they are not overshadowed by other advertisement.
(b) Is the main illustration large enough to look important?
In retails advertisement, illustration is the element that gives stature to the merchandise and the advertisement.
(c) Does the logo type stand out?
The logo should be conspicuous enough to highlight the business quickly and destructively to establish the company personality.
(d) If the advertisement is small, does it use a special boarder special type to make it distingue?
A small advertisement has to work hard to stand up against half and full pages advertisement.
A careful layout stage can make a small advertisement compete effectively.
2.Characteristics of Price Prominence 74 Price is a control factor for influencing audience toward patronizing a product or service.
It should be consider an important part of most  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 advertising designs.
Readers would want to know ‘what the product would cost him?’ ‘is the offered at reduced price?’ ‘is this a saving or more cost increment?’ comparative shopping through advertising is a modern trend.
So in price tagging, during advertisement production, price should be kept near item to which they apply, to avoid any confusion.
Goods that are purchased frequently, such as food item, must be priced to attract customers.
But non-promotional advertisement might not give price because the advertisement does not feature a specific product or service.
3.Characteristic of Focal Point Every advertisement must have at least one striking element that attracts the gaze and interest of a reader to it.
This element would guide the reader, to the advertisement.
Most times focal point is the illustration, sometimes, the headlines.
Most advertisers because of advertising derailment of objective lost focal point when preparing advertisement.
Their advertisements are made up of a little block of copy, their prices figures and unwitty illustrations at a corner have no dominant element for the reader’s eyes to rest on.
Layout Techniques in Printed Advertisement When decision to use a printed advertisement designer is made, it is therefore petinent to provide facts to be used in the preparation of the advertisement.
After getting the advertising facts, the designer could develop a rough layouts’ design and present it to the advertiser for evaluation.
According to the Harland et al (1992:67), “a rough layout of a business advertisement is simply a guide used to show the placement of an element that6 will appear in the finished advertisement.
The layout is concerned with size, position, arrangement, and potential reader’s impact of the various advertising elements”.
Harland et al (1999:67) further emphasise that “a layout is to the advertiser what blue print is to an architect: a way of telling where different element go”.
However, if the advertiser chooses to produce the layout, he would have to submit the newspaper’s house for the next action.
The following techniques will help an advertiser achieve the objective of an outstanding layout or critique the layout of an advertisement designed by another person.
Thus: (1).
Design Flow: the eye beholding the advertisement must be directed 75 orderly from the top to the bottom of the advertisement because a good layout comprises a collection of related and compatible elements.
In  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 directing the “eye flow”, the element are commonly laid in regular patterns.
The most common pattern as enumerated by Harland et al (1992), are the “S” “C” or “Z”.
In addition, the reverse S, C, and Z patterns are also used.
The most crucial element in the advertisement should be place at or near the optical centre of the advertisement .The optical centre is a spot slightly above and to the left of the actual centre layout space.
See figure 2.3 for virtual example.
Another strategy close to design flow is having the people shown in an illustration look straight to the advertisement.
This strategy applies to the items like: furniture, car, bank loan etc.
No deformity shape collection introducing Shape equipment to help you keep fit always each.
N 150k (2) Arrange Elements Properly: When advertisement’s elements are properly arranged, it will ensure maximum readership for the advertisement.
Harland et al (1992:68) state some point to put in mind when arranging advertising elements.
These include:  Place the headline immediately above the main copy block.
Do not separate the headlines from the copy by an illustration.
 Keep type lines in a short measure.
Type lines of about 3 to 31/2 inches are easy to read; 5 inches is the maximum length.
 One big illustration is usually more effective than smaller ones (3).Use Sensible Proportion: Layout should be sized to please the reader’s eye and to provide the most effective means of developing the illustration, headlines and copy message.
Narrow, long, or horizontal ones are not attractor and are difficult to handle.
To determine an appropriate proportion for advertisement, just look at some advertisement and see what is attractive, and then apply it.
A proportion of 3 to 5(6 inches wide to 10 76 inches deep for instance) is a good average.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 (4).
Make Coupons Noticeable and Useable: Many business add in their advertisement special take-offs or coupons featuring naira-off or percentage-off on purchases or free merchandise with purchase of a certain amount of money.
If an advertisement includes a coupon, there should be a noticeable boarder, either a solid or a dotted line, around the coupon so readers know what it is.
Coupon must be dated to show the duration of their usage.
(5) Use Of White Space and Boarder: An advertisement obtains full impact and interest when there is balance in the use of the white and black spaces in it.
If there is unfilled white space, the advert becomes sterile and unattractive in like manner, if there exists a lot of unfilled black space the advertisement becomes difficult to read and comprehend.
White space is an important tool used in layout.
It points out important message by setting them apart from other area of the advertisement.
White space can be used to create a visual flow through the advertisement and keep the reader’s gaze on the massage.
(The use of white space is also referred to as “river of white”).
A border perfoms an important function in almost every advertisement.
The purpose for boarders is to keep the reader’s gaze from moving outside the advertisement to other areas of the page.
It also helps a small advertisement from being absorbed by other neighboring adverts on thesame newspaper.
Consider figure 2.4 more comprehension.
This newspaper advertisement use the reverse technique to highlight PR-MIX’s SHAPE STORE, the business identification, body,copy, and the price.
White space draw the readers gaze to the illustration.
SHAPE STORE Special Offer!!!
77 50% Discount on every product Including fitness counseling,  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Fitness equipment, fitness Pills, fitness literatures.
1234, off Estate Avenue +234-7011002110 Position of Advertisement on the Newspaper Page Harland et al (1992) explain that “classified advertisement appears in specific predetermined section within the want advertisements”.
They emphasise that advertiser has no choice about the positioning of classified advertisement within a page.
When a display advertisement is set up on a newspaper page, the largest advertisement is placed in the lower right hand corner of the page.
Additional advertisement are then located above or the left of the largest advertisement.
After the news-stories are place on the page the remaining space is filled with smaller advertisements.
Figure 2.5 visually illustrates this approach to building a newspaper page.
Knowing this approach is used to prompt advertiser to review the size, layout and timing of their advertisements.
For instance, a large advertisement appearing once a week might gain more readership than two smaller advertisements.
In smaller advertisement, it might be better to position the logo in the upper left hand corner of the advertisement.
The business identification would then be closet to the news stories and have a greater chance to being recognized and associated with the advertisement.
FIGURE 2.5 ________________________ ________________________ If advertisers should examine the _____ ______ ________ ways than newspapers typically _____ ______ ________ stack advertisements to know what 3-COLUMN AD _____ ______ _______ size and style advertising potential ___ ______ customer would be likely to read.
NEWSPAPER STORIES _____ ______ _______ _____ ______ _______ _____ ______ 1 COLUMN _____ ______ AD _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ 4-COLUMN AD _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ 78 _____ 1-COUMN _____ AD  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 2-COLUMN AD Positioning advertisement on magazines’ page is not as critical as it looks on a newspaper page, so the positioning selected is basically the decision of the magazine staff.
In other word, There is no guiding rules as to how advertisement should be placed on a magazine page.
However, most magazine staff tends to honour personal preferences of advertisers.
The diagrams below illustrates this further ____ ____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ Island one-third page pattern Half page pattern _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ ______ ______ _____ _____ _____ ______ ______ _____ _____ _____ ______ ______ _____ _____ _____ ______ ______ _____ _____ _____ ______ ______ _____ _____ _____ ______ ______ _____ _____ ______ ______ _____ _____ _____ One- Third page pattern Horizontal half-page pattern 79 Fig 2.6.positioning of advertisement on a given page in a magazine can take several form: four of these form are shown here.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Source: Adapted from John D. Burke, advertising in market place(New York MC Graw-Hill)(1980:311) Preparing an Advertising Request According to Harland et al(1992:77), an advertisement request form is “generally used in business to aid in developing and scheduling advertisement.
The buyer or merchandise manager initiates the request and sends it to the advertising manager, who then sees to it that the advertisement is prepared”.
Sometimes, someone out side the firm prepares the advertisement.
The most important element in preparing advertisement is to get a request form duly filled with information that is necessary for the advertisement to be prepared.
The complete form should contain a summary of essential information needed for preparing the advertisement, which basically prompt the writing of the copy.
Frequently, additional facts and illustration are attached to the request form when it is submitted.
A TYPICAL ADVERTISEMENT REQUEST FORM REQUEST FOR ADVERTISEMENT To be published___________________________________________________________ (day of week) (date) Newspaper _______________________________________________________________ This request and sample of merchandise are due.
In advertising manager’s office 7 days in advance of request publication date.
________________________________________________________________________________ ________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ Merchandise to be advertised __________________________________________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________________________ Materials__________________________________________________________________________ __________________________________________________________________________ Colours ____________________________________________________________________ Sizes _________________________________________________________________________ Sales price_______________________________ Cost_____________________________ Regular price_____________________________ Last Price_________________________ Quantity ________________________________ amount in home _____________________ Amount of merchandise in naire(retail)________________________________________ _______________ clearance sales __________reduce price ________regular stock regular price ___________ special purchase sale _______ prestige promo _______sales of irregulars Special information: _________________________________________________________________________ Size advert request _____________ x_____________ Dept mgr.
_________________ Illustration desired __________________ Buyer __________________________________ 80 M erchandise mgr.___________________________________________________________  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Date _______________________ (Attached old illustration or picture for new) Some Newspaper Advertisement Terms 1.
Banner Head: A headline that usually extend all the way across the top of a page and usually is in bold type.
2.
Box: A newspaper item with printed boarders on all four sides 3.
Camera Ready: An advertisement layout that is ready for final photographing.
The photo negative will be used for making the plate for printing.
4.
Crop: to change the size proportions of an illustration, also to eliminate undesirable background or to cut the illustration to fit a specific space.
5.
Dealer Imprint: the name of a local business or advertiser to be inserted or imprinted in an advertisement prepared by a national advertiser.
6.
Double Spread: this is also known as “ double truck”, or “centre spread”.
It is two pages facing each other and presented as a single advertisement.
7.
Full Position: The space occupied by an advertisement at the top of a column with news matters along one side, or place next to or following reading matter but no other advertisement.
8.
Gutter: The blank space that forms the inside page margin gutter position is advertising space next to the gutter margin.
9.
Insert: printed matters, such as promotional advertising, that is for delivery with the newspaper.
10.
Kill: to stop the publication of an advertisement.
11.
Make Good: a free repeat insertion of an advertisement to compensate for an error in the original insertion.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  List five types of newspapers as stated in this unit  Explain the various types of advertising.
 Design an advertising request form.
4.0 CONCLUTION There are various benefits and advantages of using print advertising.
It provide comprehension for both literates and illiterates, most advertisement carry picture illustrations which enable the illiterates understand what the advertiser is passing across to the audience, while the elites can enhance their understanding by reading the illustration attached to the advertisement.
81 More so, print media offer low cost per reader, a wider market coverage, and usually a quick response from large audience.
Before placing a print  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 advertisement, a business person must first consider what product or service to advertise, what information to provide about the item, how much the item costs, and the quantity available.
By learning the fundamental principles associated with print media advertisement, advertiser’s can help smooth the process of communicating their sales message to potential customers.
5.0.
SUMMARY Like other aspect of business, advertising involves making choices.
Once a decision is made, an advertiser decides the print media to use.
This unit examined the creative and production tactics in print advertisement.
Two major popular print media were considered; newspapers and magazines, but an emphasis was placed on the newspaper.
The planning or printed media was another arm of the unit which was examined; it posits opinions of Harland et al (1992) and gave statistics of newspaper distribution in America.
Types of newspapers were discussed alongside with two major types of newspaper advertisement.
Diagrammatic illustrations were given to buttress the write up as well.
Furthermore, the unit examined the characteristic of an effective advertisement were three major characteristic were explicitly justified.
Pen ultimately, we considered positions that are right for advertisements placement in the print media, with diagram to buttress it.
Finally, the unit was wrapped up with an advertising request form and some newspaper advertising terms.
6.0 TUTOR –MARKED ASSIGNMENT  What are the elementary considerations for planning and using printed media?
List and explain.
 What are the characteristics an effective printed advertisement?
 With the aid of diagram, list and explain the various layout techniques of printed advertisement.
7.0 REFRENCE/ FURTHER READING Harland E. Samson and William T. Price (1992).
Advertising Planning Techniques :South –Western Publishing, Ohio, Cincinnati 82  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 MODULE 3 UNIT 3: PREPARATION AND PRODUCTION OF BROADCAST COMMERCIALS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Radio Advertisement: Preparation and Production 3.2 Creative Tactics for Television: Preparation and Production of Commercials 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Broadcast media are domestic media that crave for attention during leisure times at home, offices, restaurants, and so on.
It is said in Harland et al (1992), that the average person, during lifetime of 70 years will spend nearly 10 years watching television and almost 6 years listening to radio; this amounts to nearly 16 years of exposure to broadcast media.
The two main reasons people listen to or watch broadcast media are for information and entertainment.
As at 1992, there were 1,058 commercial television stations in the United States.
83 600 of these stations have link with one of these major national networks such as ABC, CBS or NBC.
In like manner Harland et al  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 (1992) state that there were over 9000 amplitude modulation (AM) and frequency modulation (AM) of radio waves, some of the radio stations; precisely one out of three stations has affiliation with national radio networks, hence; ABC, CBS, MBS or NBC.
In Nigeria, similar trend obtain, and given the amount of both private and public broadcast media in the country, an individual is rarely far from a radio or television broadcast area.
Radios with headphones are so portable that it is easy for a person to listen to a favorite station while engaged in other outdoor activities.
Portable television sets in similar vein have made it possible for people to view programs away from home.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to achieve the following:  Prepare and produce broadcast commercials  Understand the tactics used in broadcast commercials  Understand how both radio and television programs can be used to advertise product and services 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Radio Advertisement: Preparation and Production Radio is unique among the advertising media; it is not a selfish medium that wants all attention to itself like the television.
Radio is an audio medium; you can only hear its contents and not see it.
It is also referred to as a blind medium.
Radio is a transient medium that gives fleeting information.
Its information cannot be played back like a recorded tape.
Since radio uses only sound, the listeners can engage in other activities like washing, reading or exercising.
In fact, some people have the radio for background sound and a feeling of companionship.
With this you can perceive that if a radio commercial is not well scripted and produced, its aim might be forfeited.
Radio Formats Selection for Advertising Audience Radio format helps to define a particular audience that listens to a program and why.
“Selecting a radio station is much like choosing a list of potential customers”, Harland et al (1992:94).
Various radio formats are available and they attract listeners who have certain characteristics.
By this an advertiser can personalize and direct his advertisement to the right 84 audience.
Harland et al (1992) state nine (9) basic radio formats, they include:  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 (a) Progressive Rock: This format appeals to the young adult audience between ages 18-24.
Music selections in this format are rock and other music.
The music selections are usually up to 5 minutes and fewer than average commercial per hour are run.
(b) Top 40 Format: Young adult and teens listeners are attracted mostly to this format.
This format is often the highest rated in the market.
Its music is fast, loud and has a definite beat pattern.
(c) Middle of the road: This format appeals to the old group of listeners, ages 25-49.
Often, middle of the road stations feature a song that was a big hit 5 years ago on the Top 40 stations, but their version is usually re-mixed or orchestrated and smoother.
(d) Good music: Older audience enjoys this format; “Good Music” is background music.
Generally instrumental with very little disc jockey talk.
It is often called “elevator music”.
(e) Classical : The classical stations plays operas, ”old school”, symphonies, concertos, and ensembles of various kinds.
These appeals to older adults.
(f) Country and western: these appeals to mixed age groups.
In some markets, country and western station has substantial share of teen listening and some other time another group.
This format is generally informal with limited disc jockey talk.
(g) Ethnic : This format audiences prefer music ranging from rhythm and blues, reggae, and jazz to “good music”.
Other ethnic station may be broadcast in foreign language and found where foreigner- born person from a significant percentage of the population.
(h) All news: This format present continuous news throughout the day, older audience is generally appealed to this station.
News may be combined with talk show in this format.
It has a lower rating but high cumulative listenership, that is, an audience who listens repeatedly to that specific radio station.
(i) All talk: a considerably older audience enjoys this format.
It has been called “companion” or “dialogue” radio.
Often the station announcers talk on the air directly to listeners via telephone.
Having known the categories of radio formats which define radio 85 audiences, an advertiser now has insights whether a particular station would be good for reaching the target audience.
In most  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 communities, the advertiser can choose between AM or FM station to run his advertisement.
It is also pertinent for the advertiser to know the reach of these modulations.
An AM go farther than FM because it reaches beyond the areas of its usual coverage and a longer distance than the radio transmitter.
It is usually used by network stations.
AM is a broadcast on the standard broadcast band of 535 to 1605 kilohertz.
FM radio station broadcast on the band of 88 to 108 megahertz and provide static-free reception.
It covers a shorter distance from the station transmitter but provide listener with a better quality broadcast in stereo sound.
FM is preferred by listeners with stereo radio receivers.
Both modulations are advised to be considered by advertisers.
However, many businesses have discovered that radio commercials on FM stations do an excellent job of reaching their desired listeners.
Planning and Preparing the Radio Advertisement Planning radio advertisement requires the full attention of the advertiser; it must not be handled alone by the media staff.
Planning it requires some crucial details and information which the media staff may not be prior to except the advertiser.
Selecting the right message and scheduling the right broadcast time on the right stations are crucial to getting positive results from radio advertising.
The planning according to Harland et al (1999:95) should include decisions about: i.
What should be advertised ii.
Who the target audience will be iii.
What message would attract the audience attention?
For instance, if you wish to reach a teenage audience, locate their radio format and identify their belt.
Often the teens are disposed to radio from mid to late afternoon when students are just out of school and early evening after dinner hour, when they are studying are preferred times.
If your target audience is a rural audience, early morning, noon time and early evenings are the best broadcast times.
Try to have advertisements carried with the farm market reports or news program.
As for workers in the cities, early in the morning or in the afternoon are the best times to reach them.
You can reach many people who commute to work by broadcasting your message during drive time.
Drive time refers to those hours when people are most apt to be in their cars going to and from work.
For most communities, this time is from 6 to 9a.m and 3 to 7p.m.
Preparing Radio Advertisement 86  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Harland et al (1992) posit that advertisers can purchase time for their radio advertisements in 20, 30, and 60 seconds spot announcements.
Spot announcements are advertisements presented during a selected amount of time between programming.
Advertising time can also be purchased by program segments or program sponsorship.
Program sponsorship involves contracting the support a specific program such as x-factor, maltina dance hall, MTN project fame of local football league.
The radio staff will read prepared messages at various times during the broadcast.
Spot Announcement Spot announcement for duration of 60 seconds can carry 16 words.
This spot announcement usually has a format with similitude to that of other advertisement, this: a headline (attention getter), body copy (explanation of offer), price, request for action (encouragement to the listener to take action), and the business identification.
Statement from satisfied customers, word pictures, sound effects, creating a mental picture of the product and many more can be used to get the radio advertisement equivalent of the printed medium’s illustration.
It should be noted that a 20 or 30 seconds spot announcement take the same format as 60 seconds advertisement, the only difference would be the reduction in the amount of words that would be used to describe the product.
More so, the area of exchange in 60 and 20 or 30 seconds radio advertisement is in the copy body.
While the 60 seconds commercial provides more details and include more merchandise, 20 or 30 has reduced copy body.
Nevertheless both maintain the same introduction and conclusion.
A 20 SECONDS RADIO COMMERCIAL SCRIPT Visit the mama’s place- the place for fried rice, salad, cheese, stick meat and meat pie in Agidingbin, Ikeja.
The special deli this week is sliced cake bread with bean cake.
These just go for N800.
And save on famous fried rice and chicken with boiled eggs, N950 naira.
Save on this item and more, now through Wednesday.
Mama’s place, open 7:30am to 6pm daily at 121 Nerdec street adjacent car wash, Agidingbi.
30-SECONDS RADIO COMMERCIAL FOR OKORO PARTS Now Okoro parts have the hottest deal in town on auto parts accessories.
You can save up to 50 percent and more.
Here is one value-extra-heavy-duty shock absorber; regular priced at N20, 000 a 87 pair, now only N15, 000 at Okoro parts.
Another value is the 6-packs of 10w-40 mark V-motor oil, regularly N 3,000, now just N 1,500.
Make Okoro parts your headquarters for all your auto needs.
Okoro parts in iron street, EbuteMetta.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 60 – SECOND RADIO COMMERCIAL FOR OKORO PARTS Now Okoro part has the hottest deal in town on auto parts and accessories.
You can save up to 50 percent or one .here is one value –wire chrome wheel covers, 15 –and 16-inch sizes, regularly N800 for a set of four, now just N 400 .
other prizes have been slashed – floor mat, a matched set of four , regularly N 4,500, now just N2500; a huge supply of racing mirrors priced from N800 to N3,000; and extra-heavy-duty shock absorber, regularly N7,500 per pair, now only N3,500 at okoro parts.
All national brands of car polish, 30% off; windshield-washer fluid, N600 a gallon; mark V-motor oil, 10w-40 in 6 packs, regularly, N3,200, now just N1,600.
Make okoro parts your headquarters for all your auto needs, okoro parts in iron street EbuteMetta.
The 60-second spot announcement can provide more detail and information than a 30-second spot.
Advantages of Radio Advertising There is no off season or off time in radio listening; people tend to listen to radio all through the year.
It is the primary information source for many people.
In most homes, radio tends to be more functional and active than television.
So put it on when they wake up in the morning until it is dusk for them to sleep.
Some people even put it on when they are asleep.
Let us consider the following merits of radio advertising; 1.
In small communities, the radio may be the only advertising medium.
It is a way for the advertiser to get sales messages to customers every day.
Advertising messages can be changed or created and be disseminated immediately.
2.
In radio advertising, advertisements are presented at a time, so the advertising message stands alone, as it would not in other media.
This means, for the 20, 30 or 60 seconds that the message will be on air, it does not have to compete with any other radio advertisement for the listeners’ attention.
3.
It offers both local and national advertisers the opportunity to reach a highly selected audience.
4.
Radio is also the only medium that goes with potential customers in their cars.
Most drivers turn it on when they travel to and from work; its listenership in cars is a significant audience for most advertisers.
5.
A well-written advertisement read effectively by an announcer can result in a productive message.
In radio advertisement, professionals should endeavor to use the same music and the same voice in all advertisements.
Repeated use of introductory music and the same voice builds listener recognition.
Radio 88 advertisements should be conversational and friendly but avoid presentations that suggest you are talking down on your listener.
Business  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 name and prices are advised to be mentioned at least twice or thrice during each commercial.
Messages should be straight forward with no wasted words or over cleverness.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  List and explain what radio formats are.
 Draft a 60-second radio script for a spot advertisement 3.2 Creative Tactics for Television: Preparation and Production Of a Commercial As consumers, we see so many television commercials that are easy to take for granted because of the amount of time, effort, and money that goes into making them; this was the opinion of George .E.
Belch and Michael .A.
Belch (1995:306).
Preparing and producing a breakthrough commercials on a high level of clutter on television and which communicate effectively is a detailed and expensive process.
One, a cost per-minute basis commercials are the most expensive productions seen on television.
Harland .B.
Samson and William T. Price (1992) on the other hand viewed television as a favored medium if demonstration of a product is important in the advertisement.
They further reiterate that with major benefits in ways that might not be possible even if customers were in the place of business.
The motion, sound and dramatics of a televised commercial offer a tremendous range of possibilities for the creative advertiser.
Television is a unique and powerful advertising medium because it contains the elements of sound, sight and motion, which can be combined or integrated to create a variety of advertising appeals and execution.
Unlike the print, the viewer does not control the rate at which the message is presented, so there is no opportunity to review points of interest or re-read things that are not communicated clearly.
Just like any other form of advertising, one of the “first goals in creating television commercials is to get viewers’ attention and maintain it”, George et al (1995).
Harland et al (1992:97) comparing television with radio sees it has a cumulative medium.
That is, in agreement with George et al (1995) repeated advertising is necessary to reach the listening audience and move them to action.
It is the impact of seeing a commercial several times that brings about the customers’ reactions.
George et al (1995:307) point to the two major components of a television.
They explain that for an effective use of this medium both must work together to complement themselves in order to create the right impact and communicate the advertiser’s message.
These components include: 89 i.
Video and  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 ii.
Audio i.
Video: This element is the visual component of the television commercials.
It reflects what the eyes can see in a commercial as it relates pictures, motion and graphics.
The visual portion generally dominates the commercial, so it must attract viewer’s attention and communicate an idea, message and image.
In this regard, decisions have been made such as: the product, the presenter, action sequences, demonstrations, setting, the talent or character that will appear in the commercial and any other factors as lighting, graphics, color and identifying symbols to be able to coordinate and produce a successful advertisement.
ii.
Audio: This element includes voices, music and sound effects according to George et al (1995) “voices are used in different ways in commercials.
They may be heard through the direct presentation of a spokesperson or as a conversation among various people appearing in the commercial”.
Commonly used method for presenting the audio portion of commercial is through voice over, where the message is delivered or action on the screen is narrated or described by an announcer who is not visible.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain what you understand by creative tactics for television commercials.
Television Formats There exists verisimilude in television formats and radio formats.
Most commercial television station’s programs like: local news, weather and sports reports revolves around national programs.
Harland et al (1992:97) opine that “the competitive nature of viewer rating makes it necessary for most stations to carry national programs and advertising during the prime hours in carry talk shows, game shows, soap operas and a variety of reruns during the daytime hours.
Some stations work hard to build viewer loyalty by specializing more on a category of programs to see viewers who stick to them.
They do this by stressing either of sports, community arts, local movies, music, or news to 90 the extent they can within the national programming.
Harland et al (1992) stress further that cable television has made an impact on television  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 formatting by enabling stations to create a narrowly focused format.
For example, ESPN formats exclusively for sports, CNN relates news, and African magic format shows local movies and so on.
Planning and Preparing of Television Commercials George et al (1995:308) identify that one of the first decisions that has to be made in planning a TV commercial is the type of appeal and execution style that will be used.
Television has rational and emotional advertising appeals or combination of both which can be utilized by an advertiser to achieve his advertising goals.
Various execution styles used with rational appeals such, as a straight sell or announcement¸demonstration, testimonial, or comparison, work well on television.
Advertisers recognized that their commercial must break through the clutter and grab the viewer’s attention.
Harland et al (1992: 97) posit, “One way to ensure a quality picture in a television advertisement is to film it with television camera using 35mm film rather than a video tape recorder”.
It costs more to use a camera, but quality output cannot be compromised if the desired result is expected.
Contrary to George’s first step to television advertisement, Harland et al (1992) upholds that the first to television advertisement is to ask “what should be advertised?’ He advice that local advertisers must be sure that their advertisements should compare favorably with those run by national advertisers, who have considerably more money to invest in the production of their advertising.
Advertisers must often appeal to emotional and rational buying motives.
Television is essentially an entertainment medium, and many advertisers recognize that their commercials are successful because they entertain as well as giving information to their audience.
Planning the Commercial All elements of television commercial are brought together in a script.
Script is a written version of a commercial that provides a detailed description of its video and audio content.
The script reveals the various audio components of the commercial, the copy to be spoken by voices, and music and sound effects.
The video portion of the script provides the visual plan of the commercial, camera actions and angles scenes, transitions and other important descriptions.
Scripts further show the relationship of how the video corresponds to the audio portion of the commercial.
Once the basic script has been conceived, the writer and the art director get together to produce a story board, a series of drawings of the video scenes 91 and descriptions of the audio that accompanies each scene.
Like layouts for print advertisements, story boards provide those involved in the production  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 and approval of the commercial with a good approximation of what the final commercial will look like.
In some situations, a videotape of the story board along with the sound track may be produced if a more finished form of the commercial is needed for client presentations or protesting.
Production The moment the story board or aniamatic of the commercial is approved, it is ready to move to the production phase.
This phase is in 3 stages, thus: 1.
Preproduction: This involves all work and activities that occur before the actual shooting/recording of the commercial.
2.
Production: This is the point during which the commercial is filmed or videotaped and recorded.
3.
Post Production: At this stage activities and work that occur after the commercial has been filmed and recorded are expended, such as editing, transcribing etc.
Figure 3.3 Three Phases of Production for Electronic Media Preproduction Post Production -Selecting a director -Editing -Choosing a production company Production -Processing -Bidding -Recording sound effect -Cost estimation and timing -Location Vs. set shoots -Audio/Video mixing -Production time table -Night/Weekend shoots -Optical Set construction location -Talent arrangements -Client/agency approval Agency/Client approvals -Duplicating Casting -Release/shipping Wardrobes -Preproduction meeting Source: George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch in Intro.
to Ad and production (1995) Before the final production process begins, however, the client must usually review and approve the creative strategy and the various tactics that will be used in creating the advertising message.
Harland et al (1992:98) emphasize that advertiser’s can 60-, 40, -30, 20-, 92 and 10-second-long television spot announcements.
The number of second an advertiser opts for in a television commercial would determine how long  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 the message would stay on the screen.
They concluded that about two- thirds of T.V advertisements are 60 seconds.
The starting point in preparing a commercial is determining the theme or major point to be made.
The script is drafted with the message to be communicated.
Some of the message may not result as audio but it will be shown in the video portion of the advertisement.
The video portion of the advertisement is then developed as a sequence of sketches depicting what should be shown.
This sketch as stated earlier on is referred to as the story board.
STORYBOARD The model points at the product to make illustrations.
He makes his conversation in omniscience point of view to attract the audience to purchase the product.
his segment of a TV commercial story board shows the relationship between the audio (spoken) message and the person on camera.
SELF ASSESSMENT  With the aid of diagram explain the three phases of production for 93 electronic media.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 4.0 CONCLUSION The broadcast media; radio and television give advertisers’ communication lines to potential customers.
The essence of advertising in broadcast media is to relate goods and services to the target audience in the voice of the advertiser.
Radio offers numerous advantages to its audience, its portability, wide reach, and unselfish services by which audience can be doing other things to it, endeared many advertisers to utilize it, as a quick medium to reach their audience.
Radio format gives it a lift over television, since it engages different audience at different belt so that advertisers can determine exactly when they desire to have their advertisement placed on air.
Radio advertising requires adequate planning; time purchase, production of advertisement and audience in focus are the basic elements of its success.
Television as a broadcast medium offers a qualitative output than radio because of its audio and visual characteristics.
Though it cost much to produce a television advertisement, yet it has more impact in areas of reaching and having something to offer all categories of audience; hence: elites, illiterates, dumb, deaf and so on.
Television offers advertisers spot announcements and program sponsorship more.
An advertiser can use a professional to prepare advertisements that will take full advantages of television’s capability to present a product or service using sound, motion and visual demonstration.
5.1 SUMMARY This unit commenced with enlightenment on what broadcast media is, their purpose and uses for an advertiser.
These media are basically to inform, educate and entertain audience.
So, advertisers take advantage of the objectives of the broadcast media to reach out products and services to their audience.
They prepare and produce their advertisement to revolve broadcast media objectives, such as disseminating messages to inform, educate and entertain their audience.
They are careful with this so they don’t lose focus of their own aim, which is to provoke audience to patronize them.
This unit further gave statistics as to number of radio and television stations in the united states of American; it enumerates their linkage with national network which further extends their reach.
Two radio frequencies were treated; they are the amplitude modulation (AM) and the frequency modulation (FM).
Both have their strengths and weaknesses.
Radio formats 94 for categories of audience and television formats were treated as well.
The stages of preparing and producing broadcast were extensively treated.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 While treating the preparation and production of a radio commercial, the questions that were needed to answer were: (I) What should be advertised?
(II) Who are the target audience and (III) What message would attract the audience.
Spot announcement is the major and most productive advertising format.
It could run for 20-, 30-, or 60-seconds depending on the choice of the advertiser.
Spot announcement scripts were explained to buttress on the point of discussion.
Television creative tactics for preparing and producing commercials were justified with the aid of a diagram.
Television medium was viewed and assessed by it audio/visual characteristics.
More so television formats were examined; it was observed that television has no specific format per-se as a radio does for all categories of audience.
Though television medium operate on different belts it still remain inconsistence as some programs broadcast is only meant for all categories of audience, e.g.
: ‘maltina dance hall’, ‘Papa Ajasco’, ‘super story’ and so on.
Advertiser such as liver brothers which deals in house hold product may choose to advertise here.
However, the existence of cable television has helped a lot to give television format a clear definition.
For instance, African magic is strictly a family channel, channel ‘O’ is a music station, CNN, is strictly for news and so on.
Three stages of television production were stated and explained thus: pre- production, production and post-production.
Broadcast advertising can be used in a number of special ways besides just running commercials.
According to Harland et al (1992), advertisers should view the emergence of advertisements on cable television, video shopping, and other form of electronic marketing as an additional opportunity to deliver their selling messages to potential customers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  List and explain radio formats as treated in this unit.
 Write a 30-seconds radio commercial script.
 How important is a script to television commercial?
Explain.
 What do you understand by the term ‘story board’, what relevance has it in a television commercial?
Explain with the aid of diagram.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING 95 Harland E.Samson and William T.Prince (1992).
Advertising Planning and Techniques: South-Western Publishing, Ohio, Cincinnati.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 George.E.Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995).Introduction to Advertising and Promotion; an Integrated Marketing Communications Perspectives, 3rd Edition.
Irwin/McGraw-Hill Publishing, U.S.A. 96  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Module 3 UNITS 4 GUIDELINES FOR EVALUATING COPY OUTPUTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Guidelines for Evaluating Copy Outputs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Often we are exposed to advertisements of various categories, thus print and broadcast.
These advertisements rarely consist of all elements of a copy.
There are seven (7) elements of a copy, these were treated in previous units, and they include: 1.
The headline 2.
The subhead 3. the body copy 4.
The caption 5.
The blurb or balloon 6.
The box and panels 7.
The slogan, logotype and signature.
Always an advertisement will be made of two to three of a common element.
There is no specific rules that determines which element to be used in an advertising production or which should not.
However, there are guidelines for evaluating a copy output George et al (1995) hold that “advertisers use numerous criteria to evaluate the creative approach suggested by agency.
In some instances, the clients may want to have the rough layout or story board pretested to get quantitative information to assist in the evaluation”.
However, objectivity is deemphasized as the evaluation process is usually more subjective; the advertising process relies more on qualitative considerations.
97 2.0 OBJECTIVE  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 At the end of this unit, students should be able to identify and comprehend the various guidelines enumerated for evaluating copy output 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Guidelines for Evaluating Copy Outputs Guidelines are action steps that point to the right direction which an individual is expected to follow to achieve his objective.
Evaluating a copy is no mean task for an advertising professional, it requires high a level of professionalism to determine whether an advertisement is good to go to the target audience or not.
Copy itself is not the objective of the advertising process.
However the total integration of copy and media to provoke the audience unto patronizing an organization is what advertising objective really is.
In this unit, we want to examine the various guidelines which will help us critique an advertising copy output to determine its potential to pass on its target audience.
We shall examine Seven (7) evaluating guidelines in this unit.
These include the followings: 1.
Consistency Of Creative Approach With Brands Marketing And Advertising Objective According to George et al (1995:312) “,One of the most important factors the client must consider is whether the creative appeal and execution style recommended by the agency are consistent with the marketing strategies assigned in the overall marketing program”.
If there lacks agreement between the creative approach and the marketing and advertising brand, the whole effort of producing the copy is defeated.
Whatever the advertising professional does, he must ensure that the creative process must align and compatible with the reputation of the brand.
The way the brand image is position in the market should contribute to the marketing and advertising of the brand’s effort.
2.
Agreement Between The Creative Approach With Creative Strategy And Objective The crucial question to be asked here is whether the creative approach is consistent with the creative strategy and objective.
We should also be able to determine if this agreement communicates what it is supposed to.
To effectively evaluate a copy output, an assessor who is responsible for approving the advertisement should ask the creative specialists to explain how the appeal or execution style adheres to the creative strategy and helps 98 meet communication objectives.
This is crucial because creative experts sometimes are carried away by the graphics and animation of an  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 advertisement that they lose sight of what the advertising message is supposed to be, therefore coming up with an approach fails to execute the advertising strategy.
Also, the advertising appeal must measure up with the communications objectives laid out in the copy platform and must disseminate the information designed for it to the target audience.
3.
Appropriateness Of The Creative Approach For The Target Audience Some advertisements lose their onions because their creative approaches were not appropriate for their audiences.
Take for instance a creative approach which is intended for children and teens having two matured man and woman is the only characters that promoted the product and service.
Automatically, projected teens and children as the advertisement’s characters, their response to such advertisement would be result oriented.
The primary focus of this guideline is to determine if the creative approach or execution recommended will appeal to, understood by and communicate effectively with the target audience.
This according to George et al (1995) involves a careful consideration of all elements of the advertisement and how the audience will respond to them.
Advertisers generally disapprove advertising that they believe will get negative reaction from the target audience.
George et al (1995) suggest that “ Advertising targeted to older consumers should use models that are ten years younger than the average years of the target audience since most people feel younger than their chronological age”.
4.
Is The Creative Approach Clear and Convincing To Customers When Communicated In advertising, creativity is very important, despite this, a creative approach should not be done to over shadow the objective of selling a brand to its audience.
Advertising is supposed to communicate a clear, simple and convincing message to a brand’s audience but most advertisements gives their audiences work to do by tasking their brain before getting the message it is conveying.
The creative approach must communicate information attributes, features and benefits or images that will give consumers reasons to purchase the brand.
5.
Does the creative execution overwhelm the massage?
When a creative approach is so embellished with styles, dramas, graphic, songs e.t.c to the point of downplaying the message of the advertisement, then such advertisement should be checked and rework upon.
George et al (1995:13) point that “a common criticism of advertising, and television 99 commercials, in particular, so much emphasis is placed on creative execution that the advertiser’s message gets overshadowed.
Many creative,  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 and entertaining commercials have failed to register the brand name and selling points effectively”.
The increase in the clutter of most advertising media has necessitated the use of a novel creative approach to attract reader’s and viewer attention, hence, the creativity cannot overwhelm the message, George et al (1995) advise that clients must walk a fine line to make sure the sales message is not lost and be careful not to stifle the efforts of the creative specialists and force them into producing dull, and boring advertising 6.
Is the creative approach appropriate for the media environment which it would be seen?
Every media vehicle has particular climate that defines the caliber of audience who use it to gratify its purpose.
The media style and content determine its viewership or readership and the nature of the advertisement it contain, consideration should be given to how well the advertising fits into the media environment in which it will be shown.
For example the category of WAZOBIA FM differs from COOL FM.
To place advert in any of their radio stations, considerable effort should be made to know and identify the language and major or audience of these two media before placing advertisement in them.
7.
Is the advertisement truthful and tasteful?
It is the responsibility of the advertising client to determine if an advertisement deceives or offends the target audience.
An advertising manager must ensure to evaluate the approach suggested by the creative specialist against company standards.
To ascertain the truthfulness and tastefulness of an advertisement, the firm legal department may be asked to review the advertisement to determine whether the creative appeal, massage content, or execution could cause any problem for the company.
It is much better identifying any potential legal problems before the advertisement is shown.
SELF ASSESSMENT  List and explain the various guidelines stated for evaluating a copy output 4.0.
CONCLUSION The basic guideline for evaluating a copy output have been listed and 100 thoroughly explained.
Advertising manager, production manager and other creative team members in an advertising company can utilize these  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 guidelines to review, evaluate and approve the idea offered by the creative specialists.
There may arise a situation capable of making an advertising agency deviate from the standard the firm uses to judge creative output.
In fact, a client may want to move beyond these subjective criteria and use more sophisticated pretesting methods to determine the value of a particular approach suggested by a creative specialist .Which ever approach that is used, the bone of contention is that a standard evaluation should be conducted for every advertising approach before it is disseminated to audience.
5.0.
SUMMARY This unit examined guidelines for evaluating copy outputs.
The units outline seven basic guidelines as expounded by George et al (1995).
The guidelines are sample evaluating exposure to anyone who desire a career in advertising profession or who in a way is directly or indirectly engaged in advertising functions.
As stated in the unit, organization may choose to deviate from the basic outlined guidelines.
The most important situation is to ensure that advertisement is diligently vetted before they are disseminated.
The following were the guidelines discussed in this unit: a.
Agreement between the creative approach with creative strategy and objective b. Appropriateness of the creative approach for the target audience c. Consistency of creative approach with brand’s marketing and advertising objective.
d. Is the creative approach clear and convincing to customers when communicated?
e. Does the creative execution overwhelm the massage?
f. Is the creative approach appropriate for the media environment which it would be seen?
g. Is the advertisement truthful and tasteful?
6.0.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  How can you determine if an advertisement is truthful or tasteful?
 What do you understand by the appropriateness of the creative approach for the target audience?
 What argument does the writer stated, when creative execution overwhelms the message?
7.1 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 101  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 George E. Belch and Michael A. belch (1995).
Introduction to Advertising and Promotion: An integrated marketing communication perspective, 3rd edition, Irwin/McGraw-hill publishing, U.S.A MAC 332 MODULE 4: ADVERTISING MEDIA PLANNING AND STRATEGY Unit 1: An Overview of Media Planning Unit 2: Advertising Media Objective Unit 3: Media Planning In Advertising Agency UNIT 1: AN OVERVIEW OF MEDIA PLANNING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 What is media planning?
3.2 Problems and activities involve in media planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assessment 7.0 References/further readings.
1.0 INTRODUCTION 102  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Media planning is a prerequisite to planning a successful advertising.
Media are vehicles that convey the advertiser’s messages to the target audience.
When advertising media are absent, advertising message is worthless.
Some school of thought had it that the media is synonymous to the message, hence, where the media is not seen, advertising message die a natural death.
More so, the evolution of existing and introduction of new media have contributed to the already difficult challenges of media planning.
Planning when, where and how the message is to be, is develop the framework that will deliver the message to the target audience in the most efficient and cost-effective manner possible in a way that will communicate what the product can do.
This unit presents an overview of media planning; it shows the problems bedeviling media planning and presents a diagrammatic illustration of the activities involved in developing media plans.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, students would understand:  What media planning is  The problems facing media planning  The activities involve in developing a successful media plan.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is media planning?
George et al (1995:318) define media planning as “the series of decisions involved in delivering the promotional message to the prospective purchasers or users of the product or brand”.
Media planning involves activities varying from conceptualization to purchasing and utilization of airtime and space.
It is a process in which a number of decisions are made, some would be altered while some changed; these processes continue as the plan develops.
When this process is actualized, it becomes a media plan.
Media plan puts very much interest in the medium of communication because; it is this medium that helps to determine the budget that would be set for the advertising campaign.
It is really not a mean task putting together a concise media plan; nevertheless, the medium is the general category of available delivery systems, which includes broadcast media such as television and 103 radio, print media such as Newspapers and Magazines, direct mail, outdoor advertising, and other support media.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 An Overview of Media Planning Media planning is one of the advertising planning processes which are subject to a reasonable degree of systematic thought and analysis.
There is a respectable amount of information and ideas available which enable one to study the subject and thereby acquire a recognizable degree of expertise.
Media planning is inextricably part of the total advertising plan.
It should not be treated as an independent subject but an embodiment of the total advertising plan.
This does not mean its methods cannot be studied separately.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCICE  Define media planning according to George et al, pointing out various elements of the definition.
 What do you understand by “media planning should not be treated independently but part of the advertising process”.
Media planning process is not an easy task.
It provided multiple options of media to the expert to work around with before he determines the appropriate ones for a particular advertising campaign.
Besides, the popular media such as television, radio, Newspaper and Magazines, there are as well out- of home media such as: outdoor advertising, transit advertising and electronic billboards.
In addition to these are support media which the media plan expert exploits to drive home the objectives of an advertising campaign, these include: direct marketing, special advertising, and in-store point-of-purchase.
Media planning at first looks simple and straight forward after considering the relativities among the media alternatives.
But media selection becomes so involve due to the nature or characteristics of the media themselves.
Television combines both visual and audio; an advantage it has over other media, Newspaper and Magazine can convey more information and retain the message available to the potential buyers for a much longer time.
Outdoor, direct media and each of the others offer their own advantages as well.
The characteristics of all these media must be considered along with many other factors; this even make the process more complicated when the manager has to choose between alternatives within the same medium, for example; The Punch and The Guardian Newspapers, Channels T.V and Silverbird television and so on George et al (1995) contribute that “the potential for achieving effective 104 communications through a well-designed media strategy was demonstrated by a flower company called PC flowers.
According to them, in 1990, PC  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Flowers was the smallest of the 25,000 members in the Florists’ Transworld Delivery Association (FTD).
The company then started to advertise its services on prodigy, a computer service with 2 million subscribers.
PC flower moved into the top 10 within four months and now consistently ranks as one of the top two FTD members in the world.
Likewise, MCI, the number two long-distance company, was losing market share to AT&T until it began blitzing the market with promotions and other advertising messages.
In 1993, MCI ran more than 50 different television commercials in addition to specialize sports on Chinese, Hispanic and Russian television.
The company effectively stemmed the market share erosion.
What affect media planning process the most are products and services being advertised, this is so because organizations have found some media more productive than others, when it comes to reaching to target audience.
The amount earn mark for an advertising campaign is not a criterion for it to produce a profit goal which the advertiser anticipates, but what does, is the quality of work put into the media plan.
For example Procter and gamble rely heavily on television whereas general motors prefers print media, the result of this is, when advertising budget is expended on the right media, then strategies would achieve significant result.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain the situation of PC flower and MCI as narrated by George et al.
What makes media plan very complex than it appears.
3.2 Problems In Media Planning Media planning explains the best way the message of an advertiser can get to his target audience and market.
It is in summary a way to find perfect media combination that would drive or disseminate the advertiser’s sales messages to the right market and audience, thereafter achieving patronage at the highest positive level.
In other words, George et al (1995:319) posit media plan as determining “the best way to get advertiser’s message to the market”.
In fundamental sense, they emphasize the goal of media plan as one that finds that combination of media that enables the manner to the largest number of potential customers at the lowest cost.
Media planning cannot be predetermined by mere speculation, the actuality involve in putting it up is such that calls for experimentation of research data on the media available for a particular advertising campaign.
As stated elsewhere, a series of decision are taken in this process; some rejected, 105 some adopted, while some are developed to ascertain the desired goal of an advertisement.
George et al (1995) think many advertisers find it necessary  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 to alter and update their objectives and strategies frequently.
Possibly, to maximize the advertising objectives It is so unfortunate that media strategy decision has not become a standard task.
There exists so many factors which are bedeviling and contributing to the difficulty of establishing the plan, this limits its effectiveness.
These challenges include: (1) Insufficient Information (2) Inconsistent Terminologies (3) Time Pressures (4) Difficulty Measuring Effectiveness.
a.
Insufficient Information Media planner often requires information about media and markets, more than it is available.
Though there is a good measure of available information about the media and market, still, all that is required by media planner cannot just be measureable either by the virtue of the cost of measurement or the impossibility in measuring their effectiveness.
For instance, George et al (1995) say that the measure of radio listenership exist, but only periodic listenership studies are reported due to sample size and cost constraints.
With this example we could uphold that radio listenership measurement is possible but cost more with time and finance.
Likewise, there exists, problems with some measures of audience in television and print as well.
Furthermore, the timing of measurements is a great constraint.
Some audience are disposed to the media at a particular time of the year, for example, we see more people watching television in festive seasons and public holidays than the usual working days.
This could bedevil the measurement potential of a media planner.
However, anytime a media manager hope to utilize data, reference should be made to the time of measurement to reflect the advertising plan which would be disseminated to a particular audience at that same point in time.
Because there are no consistent audience figures, therefore, advertisers can review his programme to fit this inconsistency too.
George et al (1995) further opine that “Lack of information is even more a pronounced problem with small advertisers, who may not be able to afford or purchase the information they require.
As a result of this, their decisions are made on limited or out-of - date data.
b.
Insufficient Terminologies 106 Challenges obtain for the simple reason of differential use of semantic in various media types.
The cost bases used by different media often vary and  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 the standard of measurement used to establish these costs are not always consistent.
Print media may present cost data in terms of cost of reaching a thousand people (cost per thousand, or CPM) whereas broadcast media to the number of showing.
It should be noted as well that audience information used for these media has to be collected also through different methods which is peculiar to the media .The word reach and coverage are two terminologies which are used interchangeably in media planning; both also have contributed immensely to the confusion.
c. Time Pressure George et al (1995) hold that advertisers are often in a hurry; at times, because they need to be, other times because they think they need to be.
Most often competitors’ cut in prices of goods and services, put them at pressure of hastening up or make them require immediate response.
Many a times, a false urgency causes time pressure.
Whichever way you look at it, pressure of urgency on media planner may not yield proper planning and analysis of the markets and media.
d. Difficulty Measuring Effectiveness It is difficult to determine the relative effectiveness of various media or media vehicles because it is so hard to measure the effectiveness of advertising and promotions in general.
Though progress is being made particularly in area of direct – response advertising, the media planner must usually guess at the impact of these alternatives.
This situation poses problems, hence, not all media decisions are quantitatively determined.
ACTIVITIES INVOLVED IN DEVELOPING THE MEDIA THE SITUATION THE MARKETING CREATIVE STRATEGY PLAN ANALYSIS STRATEGY PLANT Purpose: to determine what to Purpose: to explain activities that communicate through adverts these Purpose: to understand the will solve one or more of the includes the determination of: mark eting pro blem.
An alysis is mark eting pro blems.
I ncludes t he 1.
Ho w produ ct can m 1e0et7 made up to a determination of.
consumer needs.
1.
Size & shar e o f the total 1.
Marketing objectives 2.
How product will be market 2.
Product & spending positioned in 2.
Sales history, costs & strategy advertisements  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 PTOCREAT 108 MEDIA USE DECISION.
MEDIA USE DECISION.
MEDIA USE DECISION- OTHER BROADCAST PRINT MEDIA 1.
What kind of 1.
Number of adverts to 1.
Billboards: sponsorship (sole, shared appear and on which a.
Location of market and  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Source: George et al (1995: 320) SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  With the aim diagram, explain the activities involved in developing the media.
4.0 CONCLUSION Media planning is a broad subject which cannot be exhausted in this module or unit.
It is the heart of advertising plan which need not be taking haphazardly or with levity.
Media planning focuses on how to determine the right medium or corresponding media that will give an advertiser’s product or service the desire response and patronage.
Media plan requires a high level of professionalism with long years of experience from media managers to be able to come up with a master plan for a winning campaign.
Though it is a painstaking task, it pays well afterwards.
Any media manager who draws up and implements a successful plan would enjoy patronage from other firms and by so retain a lasting goodwill and reputation until proven otherwise.
The big names we hear in advertising community, such as: Prima Garnet, Procter and Gamble, etc have proven their expertise in time past and are now enjoying the benefits there of.
Media planning,evolves around decisions and media alternatives.
The complexity of this concept basically lie in selecting alternatives from the same media and determining their effectiveness.
Taking dropping and developing on decision, it is still the surest way to come up with an excellent media campaign: interplaying ideas and creativity makes a good advertisement but interplaying quality decision produces a perfect master piece of media plan.
109 5.0 SUMMARY  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 This unit elucidated the overview of media planning in advertising.
The unit started with an introduction, which led us into the concept of media planning.
The reason why advertising agencies need media plan and the challenges bedeviling media planning, such as the evolution of existing media and the introduction of new ones.
The unit further considered the objectives of the unit; this spelt out what students are expected to gain at the end of reading it.
Students were expected to understand what media planning is, the problems facing it and the activities involved in developing the media plan.
The main content ushered us into the definition of media planning and how it activities varies from the purchase and usage of media time and space.
Media plan focuses on the medium which an advertiser needs to transport his message to the market or target audience.
The content further cited George et al (1995) case study of PC Flower and MCI, how they both use media planning to their advantage.
Four (4) problems facing media planning were enumerated, giving each item exhaustive explanation.
The four problems are: (1.)
Insufficient Information (2) Inconsistent Terminologies (3) Time Pressures (4) Difficulty Measuring Effectiveness.
Ultimately, this unit was concluded by a diagrammatical illustration of activities involved in developing the media.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT  Define media planning  List and explain the four problems of media planning as discussed in this unit.
 Explain the activities involved in developing the media plan.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURHTER READING George.
E. Belch and Michael Belch (1995).
Introduction to Advertising and Promotion: an Integrated Marketing Communication Perspective: 3rd (ED).
McGraw-Hill Companies.
USA.
110 MAC 332 MODULE 4  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 UNIT 2: ADVERTISING AND MEDIA OBJECTIVE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What Advertising Objective Mean to the Advertiser 3.2 Media Objective and Strategy in Focus 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 Reference/ Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Advertising media is not an advertising end but it is a means to an end for advertising campaign.
The ends meet of every advertising campaign is to reach the entire coverage of its target audience, disseminates its messages and provoking their patronage or sympathy/ support.
Most advertising campaign do not have immediate advertising objective of sales, but they try to get their presence registered in the mind of the target audience, some, though wanted patronage but not as immediate as some other would do, rather they look for a way to become a perfect substitute for the product of their choice.
Some get to the point of winning the loyalty of audience for lengthy years.
Ultimately, the end of advertising media is to successfully convey the advertiser’s messages to the target audience, ensuring hitch-free and well delivery of information.
Advertising objective mostly determine what media would be used to convey the message.
This is why the unit would be treating advertising and media objectives as a part of media planning.
2.0 OBJECTIVE The objective of this unit shall be to help students understand:  The objectives of advertising and advertising media  The types of advertising objectives  To understand what media objective is 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What Advertising Objective Means to the Advertiser The term advertising comes from the Latin word “adverto”.
“Adverto” which means to turn around.
By turn around we mean be captivated 111 because your attention is grabbed by something or someone.
Putting it this  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 way, advertising is capturing attention, share information and get the support of the person whose attention you captured.
Essentially, there are two types of advertising: Brand Advertising or Direct Response Advertising.
Both have validity in the right situation.
Understanding the distinction between these forms of advertising will ensure you do not waste money from your marketing or advertising budget.
An Objective advertising will make sure the best looking advertisements that reflect key communication messages, uplifts brand identity and more importantly, create a response is produced.
Advertising has many parts.
During the advertising process many decisions have to be taken.
These decisions include: deciding what objectives the advertising should accomplish, deciding the advertising budget, deciding who the target audience is for the advertising, deciding what media will be used for the advertising, and finally, deciding the actual copy of the advertisement.
One may tend to think that the point of all advertising is to make the consumer buy the product that the advertiser is selling.
However, there may be many other reasons why advertising is done.
Some of the reasons are:  To motivate the consumer to behave in a particular way…for example: to motivate the consumer to take up trial purchases from a store.
 To change the attitude of the people…for example: some advertisements might be designed to make the youth think that drinking soft drinks is “cool”.
 To create awareness about new products and ideas…for example: To create awareness about certain products that are new to the market like a new “easy carpet cleaner” etc.
Image creation and positioning.
Some advertisements are designed with the aim of positioning themselves in the mind of the consumers.
Let the above examples give you an idea of the kind of advertising objectives you can have.
Media focus can help you define your advertising objectives on the basis of business and situation in the market place, and in the minds of the consumers.
Before an advertiser decides on budget, he chooses his media, and further decides what advertising objectives he wants to achieve.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Mention three reasons why advertising is done.
 How do you explain what an objective advertising is?
Types of Advertising Objectives and Strategies 112  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 A small business owner, who probably do not have the luxury of a large advertising budget can make the most of limited advertising naira by establishing clear advertising objectives, such can also make use of low- cost but effective advertising strategies.
A good number of possible objectives and strategies suitable for the business is suggested below.
They include: Product Demonstration One advertising objective is to demonstrate the effectiveness of a product or services, or its ease of use.
A common example is the "before and after" technique, which shows how well a product cleans, improves appearances or enhances quality of life.
If one operate a business that involves selling cosmetic products, before/after photos or video can demonstrate the effectiveness of the cosmetics on the customers.
If you operate a hair salon, photos of satisfied clients can show off your skills to potential customers also.
Creating Image Businesses may use advertising for the objective of building a company or brand image.
Insurance agencies often attempt to position themselves as trustworthy by guaranteeing that consumers can count on them in their time of need.
Car dealers use advertising to establish a reputation for fairness and honesty.
Retailers may attempt to create an image of always offering the lowest prices or providing the best service.
Educational institution may build for themselves an image of quality and uninterrupted academic services and so on.
Change of Perceptions An advertising objective may be to alter the perceptions of the public.
A business that has developed a reputation in the community for treating customers poorly can use advertising to tout its new customer-service policy.
The owner of a restaurant that is perceived to serve an upscale clientele may advertise new menu choices and prices to appeal to a wider range of diners.
An individual perceived to be a hooligan and tout can use advertising to alter his perception of a changed life; that after being preached to about Jesus Christ repented and became born again.
Strategy of Special Promotion One other way to set an advertising objective is by giving a good discount on a product or service.
Also, it could be that for every purchase of two items, the customers get one free.
More so, a typical small-business advertising strategy could be to make use of special promotions.
By developing an email database, one can send customers coupons or invite them to special sale events.
Another technique is to attach coupons to 113 receipts that allow for savings on future purchases.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Internet Strategy The internet has made the world a global village such that with just a touch on the keyboard you are straight in any country of your choice.
Participating in blogs or social media like linked in, which pertain to your business, is a strategy that allows you to interact with potential buyers.
For example, if you sell products such as handmade crafts like necklace, earrings, bangles etc via your website and become active in craft-related blogs, you would be seen and patronized by lots more potential customers.
You could include a link to your website in your signature line so as to direct traffic to you.
You can also create a blog of your own.
Technique of a Low-Cost Media Use a low-cost media strategy to reach a targeted group of customers.
For example, if you operate a computer repair service, advertise in small community or "naira-saver" publications that are often delivered to residents in a specific geographic area for free, such which include: programme fliers, programme booklet, wedding programme booklet, posters, churches newsletters, school publications and so on.
These publications typically charge less for advertising space than regular daily newspapers, and you will also attract the attention of other small-business owners who could make use of your services.
3.2 Media Objectives and Strategies in Focus “ Just as the situation analysis lead to establishment of marketing and communication objectives, the media situation analysis should lead to determination of specific media objectives” George et al (1995).
The media objectives are not ends in themselves.
Rather, they are designed to lead to the attainment of communications and marketing objectives.
Media objectives are the goals to be attained by the media program and should be limited to those that can be accomplished through media strategies.
An example of media objectives is this: create awareness in the target-market through the followings: a.
Use broadcast media to provide coverage of 80 percent of the target market over a 6months period.
b.
Reach 60 percent of the target audience at least three times over the same six-month period.
c. Concentrate heaviest advertising in festival periods like: Christmas celebration, New Year celebration, Valentine’s Day, mother and father’s days, worker’s day and so on, with lighter emphasis when there are no special days or festivals.
Developing and Implementing Media Strategy 114 It is pertinent to determine what is required to accomplish a successful media objective, media plan and strategies are therefore key factors to this  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 end.
Media planners consider how to achieve these objectives by the development and implementation of media strategies which evolve directly from the actions required to meet objectives and involve the criteria in figure 4.1.
George et al (1995) state eight points of discussion; however, we shall extensively discuss five of them.
Figure 4.1: Criteria considered in the development of media plan  Developing a media mix  Determine target market coverage  Determine geographic coverage  Scheduling  Determine reach versus frequency  Creative aspects and mood  Flexibility  Budget consideration a.
Developing a media mix Multiple media and media vehicles are available to the advertiser to choose from.
It is possible that among these varieties, an advertiser might just select one medium or vehicle as to disseminate his advertising message to the target audience; it is also much more possible that a number of alternatives would be used.
To determine the kind of media or combinations to be employed, the media planner would consider the following factors: i.
The objective of the advertising campaign ii.
The characteristic of the product or service iii.
The size of the budget iv.
Individual preferences George et al (1995:329), posit an example, hence, “ consider a promotional situation in which a product requires a visual demonstration to be communicated effectively.
In this case, television may be the most effective medium.
If the promotion calls for coupon to stimulate trial, print media would be necessary.
115  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Media mix helps advertisers to add versatility to their media strategies because each medium has a distinctive role it plays in the advertising campaign, hence making a meritorious contribution to the process.
Through effective media combination, advertisers can increase their coverage, reach and frequency level in addition to achieving an overall communications and marketing goals.
b.
Determine target market coverage To achieve coverage of target market, it is the responsibility of the media planner to determing which target audience should receive the most media emphasis.
Target audience could be segmented by age, gender, race, etc.
in this regard, let us take age as the segmentational determinant; where you have a product which is useful for people at age 15-25, 26- 50, and 51- and above.
After a careful research, you realized that customers between ages 26-50 use the product more, then your media campaign coverage should reach to these class more than other ages.
George et al(1995) opine that developing media strategies involves matching the most appropriate media to the market by asking the question, “Through which media and media vehicles can I best get my message to prospective buyers?” the bone of contention here, is the market coverage .
Sometimes, in a bid to cover a target market, media planner may be reaching some areas with potential customers but with less exposure; what obtain is that some potential customers are not exposed to the advertisement due to wrongly used media combination.
The goal of the media planner is to extend media coverage to as many of the members of the target audience as possible while minimizing the amount of waste coverage.
The situation often involve trade-offs.
Sometimes, one has to live with less reach than desired: other times, the most effective media expose others not sought.
In this instance, waste coverage is justified because the media employed are likely to be the most effective means of delivery available and the cost of the waste coverage is exceeded by the value gained from their use.
c. Scheduling Without gainsaying, organizations would like to retain their advertising before their customers at all times as a continuous reminder of the product or brand name.
Realistically, this is not obtainable for a variety of reasons, not even the least which is the budget nor is it necessary.
The aim of scheduling is to time the efforts of the promotion so they would coincide with the highest buying time.
For some product, this times are not easy to identified, for some they are obvious.
There are three scheduling methods 116 available to the media planner, these include:  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 a. Continuity b. Flighting c. Pulsing Continuity: this refers to a continuous pattern of advertising , which may mean every day, every week or every month.
The key is that a regular continuous pattern is developed without gaps or no-advertising period.
Such strategies might be used for promoting a food product, lundry detergent or other products consumed on an ongoing basis without consideration for seasons.
Merits  Serve as a constant reminder to the customer  Allows for media priorities( quantity discount, preferred location, etc)  Covers the entire buying cycle Demerits  Higher cost  Potential for over exposure  Limited media allocation possibility Flighting: this method employs a less regular schedule, with intermittent period of advertising and non-advertising.
Sometimes period, there are heavier promotional expenditures and others, there may be no advertising.
Merit  Cost efficiency of advertising only during purchase cycle  May allow for inclusion of more than one medium or vehicle with limited budget.
Demerit  Weighting may offer more exposure and advantage over competitors  Increased likelihood of wear out  Lack of awareness, interest, retention of promotional message during non- scheduled times  Vulnerability to competitive effort during non- scheduled period Pulsing: this is actually a combination of the first two methods, in pulsing strategy, continuity is maintained but at certain times promotional effort are stepped up.
The scheduling strategy depends on the objectives buying cycles and the budgets among other factors.
117 Merit  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013  All of the same as the previous two methods Demerit  Not required for seasonal product or other cyclical product d. Determine Geographic Coverage The primary profession of the northerners in Nigeria is agriculture, as such fertilizer, tractors, feeds for animals and so on can be well advertised in this region.
If agricultural products are advertised in Lagos more than the north, the advertiser automatically has achieved wasted coverage of media objective.
It would not be the wisest to promote agricultural products in those areas where interest is not high, unless you could generate an increase in interest.
e. Flexibility A good degree of flexibility is required in an effective media strategy.
Because of the rapidly transforming marketing environment.
Techniques may need modification.
If the plan has no on built flexibility, opportunities may be lost or the organization may not be able to address new threats.
Flexibility is needed to address the following: 1.
Market opportunities: at times, a market opportunity evolves that an advertiser wishes to take advantage of, for instance, the development of a new advertising medium may offer an opportunity that was not previously available.
2.
Market Threats: factors both internal or external may pose a threat to a firm, and changes in media strategies are dictated.
For instance, a competitor may alter its media strategy to gain an edge.
Failing to respond to this challenge could create problem for the firm.
3.
Availability of Media: Sometimes, a desired medium or vehicle is not available to the marketer; perhaps, the medium does not reach a particular target segment or has no time or space available.
There are still some areas this country where certain media do not reach even when the media are available, limited advertising time or space may have already been sold or cut off dates for entry may have passed.
4.
Changes in Media or Media Vehicle: A change in the medium or a particular vehicle may necessitate a change in a media strategy.
For instance, the advent of cable television open up new opportunities for message delivery, as will the introduction of the interactive media.
Likewise, a drop in ratings or a change in editorial format may lead the advertiser to use different programs or print alternatives.
Ultimately, these four factors call that the media strategy be developed with enough 118 flexibility to allow the manager to adapt to specific market situations.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  List and explain five criteria of media for the development of media plan.
4.0 CONCLUSION Media objective;s setting is paramount in every advertising plan.
He, who fails to plan, has planned to fail.
Either ways, there is an underlining objective which is to either succeed or fail.
Setting advertising objective, gives the advertiser the expected end of his investment, this end is an evaluation appraisal to determine whether the advertising campaign would be successful or not.
Media objective helps in the media plan to systematically annex varieties of media vehicles in the dissemination of advertising messages.
The primary goal of the media is to convey an advertising message successfully to the target audience.
Media as discussed elsewhere is not an end but a means to an end for an advertiser.
As a result of this, so much creativity would be required to empowering the media to perform potentially, and by such would ascertain a two-way symmetric flow of information.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has presented the overview of media objectives, development of media strategies, advertising objective and their roles in the formation of media and advertising plans.
The main content of this unit started with what advertising objective and strategies mean to an advertiser.
In brief a quick look was giving to these areas of advertising objectives:  To motivate the consumer to behave in a particular way…for example: to motivate the consumer to take up trial purchases from stores.
 To change the attitude of the people…for example: some advertisements might be designed to make the youth think that drinking soft drinks is “cool”.
 To create awareness about new products and ideas…for example: To create awareness about certain products that are new to the market like a new “easy carpet cleaner” etc.
Image creation and positioning Types of advertising objectives were considered, variety ranging from product demonstration to low-cost media were explanatorily exhausted.
Media objectives and strategies in focus was another area that was touched.
Media objectives and strategies were itemized and explained.
George’s 8 points were stated and five were explained to give readers avenue to research on the remaining.
119  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Three major objectives of the media were stated for intending or professional media practitioners to hold on to when planning for the media, these include to: a.
Use broadcast media to provide coverage of 80 percent of the target market over a 6months period.
b.
Reach 60 percent of the target audience at least three times over the same six-month period.
c. Concentrate heaviest advertising in festival periods like: Christmas celebration, New Year celebration, Valentine’s Day, mother and father’s days, worker’s day and so on.
When there are no special days or festivals, advising should be reduced.
The unit was concluded after critical explanations were given to the five media strategies that were picked from among the eight points stated by George et al (1995).
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  List and explain types of advertising plans and strategies.
 State the three major objectives of the media?
 Media is a means to an advertising end.
Explain 7.0 REFERENCE/ FURTHER READING George E. Belch and Michael A. Belch (1995).
Introduction to Advertising and Promotion: An Integrated Marketing Communications Perspective, 3rd (ED), McGraw-Hill Companies.
MAC 332 MODULE 4 UNIT 3: MEDIA PLANNING IN ADVERTISING AGENCY 1.1 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Media Planning In a Contemporary Environment: An Elementary Analysis 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 Reference/ Further Reading 120 1.0 INTRODUCTION  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Marketing communications has two fundamental task, these are message creation and message dissemination.
Media planning supports message dissemination.
It also helps to determine which media to be used, whether television programs, newspapers, bus-stop posters, in-store displays, banner advertisements on the Web, or a flyer on Facebook.
Media planning also tells when and where to use media in order to reach a desired audience.
In a nut-shell, media planning refers to the process of selecting media time and space to disseminate advertising messages in order to accomplish marketing objectives.
Often, media planners perceive their job role from the perspective of a brand contact lieu of focusing only on the medium used to disseminate their messages.
Media planners also pay attention to how to create and manage brand contact, which is any planned and unplanned form of exposure to and interaction with a product or service.
For example, when you see an advertisement for MTN on television, or hear an ETISALAT slogan on the radio, or being told by a friend that her iPod is the greatest invention, or sample a new flavor of Lucozade energy drink at the supermarket, you are experiencing brand contact.
Television commercials, radio advertisement, and product sampling are planned forms of brand contact.
Word of mouth is an unplanned brand contact, and advertisers normally do not plan for word of mouth.
From the consumer's perspective, however, unplanned forms of brand contact may be more influential because they are less suspicious compared to advertising.
The brand contact perspective shows how the role of media planners has expanded.
First, media planners have moved from focusing only on traditional media to integrating traditional media and new media.
New media, cable and satellite television, satellite radio, business-to-business e- media, consumer Internet, movie screen advertising and videogame advertising etc.
are playing increasingly significant roles.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, students would achieve the followings:  Comprehend what media planning is  Identify and know the various elements of media planning  Be able to identify and understand characteristics of advertising media planning 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 121  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 3.1 Media Planning In a Contemporary Environment: An Elementary Analysis Media planners are making more use of product placements now, in lieu of advertising insertions.
Advertising insertions, like print advertisement or television commercials, are made separately from the content and are inserted into it.
The advertisements are distinct from the articles or TV programs, not a part of them.
As a result, the advertisements seem intrusive.
In contrast, product placement (also called brand placement or branded entertainment) blends product information with the content itself.
Whether content is a television program, movie, video game or other form of entertainment, product placement puts the brand message into the entertainment content.
For example, in the movie E.T., the extraterrestrial eats Reese's Pieces candy.
The candy was authentically integrated into the movie?
and sales of Reese's Pieces soared 80% after the movie, catapulting the new product to mainstream status.
On the other hand, inappropriate or excessive product placements may do more harm than good to the brand.
The role of media planners has expanded as media planners have moved beyond planned messages to take advantage of unplanned messages as well.
Whereas planned messages are what advertisers initiated, like an advertisement, press release or sales promotion unplanned messages are often initiated by people and organizations other than advertisers themselves.
Word of mouth, both online and offline, is one form of unplanned message.
Although advertisers have little direct control over the flow of unplanned messages, they can facilitate such a flow.
Media Planning Process How is a media plan developed?
Media planning is a four-step process which consists of: 1.
Setting media objectives in light of marketing and advertising objectives, 2.
Developing a media strategy for implementing media objectives, 3.
Designing media tactics for realizing media strategy, and 4.
Proposing procedures for evaluating the effectiveness of the media plan.
Now, let us take a deeper look into the media planning process.
Media planning, such as planning the marketing communications for the launch of a new product, starts with setting media objectives.
Media objectives usually consist of two key components:  Target audience and  Communication goals 122  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 The target audience component of the media objectives defines who the intended target of the campaign is.
For example, P&G's target audience objective for its new product was men 18-40 years old.The communications goals component of the media objectives defines how many of the audience the campaign intends to reach and how many times it will reach them.
In short, media objectives are a series of statements that specify what exactly the media plan intends to accomplish.
The objectives represent the most important goals of brand message dissemination, and they are the concrete steps to accomplish marketing objectives.
a.
Target Audience The first objective of a media plan is to select the target audience: the people whom the media plan attempts to influence through various forms of brand contact.
Because media objectives are subordinate to marketing and advertising objectives, it is essential to understand how the target audience is defined in the marketing and advertising objectives.
The definition may or may not be exactly the same, depending on the marketing and advertising objectives and strategies.
A common marketing objective is to increase sales by a specific amount.
But this marketing objective does not specify a target audience, which is why the media objective is needed.
The target audience is often defined in terms of demographics and psychographics.
Demographics of media consumers, includes: gender, age, education, household income, marital status, employment status, type of residence, and number of children in the household.
Using demographic variables, for example, the target audience of a media plan could be "individuals who are 26-to-45 years old with yearly household income of N500, 000 or more" or "all households with children age 3 years or younger."
Some advertisers believe that demographic definitions of a target audience are too ambiguous, because individual consumers that fit such definitions can be quite different in terms of their brand preference and purchasing behaviour.
For example, think about the students in a media planning class.
Even though some of them are the same age and gender, they may like different brands of toothpaste, shampoo, cereal, clothing, and other products.
Therefore, media planners use psychographics to refine the definition of the target audience more.
Psychographics is a generic term for consumers' personality traits (serious, funny, conservative), beliefs and attitudes about social issues (opinions about abortion, environment, globalization), personal interests (music, sports, movie going), and shopping orientations (recreational shoppers, price-sensitive shoppers, convenience shoppers).
Mazda, for example, doesn't define its target audience by age, income or gender, but by 123 psychographic principles.
Mazda targets people who have a need for self- expression, are young at heart, and love to drive.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 Generational Cohort is another useful concept for selecting the target audience.
Because the members of a particular generational cohort are likely to have had similar experiences during their formative years, they maintain analogous social views, attitudes, and values.
Product and Brand Usage: Target audiences can also be more precisely defined by their consumption behavior.
Product usage includes both brand usage (the use of a specific brand such as Special K cereal or Dove soap) and category usage (the use of a product category such as facial tissue or chewing gum).
Product use commonly has four levels: heavy users, medium users, light users and non-users.
The levels of use depend on the type of product.
For example, Simmons defines heavy domestic beer users as those who consume five or more cans in the past 30 days, medium beer users as those who consumer two to four cans, and light users as those who consume one can in 30 days.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  Explain the four basic media objectives.
 Explain the varieties of target audience used by media planner to develop a super blue print for advertising campaign.
b. Communication Goals For Advertising Media Planning After media planners define the target audience for a media plan, they set communication goals: to what degree the target audience must be exposed to (and interact with) brand messages in order to achieve advertising and marketing objectives.
For example, one communication goal can be that 75 percent of the target audience will see the brand in television commercials at least once during a period of three months.
Another communication goal is that 25 percent of the target audience will form a preference for a new brand in the first month of the brand launch.
The different communication goals can be better understood in a hierarchy of advertising objectives, such as Bill Harvey's expansion of an earlier model of Advertising Research Foundation (ARF).
ARF model has ten levels; the first three levels of goals from the bottom which include vehicle distribution, vehicle exposure, and advertising exposure are particularly relevant for media planning.
i.
Vehicle distribution refers to the coverage of a media vehicle, such as the number of copies that a magazine or newspaper issue has, or the number of households that can tune in to a given television channel.
ii.
Vehicle exposure refers to the number of individuals exposed to the media vehicle, such as the number of people who read a magazine or watched a 124 television program.
Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 iii.
Advertising exposure refers to the number of individuals exposed an advertisement or a commercial itself.
It is important to note the difference between vehicle exposure and advertising exposure for many media with editorial content.
For example, not all audience members of a television program will watch all the commercials interspersed in the program.
A study shows that only 68 percent of television audiences watch the commercials in television programs.
Vehicle exposure represents only an opportunity to see an advertisement, not necessarily that the advertisement has actually been seen.
In reality, advertising exposure is rarely measured, and media planners use vehicle exposure as a proxy measure of advertising exposure.
Another group of communication goals is advertising recall, advertising persuasion, leads and sales.
Advertising recall represents the cognitive effect of the advertisement, advertising persuasion represents the emotional effect of the advertisement, and leads and sales are the behavioral effects of the advertisement.
Each can be specified in a media plan as a communication goal.
For example, a communication goal can specify that 50% of the target audience will recall the radio advertisement during the month of the campaign, or that a campaign will generate 3000 leads.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE  What do you understand by communication goals for advertising media planning?
 What is ARF?
Explain the ARF first three levels of goals from the bottom.
Setting Communication Goals for an Effective Media Plan Media planners can set communication goals based on the level of reach.
That is, how many of the target audience should be reached with the media plan, say 50%, 75% or 95%?
Theoretically, a reach of 100 is possible, but it is rarely a communication goal because some audience members may not use any of the media, making them unreachable.
What, then, would be the optimal level of reach for a given product category or a market situation?
There is no quick answer to this question; it all depends on the media planner's analysis of major factors facing the brand.
Media experts suggest high reach is appropriate when something new is associated with the brand, such as new features, new sales incentives, new packaging or new service opportunities.
The newness requires a high level of awareness among the target audience.
A high reach is also often necessary in three other situations: 125  Advertising in support of sales promotion activities,  Reminder advertising for a mass market product, and  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013  When the brand faces severe competition.
When setting levels of frequency, media planners have more rules of thumb to choose from when setting levels of reach.
For example, media planners have often been setting a frequency of 3 during a purchase cycle, following Michael Naples' seminal study of effective frequency published in 1979.
Naples' study suggests that there is a threshold level of repetition; advertising below the threshold level will be ineffective.
Therefore, three exposures during a purchase cycle are necessary.
Many media planners still use this rule in setting the effective frequency of a media plan.
More recently, Philip Jones found that one exposure generates the highest proportion of sales and that additional exposures add very little to the effect of the first.
Erwin Ephron further developed th e concept of "recency planning" and suggested that one exposure within a purchase cycle should be set as close to the actual purchase moment as possible.
Recency planning starts with the idea that when is more important than how many; That is, advertising will be most effective if it is timed to when a consumer is in the market to buy the product or service.
In the short-term, therefore, additional exposures are likely to be wasteful because audience members are not in the buying mode.
In some cases, advertisers know when consumers are in the market, such as swelters advertisements during the harmattan when many people are planning for New Year’s celebration.
Joseph W. Ostrow created a decision model to help media planners determine the optimal frequency level through assessing marketing factors, copy factors and media factors.
Starting with a base effective frequency of 3, the media planner makes frequency adjustments based on a series of 20 factors in three categories.
As illustrated in the table, each category includes several statements, upon which the media planner makes judgments by circling an appropriate rating in that row of the chart.
For example, the first factor asks the planner to rate whether the product is an "Established brand" or "New brand."
A totally new brand will require higher frequency than an established brand, and so the planner would circle the "+.2" frequency adjustment.
After assessing the factors, the media planner sums the adjustments to calculate the recommended effective frequency.
Media planners may modify the model by adding or removing statements to make the estimate more appropriate.
The Ostrow Model of Effective Frequency Low Required Frequency High Required Frequency Adjustment Frequency Market Factors 126 Established brand -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 New brand High brand share -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Low brand share  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 High brand loyalty -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Low brand loyalty Long purchase cycle -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Short purchase cycle Less frequent usage -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Frequency usage Low share of voice -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 High share of voice Target other group -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Target old people or children Message Factors Low message -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 High message complexity complexity High message -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Low message uniqueness uniqueness Continuing -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 New campaign campaign Product-focused -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Image-focused message message Low message -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 High message variety variety High wearout -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Low wearout Large advertising -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Small advertising units units Media Factors Low clutter -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 High clutter Favorable editorial -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Neutral editorial setting setting High audience -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Low audience attentiveness attentiveness Continuous -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Pulse or flight scheduling scheduling Few media vehicles -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 More media vehicles High repeat -.2 -.1 +.1 +.2 Low repeat exposure exposure media media Ultimately, media planners may set goals for other forms of communication.
For example, promotional activities may be used in a media plan.
Media planners estimate and specify response rates for these activities.
By establishing communication goals, media planners set the stage for assessing the effectiveness of a media plan at the end.
4.1 CONCLUSION 127  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 The development of advertising media plan follows a systematic path especially with emphasis on the best way to deliver the message.
The process involves four stages which are: 1.
Market Analysis: this focus on the review of both internal and external factors, competitive strategies and the likes.
This allows for an evaluation of market analysis with focus on the media and delivery of the message.
2.
Establishment of media objectives: this should always lead to the determination of specific media objective as stated in unit three.
3.
Media strategy development: this is concern with the direct action of implementing the media strategy in order to produce a desirable goal.
4.
Evaluation and follow up: the media planner at this stage assesses the performance of the planning exercise and then makes recommendations or start up the process all over if the desired result is not got.
In the light of this, media planning is a painstaking process which detailed a step by step procedure to determine the right media and vehicles for an advertising campaign.
Media planning to the advertiser is simply a facet of the general problem of allocating financial resources in a way to optimize long-term profits.
In this respect the area of influence that the media planner can exert is fairly narrow.
It is often difficult to suggest that money allocated for advertising would better be allocated to research and development.
The various stages through which a media plan evolves within an agency are quite complex.
They will vary from agency to agency, and within agencies and also from account to account.
Often, the variations depend on the size of the problem to be tackled, the agency’s organization and its relations with its clients.
The development of all media plan should follow similar pattern.
5.0 SUMMARY Advertising media plan is crucial in the production and dissemination of advertisement.
Any advertisement without concrete media plan is doomed, because, such advertisement might just be addressing the wrong audience and direction.
Media plan is therefore research-oriented procedure which requires a high level of professionalism in the part of the agency managing it.
This unit gave a cursory look into what advertising media is.
It concluded the entirety of the media plan by exhausting matters on media planning process, advertising media objectives, hence, target audience and advertising communication goals.
Furthermore, four types of target audience where explained to give readers varieties to choose from, also, 128 how to set goal for advertising media was enumerated; theories from different schools of thought were examined.
Michael Naples, Philip Jones  Advertising Copy and Layout (MAC 332) 2013 and Joseph W. Ostrow’s experimentation and model were respectively examined and analysed to give better understanding to the topic treated in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT  Explain the media planning process.
 With the aid of table, explain Ostrow ’s model of effective frequency  List and explain the various types of target audience stated in this unit 7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Erwin Ephron (1997), "Recency Planning," Journal of Advertising Research, 37(4), 61-65.
Jack Z. Sissors and Roger B. Baron (2002), "Advertising Media Planning," Sixth Edition, McGraw-Hill.
James R. Adams ( 1977).
Media Planning.
Business Books: United Kingdom.
John P. Jones (1995a), When Ads Work: New Proof that Advertising Triggers Sales.
New York: Lexington Books.
Joseph W. Ostrow (1984), "Setting Frequency Levels: An Art or a Science?"
Journal of Advertising Research, 24(4), I-9 to I-11.
Michael J. Naples (1979), "Effective Frequency: The relationship between Frequency and Advertising Awareness," Association of National Advertisers, New York.
129
