NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE:PCR 375 COURSE TITLE:LANGUAGE INFORMATION IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTIONPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION COURSE GUIDE PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Course Developer/Writer Aderibigbe Nurudeen Adeniyi Olabisi Onabanjo University The University Library Ago- woye Course Editor Professor Francis Egbokhare Department of Linguistics Faculty of Arts University of Ibadan Course Coordinator Oyedolapo B. Durojaye National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-511-7 All Rights Reserved CONTENTS PAGE iiiPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Introduction……………………………………………………….. 1 What You Will Learn in this Course……………………………….
1 Course Aims……………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives………………………………………………… 1 Working through this Course…………………………………….. 2 Course Materials………………………………………………….. 2 Study Units……………………………………………………….. 3 Textbooks and References……………………………………….. 3 Assignment File…………………………………………………... 4 Assessment……………………………………………………….. 4 Tutor Marked Assignment………………………………………... 5 Final Examination and Grading………………………………….. 5 Course Marking Scheme………………………………………….
6 Presentation Schedule…………………………………………….
6 Course Overview………………………………………………….
6 How to Get the Most from this Course…………………………… 7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials…………………………………… 9 Introduction PCR375 Language and Information Management in Peace and Conflict Resolution is a-one semester 3 credit unit course.
It is a prerequisite towards a B.Sc degree in Peace and Conflict Resolution studies of the Open University.
The course is divided into 4 modules and has been developed with local and global perspectives in mind.
This Course Guide will enlighten you about what the course is all about, what materials will best serve your interest in this field and how to use them.
It will also be a guide on how much time to use in order to successfully complete the course.
It dwells on the necessity for you to complete the tutor marked assignments embedded therein and your responsibilities during the facilitation session with the course facilitator.
What You Will Learn in this Course It is very important to note that the study of this course is theoretical as well as practical.
The theoretical consists of insights, observations research findings and formal propositions that were produced by vibrant peace work researchers on the field, especially those that deal with the influence of language and communications in peace and conflict.
It will give you a wider view of issues relevant to conflict and peace studies through language and communication with a view to providing right tools and necessary skills to effect a change from conflict situation to an enviable peace.
ivPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Course Aim This course is to get you acquainted with other relevant issues in language and communication and their overall influence in peace and conflict situations.
The student is expected to apply knowledge gained to everyday living and to the practical challenges of life.
It also includes using effective communication to cultivate friendly relationships in a harmonious environment whenever the need arises.
Course Objectives The overall objectives and expectation of this course are many.
In addition to this each unit has its objectives which you will find at the beginning of each unit.
You are expected to read them before working through the unit.
It is also necessary to check once in a while with the objectives to be able to determine the progress you are making at each point.
You should also endeavour to look at each unit objectives after completing that unit.
As you follow the simple instruction above, you are assured of a proper guidance that will help you benefit the most from your time with the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • Explain what language is and define it.
• Discuss elements of language • Explain importance of language • Explain language barrier in conflict and resolution • Define information and communication • Describe the relationship between communication and information • Explain types of communication • Discuss relationship in communication • Explain the significance of interpersonal communication • Generally explain how to deal with conflict communicatively • Discuss control communication and conflict resolution • Discuss perception influence in relationship • Explain listening and its uses in conflict resolution • Discuss media roles in peace and conflict resolution.
Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read recommended books and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Most of the units contain self- assessment exercises.
At the end of this course, is a final examination.
vPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Stated below are the components of the course and what you are expected to do.
Course Materials • Course Guide • Study Units • References and Further Readings • Assignment File • Presentation In addition, you must obtain the text materials, which are provided by the NOUN.
You may also want to purchase the other recommended materials.
Please ensure you log on to the internet for other materials that you can get through various search engines like, YAHOO.GOGGLE, MAMA etc.
You can contact your facilitator if you have problems in obtaining the text materials or other internet sites that you may need to visit.
Study Units There are 20 Units in this course: Module 1 Unit 1 Meaning/Definition of Language Unit 2 Elements of Language Unit 3 Importance of Language Unit 4 Language Barrier in Conflict and Resolution Unit 5 Language and Conflict Resolution Module 2 Unit 1 Language, Communication and Reinforcement of Ideology Unit 2 Meaning/Definition of Information and Communication Unit 3 Relationship between Communication and Information Unit 4 Importance of Communication Unit 5 Types of Communication Module 3 Unit 1 Relationship in Communication Unit 2 Interpersonal Communication Unit 3 Dealing with Conflict in Communication Unit 4 Control Communication and Conflict Resolution Unit 5 Perception Influence in Relationship viPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Module 4 Unit 1 Effective Communication Unit 2 Theories of Communication Unit 3 Listening Unit 4 Resolving Conflict through Listening Unit 5 Media Role in Peace and Conflict Textbooks and References The following books are suggested for further reading: Gamble T.K & Gamble M. (2002).
Communication Works.
New York: McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. Hybels S, Weaver II R.L.
Communicating Effectively.
New York: McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. Oyedokun A.A. (2007).
Third World Information Service: Ibadan: Information Service Ltd. Paul R.T (1998).
Managerial Communication Finger on the Pulse.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Roy M.B.
et al (2004).
Communicating: A Social and Carrer Focus.
Boston: Houghton Mifthin Comp.
Urmila Rai.
Rai & M. (2002).
Effective Communication.
Mumbai, India: Himalaya Pub.
House.
Jim Lyttle (2002).
Organizational Behaviour Textbook and Cases for Undergraduate and Graduate Courses.
Booktyntom Ross Publisher.
Paula S. Rothenberg (2005).
Race, Class, and Gender in United States: An Integral Study.
New York: Harrey Milk Publishers.
Gundersen, D.F, Hopper Robert (1984).
Communication and Law Enforcement.
Boston: Hamper and Row, Publishers, Inc. Brookover, A.
(2000).
Interpersonal Conflict.
New York: Dosey Press.
Thomas Kilman (1972).
Resolving Conflict.
New Orleans: Ralple Publication Inc. Hocker, J.H, Wilmot W.W. (1985).
Interpersonal Conflict.
Dubuque, Lowa: W.C. Brown Publishers.
Assignment File viiPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION There are two aspects to the assessment of this course like any other PCR courses in NOUN.
In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your facilitator for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
You will discover that there are many assignments for this course, in every unit.
These assignments are a guide to you to understand the course.
Assessment An assessment file and marking scheme will be made available to you.
In the assessment file you will find details of the work you must submit to your facilitator for marking.
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the tutor marked and the written examination.
The marks you obtain in these two areas will make up your final marks.
The assignment must be submitted to your facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file.
The work you submit to your facilitator for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are over 20 Tutor-Marked Assignments in this course.
You do not need to submit all the assignments.
The best three of what you have submitted will be recorded.
Each assignment counts for 10 marks but total of the best three assignment totaling 30% forwards your total course mark.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reference books, reading and study units.
However, it is always desirable at this level that you browse through the net to research more and read widely, and demonstrate that you have very broad and in-dept knowledge of the subject matter.
When you complete your TMA (Tutor Marked Assignment) submit with the form to your facilitator.
Ensure that each assignment reaches your facilitator on or before the deadline given in the Assignment file.
If, for a good reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension may not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances warranting such.
viiiPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Final Examination and Grading The final examination for PCR375: Language and Information Management in Peace and Conflict Resolution will be three hours duration and have a value of 70% of the total grade.
The examination will consists of questions which reflect the practice exercises and Tutor Marked Assignments you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between the completion of the last unit and sitting for the examination, to revise the entire course.
You may find it useful to review your Tutor Marked Assignments and comment on them before the examination, the final examination covers information from all aspects of the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is broken down: Table 1: Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1-4 (the best four of Four submitted.
Best three all the assignments submitted assignments, marked out of 10% totaling 30% Final Examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score Presentation Schedule The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you.
You will also be told the date of completing the study units and dates for examinations.
Course Overview Unit Title of Work Week Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Module 1 1 Meaning Definition of Language 1 Assignment 1 2 Elements of Language 1 Assignment 2 3 Importance of Language 1 Assignment 3 4 Language Barrier in Conflict and 1 Assignment 4 ixPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Resolution 5 Language and Conflict Resolution: The 1 Assignment 5 Limit of English Language Module 2 1 Language, Communication and 1 Assignment 6 Reinforcement of Ideology 2 Meaning/Definition of Information and 1 Assignment 7 Communication 3 Relationship between Communication and 1 Assignment 8 Information 4 Importance of Communication 1 Assignment 9 5 Types of Communication 1 Assignment 10 Module 3 1 Relationship in Communication 1 Assignment 11 2 Interpersonal Communication 1 Assignment 12 3 Dealing with Conflict in Communication 1 Assignment 13 4 Control Communication and Conflict 1 Assignment 14 Resolution 5 Perception Influence in Relationship 1 Assignment 15 Module 4 1 Effective Communication 1 Assignment 16 2 Theories of Communication 1 Assignment 17 3 Listening 1 Assignment 18 4 Resolving Conflict through Listening 1 Assignment 19 5 Media Role in Peace and Conflict 1 Assignment 20 How to Get the Most from this Course You will be required to study the units on your own.
But arrangements have been made for you to meet with your facilitator for tutorials on regular basis in the study centre.
Also, you can organize interactive sessions with your course mates.
In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is xPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your textbooks books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or visit the study center.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a Study Schedule.
Design a ‘Course overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), check the Assignment File for your next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
xiPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 8. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
9.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
10.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, par particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
11.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide) Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course Information relating to the tutorials will be provided at the appropriate time.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must take your tutor marked assignments to the study centre well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help.
Contact your tutor if you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings; you have difficulty with the exercises; you have a question or problem with and assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it interesting and useful.
xiiPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Course Code PCR 375 Course Title Language and Information Management in Peace and Conflict Resolution Course Developer/Writer Aderibigbe Nurudeen Adeniyi Olabisi Onabanjo University The University Library Ago- woye Course Editor Professor Francis Egbokhare Department of Linguistics Faculty of Arts University of Ibadan Course Coordinator Oyedolapo B. Durojaye National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xiiiPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-511-7 All Rights Reserved xivPCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………………….. 1 Unit 1 Meaning/Definition of Language…………………… 1 Unit 2 Elements of Language……………………………….
7 Unit 3 Importance of Language…………………………….
14 Unit 4 Language Barrier in Conflict and Resolution……….
21 Unit 5 Language and Conflict Resolution………………….
31 Module 2 ………………………………………………………… 36 Unit 1 Language, Communication and Reinforcement of Ideology…………………………………………….. 36 Unit 2 Meaning/Definition of Information and Communication……………………………………… 42 Unit 3 Relationship between Communication and Information…………………………………………… 49 Unit 4 Importance of Communication……………………….. 55 Unit 5 Types of Communication…………………………….. 60 Module 3 ………………………………………………………… 66 Unit 1 Relationship in Communication……………………… 66 Unit 2 Interpersonal Communication……………………….. 74 Unit 3 Dealing with Conflict Communicatively…………….
82 Unit 4 Control Communication and Conflict Resolution…….
91 Unit 5 Perception Influence in Relationship………………….
99 Module 4 …………………………………………………………109 Unit 1 Effective Communication…………………………….
109 Unit 2 Theories of Communication………………………….
114 Unit 3 Listening……………………………………………... 120 Unit 4 Resolving Conflict through Listening……………….. 129 Unit 5 Media Role in Peace and Conflict…………………… 135 xvNonePCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION MODULE 1 Unit 1 Meaning/Definition of Language Unit 2 Elements of Language Unit 3 Importance of Language Unit 4 Language Barrier in Conflict and Resolution Unit 5 Language and Conflict Resolution UNIT 1 MEANING/DEFINITION OF LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Nature of Language 3.2 Language is Personal and Socio Cultural 3.3 Language Codes 3.4 Attributes of Language 3.4.1 Some Definitions of Language 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION What is Language?
Some Few Definition of Language Before you read on it is important at this point to determine a working definitions of language.
The followings are some expert opinions on what language is: (i) Language is an organized system of linguistics symbols (words) used by human beings to communicate with one another.
(a) Language is basic to communication through words.
(b) Language encompasses all forms of expression.
N. E. Wood, Delayed Speech and Language Development (1964) Pp.
6-7 1PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION (ii) Language is a symbolic system linking what goes on inside our heads with what goes on outside.
It mediates between self and society.
It is a form of representation, a way of representing the world to ourselves and to others.
D. Burton, Literacy (1994).
(iii) Language is a system of conventional symbols used for communication by a whole community.
A. C. Gibson, An Introduction to the Pronunciation of English (1990) P.3.
(iv) Language is for negotiating meaning, building understanding and relationships and the activity of using language for any of these purposes always involves creating what is technically called a text – a stretch of language which is coherent and meaningful.
F. Christie.
Factual Writing in the First Years of School (1987) P. 209.
(v) Language is a system of arbitrary vocal symbols used for human communication.
Wardhough.
Reading: A Linguistic Perspective (1969) (vi) Language refers to the particular set of symbols that allow for intelligible communication in a culture.
Language skills include the ability to speak, write and to comprehend the symbols of one’s language.
P.J.
Megan, Child Development and Personality (1979) 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • explain the term - language • explain the nature of language • list some language codes • explain the attributes of language.
2PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nature of Language Language is frequently used, but rarely defined.
Many definitions imply that language is speech alone or speech and writing; that is, codes based on words, recognition of the legitimacy of native signs.
Language certainly involves producing and receiving information (speaking or signing and listening or watching), and decoding and coding text reading and writing.
However, we believe that it is not very helpful to ignore non-verbal codes.
Native sign language is visual-spatial languages that are not derived from the language that is spoken by the surrounding culture.
Signs are visual symbols including facial expression.
It is not only in sign languages, however, that non-verbal cues are important.
If you think of a situation where you actually speak such as in a conversation with a friend, you will realize that you frequently use more than one way of conveying and interpreting meaning.
Speech is prominent but so are a range of non-verbal cues, such as facial expression and writing: it is a complex and abstract phenomenon that can be realized through a number of verbal and non-verbal codes.
A language is seen as one of many social practices that operate interactively in a society to represent and make meaning (Halliday 1978: Hodge & Kriss 1988: Furlough (1996) Language is centred on meaning: it is the most powerful and persuasive means used by human beings for communication.
Because language is centred on meaning which is shared culturally, it follows that it is rooted in the culture of the group that uses it.
It makes no sense to think of a language used by only one individual.
To make sense out of our world or environment we learn language and to do this we use verbal and/or non-verbal systems.
For instance, speech, gestures scribbling, drawing and writing are all used for communication.
3.2 Language is Personal and Sociocultural Language is used for a whole range of purposes; different people use language for different purposes.
However, it is learned and used in a sociocultural context.
The language one learns has been developed by the tribe or clan one belongs to but is redeveloped by the individual.
The individual use of language influences the group and vice-versa.
Also, as we are most interested in language, we need to know that 3PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION language is a social process, and the environment, in which it takes place is a social institution.
Knowledge of language is transmitted in social contexts, through relationship, like those of parent and child, or teacher and pupil, or classmates, that are defined in the value system and ideology of the culture.
(Halliday & Hasan 1985).
Hence, it is important that we understand what is to be learned as language, how an individual learns it, also how socio cultural factors influence an individual‘s language and how groups use language.
Our thinking and language is shaped by our culture, hence the current focus on sexist and racist uses of language.
Language is part of culture: what the language is and how it is used depends on the culture.
You cannot know a language unless you know the culture.
This sociocultural view of language pervades all knowledge of study of the concept language.
Language holds us together as group, differentiates us into groups and controls the way we shape concepts how we think, how we perceive, and how we judge others.
Successful communication with someone from another culture involves understanding a common language without this shared language, communication problems may occur when a third party, the translator or interpreter, attempts to convey both the verbal and non- verbal intent of a message.
3.3 Language Codes We have discussed earlier that language is perceived as being more than speech-it consists of a number of codes.
What are those codes?
If we investigate what we use for communication, we can begin to appreciate the potential range of language codes, both verbal and non-verbal.
One way of classifying language codes is by the method of production, for instance oral, graphic, or gestural words are the basis of the code, that is, whether it is verbal or non- verbal.
Table 1.1 (Cameron and sanders 1977) uses this categories to classify the different codes we use to make sense of our world.
4PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Table 1.1 Matrix of language Modes Oral Graphic Gestural Verbal Speech Writing Finger-spelling (predominally) Song braille lip-reading Semaphore Non-Verbal cries sign Signs (used by deaf) (directional) Signs (used in sport) Predominantly laughter sign (Mathematical) Music Music (score) body position (Sound) art (school) posture movement Object arrangement facial expression M.H Cameron and M.T Saunders, an Overview of Language.
3.4 Attributes of Language If you look closely at these language codes as presented in the table 1.1.
You will begin to appreciate the complexity of and variations in language use.
From the table you will realize that the codes possess a number of features.
For instance, language is systematic- signs and symbols are selected and used according to rules.
These rules have been developed by the users and are determined by the culture and have to be learned by new language users such as children and second language learners.
Language is arbitrary- there is no inherent reason why the word ‘cat’ refers to a small, furry animal.
But the name has been agreed upon by a group of language users.
For meaning to be shared, the signs and symbols, and the way they are to be used in any language, have to be agreed upon by the language users.
The agreement by groups of language users to use certain signs and symbols is not the kind of agreement that two or more people might come to in resolving a dispute.
Rather it is the kind of agreement that occurs when groups of people come to share values, beliefs, and ways of doing things over time.
In other words, the agreement is a convention.
Language is symbolic.
In the cat example mentioned earlier, the word ‘cat’ is a symbol for a particular type of animal and the word or symbol ‘cat’ has come to represent that particular animal.
What is wonderful about language is that it is also generative.
With a limited set of symbols and agreed rules for structuring, these symbols can always be used in creating new meanings.
Language is continually changing to meet the needs of language users, words come and go and the meaning of words change over time.
5PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION The nature and use of language set us apart from other animals.
Through it we symbolize experiences; the mental representation is something that lasts over time and does not disappear when the phenomenon disappears.
By putting our experience into language we distance ourselves from them and thereby transform them into something that can be worked upon, creating new meanings.
Others can respond to our representation and work with us on them.
We can learn from these responses, it enables us to make great advances in our knowledge and understanding of our environment.
4.0 CONCLUSION Language, as you have seen in this unit, is a unified system of symbols that permits sharing of meaning.
Language allows minds to meet and merge.
When we make sense out of people’s messages through language, we learn to understand them and that is simply what language and its use is all about in any given society.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed you to meaning and attributes of language and its socio cultural relationships and codes.
Language as you would now agree is the principal means used by human being to communicate with one another.
It is primarily spoken, although it can be transferred to other media such as written but, when verbal medium is unavailable as for instance among the deaf, visual means such as sign language is used.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you understand by the term, language and its attributes?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Sammie M. B.
(2000).
Business Communication and Use of English: With Practical Persuasive Communication Skills.
Lagos: M & B Handbooks.
Gibson, A.C. (1990).
An Introduction to the Pronunciation of English Igboanusi, H. (2001).
Language Attitude and Language Conflict in West Africa.
Ibadan: Enicrownfit Publishers.
6PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION UNIT 2 THE ELEMENTS OF LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sounds 3.2 Words 3.3 Grammar 3.4 Meaning 3.4.1 Do Words Contain Meanings?
3.4.2 Can Language Obscure Meanings?
3.4.3 Words Have Denotative and Connotative Meanings 3.4.4 Words can be Concrete or Abstract 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Language, talk, speech and communication are four different but related phenomena.
Language as noted, is a structured system of signs, sound, gestures, or marks that allows people to express ideas and feelings to others; talk is what we do everyday; speech is one vehicle used to transmit language: and communication involves the exchange of meaning.
Language is one mean through which we communicate, and speech is one way in which we use language.
The fact that we possess language does not mean that we communicate well, but we can not verbally communicate without language and language would be useless if it does not help us to convey meanings.
The ultimate goal here is to coordinate language and speech to produce effective communication which is the transfer of meaning as intended.
You can learn more about language by examining four of its key elements: sounds, words, grammar and meaning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • describe elements of language • identify the relationships between meaning and language.
7PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Language is more than communication.
If you were to ask one hundred different people to explain what they use language for, it is likely that at least ninety-five would reply “To communicate”.
Of course they would be right, but their answer would tell only part of the story.
Their responses wouldn’t explain very much, particularly, if you take the view at examining the elements of language.
3.1 Sounds Most of us learn to speak our various languages before we learn to write it, and most of us are born with the physical mechanisms that enable us to make speech sounds.
However, we do not all learn to produce the sounds in exactly the same way.
Though using the same language, people of certain geographic regions or cultural groups may speak quite differently.
Dialects and other speech patterns can complicate communication between those who speak the same language.
This is found in almost all the geo-political zones in Nigeria, i.e.
there are differences between Yoruba spoken in Oyo and that of Ijebu or Hausa spoken in Sokoto and that from Kano Ditto for Igbo language.
3.2 Words Words are symbols that stand for object and concepts.
A word can represent an object or an abstract concept: the word desk represents an actual piece of furniture.
Words have meanings because communities and cultures give them meaning.
People agree that certain sound combinations mean certain things to them.
One of the intriguing things about language is the idioms, or words whose meaning cannot be understood by the ordinary usage.
I spent several years in the Northern part of Nigeria and learn Hausa language and many words from the language so that I can better communicate with friends and colleagues.
Despite the use of English-Hausa Dictionary, I am still not at home with some terms.
There are terms permitted for use in Hausa that my Dictionary does not explain.
But for understanding to occur, all parties in the communication event must agree on meanings.
3.3 Grammar Just as language has rules that govern how sounds may be joined into words, it also has rules that govern how words may be joined into phrases and sentences.
This set of rules is called grammar.
For example, the English grammar system requires that singular nouns take singular verb forms and plural nouns take plural verb forms.
8PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION As we join sounds together to form words and join words together to form phrase, sentences, and paragraphs, we use language’s sound and grammar systems simultaneously.
The ability to use sound and grammar correctly is crucial to competent communication.
Grammar enables us to make complete sentences and to understand the sentences made by others.
Despite the many rules that govern language, there is virtually no limit to the number of different messages that can be created.
3.4 Meaning Study of meaning or the association of words with ideas, feeling, and contexts is called semantics.
If language does not have meaning, it would serve little or no purpose.
Because words and word patterns can be used to exchange meanings between people and even between generations, language is useful tool for communication.
3.4.1 Do Words Contain Meanings?
We tend to associate language symbols (words) with specific meanings and to take that relationship for granted.
But it is important to understand that, in fact, language by itself has meaning.
The notion might seem to contradict our entire discussion so far.
You might wonder how language can be a system involving rules and meanings, yet still have no meaning itself.
Actually, it is entirely arbitrary that the word cat represents those four legged felines that some of us love and some of us hate.
There is nothing about the letters c, a, and t that is essentially related to the being of a cat when we see or hear the symbol, we fill in the meaning.
The belief that words have meaning in themselves is widespread.
Over the years, students in communication class were asked whether words have meaning.
The data, though not scientifically collected, suggests that more than 75 percent of the students believe that words do have meaning.
But the simple fact is that words do not contain meanings by themselves.
Words only acquire meaning through the context in which they are used and the fact that those who use them give them meaning.
Now, the question is who determines meaning?
The answer is you.
You control which words you use, the meaning you wish to give them, and, if you have mastered the art of communication, how people react to them.
Although everyone has the ability to impart meaning to words, not everyone does so in the same way.
Thus, a sender might intend one meaning for a message, but the receiver might either intentionally or 9PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION unintentionally give the message a different meaning.
Disparity between the meaning sent and the meaning received are consequence of so many conflicts.
This at times can be great problem when the sender and receiver have different cultural backgrounds or even different experiences and knowledge.
For instance, conflict resolution specialist often use specialist terms that is unfamiliar to someone who does not have much knowledge about this field.
Care in choosing words is especially important in such situations.
3.4.2 Can Language Obscure Meanings?
Word meanings vary from person to person on the basis of each one’s experience and the direct relationship of those experiences to particular words.
For example, the term “myocardial infarction” has limited meaning to most people, whereas the term heart attack is understood by most or almost everyone to denote a serious health crisis related to the heart.
However, a doctor, a patient, and a statistician in a hospital will understand the term quite differently.
While the doctor thinks of procedures that will help the patient.
The patient thinks, “will I live or die?” The family members think what they can do to help.
“The statistician sees a probability related to life and death.
The medical doctor knows that using the term myocardial infarction might confuse the patient and family members, so the more common term heart attack must be used.
Employing the wrong language in such a sensitive situation can lead to misunderstanding and confusion.
Also, the meanings of words, like words themselves, change from time to time and from place to place.
It is easy to forget that meaning we have for a word might not match the meaning held by others.
What words do we use now that might change in meaning over the next few years?
We constantly add words to our language, especially those related to new technologies.
Consider e-mail, snail mail, fax CD-ROM< compact Disk, cell phone, ATM, surfing the web, download, upload and so on.
Word meanings also vary from region to region.
For example, in some region word use can lead to misunderstandings and we must be sensitive to such potential differences.
Also, cultures and co-cultures hold differing meanings for certain words.
Co-cultures within a language community sometimes use words or phrases in ways that are unique to their group.
Scientists, engineers, conflict resolution experts, use language that might be too specialized to be understood by the general public.
10PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.4.3 Words Have Denotative and Connotative Meanings Denotative or Denotation is the core meaning associated with a word that is, its standard dictionary definition.
Denotative meanings are usually readily understood.
Many people use words as if they had only a denotative or specific meaning, but this is not the case.
Although commonly understood dictionary definition (denotative meanings) do exist, when we communicate we usually use words connotatively.
Connotation is the subjective meaning of a word, what a words suggests because of feelings or associations it evokes.
The connotative meaning is based in the context in which the word is used, how the meaning is expressed non-verbally (tone of voice, facial expression of the speaker, and so on) and the understanding of the person who is receiving it.
The competent communicator can differentiate between denotative and connotative meaning and understands which is being used in a given situation.
Connotative meanings may be generally accepted by most of the people, who use the language, by people within a particular group, or by individuals.
For example, to an urban dweller, the word ‘farm’ might mean places where crops are grown or where animals are kept, but to a particular rural person, farm might represent a livelihood, a workplace, or a home.
3.4.4 Words can be Concrete or Abstract Concrete words are symbols for specific things that can be pointed to or physically experienced (see, taste, smell, hear or touch).
For example, words such as car, book, keys and dogs are concrete words.
They represent specific, tangible objects, and therefore their meanings are usually quite clear.
We can be even more specific with the Quran, the Bible, and house keys.
Consequently, communication based on concrete words leaves little room for misunderstanding, and any disagreement can typically be resolved by referring to the object themselves.
Abstract words, however, are symbols for ideas, qualities, and relationships.
Because they represent things that cannot be experienced through the senses, their meanings depend on the experiences and intentions of the persons using them.
For instance, words such as right, freedom, truth, and trust, conflict, peace are abstract ideas which can only be felt.
Slangs are words that are referred to as jargons.
Co-cultures, such as students might use slang or words to communicate only with those who know the words, and the words and meanings change quickly-such words are constantly being discarded and new ones invented-sometimes just to make sure that people outside a particular groups will not catch on to their meanings.
All kinds of groups including 11PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION members of a given profession, college students, ethnic groups and gangs, develop and use slang terms.
Language is used to share meaning, but it also can be used to obscure, distance, or hide meaning.
One way to obscure meaning is to use euphemism.
A euphemism is an inoffensive or mild expression given in place of one that may offend, cause embarrassment, or suggest something unpleasant.
Our society also uses euphemisms to avoid taboo subjects or words that can trigger negative reactions.
Employing euphemisms can defuse tension and emotional change that is associated with controversial or difficult situations.
For instance, when a person dies, we often use a euphemism such as “passed away” if a king dies we often say |he has joined his ancestors” rather than use blunt words.
The phrase “passed away” seems to make a difficult complex situation more approachable.
Euphemisms can also be used to enhance something, to make it seem a little more glamorous than it actually is.
In some societies people have become so concerned with labels that they have renamed many things to give them a more positive connotation.
For instance salesman is viewed as being sexist and aside from that it is also viewed as conjuring a negative image that is not exactly characterized scrupulous business ethics.
This unfavorable connotation has thus, been fostered by the media.
Thus, referring to a person who sells merchandise as a sales associate, sales consultant, or sale representative sound more positive.
Sometimes the term trash collector, refuse collector or garbage collector now is recast as sanitation engineer, or environmental executive, which makes the job seem move attractive or dignifying.
Language can also be used to create deliberately ambiguous message, for instance when management of a corporate firm told their staff that they had been “dehired” because the firm is experiencing “negative employee retention”.
Actually, the employee in this case has been fired in a lay off.
But no one is willing to say so.
Doublespeak is the deliberate misuse of language to distort meaning.
Doublespeak was made popular by George Orwell in his 1984.
Doublespeak is not a slip of the tongue or language used improperly because of ignorance.
It is a tool that the powerful use to achieve their ends without clearly communicating with those who may be affected by their actions or who may foot the bill for them Lutz (2005).
Doublespeak is particularly harmful when it makes something inappropriate or negative appear to be appropriate or positive”.
As you can see, language and meaning are inseparable parts of communication 12PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION and conflict studies.
It smoothen successful communication.
Unfortunately, a type of communication also occurs when a message is misunderstood.
4.0 CONCLUSION The misuse of language is more than simply a matter of misusing words: It also affects our ability to think and foster peace in relationship.
According to most scholars, thought and language are inseparable when we can not find an appropriate word to express our feeling, perhaps our thinking is not clear and if thoughts are not expressed clearly and accurately misunderstanding is inevitable.
5.0 SUMMARY The elements of language help us to fashion our messages so that most people will be able to understand our meanings.
Thus, the ability to carefully choose the elements of language to construct and share message effectively and efficiently helps us to become competent communicators.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why are elements of language important in communication interaction?
2.
Provide some personal examples of power language?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Igboanusi, H. (2001).
Language Attitude and Language Conflict in West Africa.
Ibadan: Enicrownfit Publishers.
Aina, S. (2003).
Anatomy of Communication.
Abeokuta: Julian Publishers.
13PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION UNIT 3 IMPORTANCE OF LANGUAGE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of Language 3.2 Languages and Culture 3.2.1 Verbal Processes 3.2.2 Patterns of Thought 3.3 Culture and Meaning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The importance of language to the study of communication and conflict is clearly captured in this Federico Felines simple sentence “A different language is a different view of life”.
His notion takes on added significance when you realize that one of the major characteristics identifying you as human is your ability to use language.
To state that language is important is merely to acknowledge the obvious, yet the significant influence language has on human behaviour is frequently overlooked.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the importance of language • identify the various functions of language • identify the relationship between language and culture.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Functions of Language Language is extremely important to human interaction because of its labeling, interaction and transmission functions.
The labeling function serves to identify or name a person object, or act so that he, she or it may be referred to in communication.
The interaction function is concerned with the sharing and communication of ideas and emotions.
14PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION And transmission is the process by which you pass information to others.
These functions are generally considered as the primary purposes of communication there are other functions and purposes that are equally important.
Crystal (2004) identified six additional purposes language facilitates in addition to maintaining social and individual needs.
Such functions are: emotive expression, thinking, phatic interaction, and control of reality, the keeping of history and identity expression.
a. Emotive Expression Language permits you to express your internal emotional states.
This form of expression may range from a simple statement such as “I feel sad” to the cursing of something that is not functioning properly e.g.
(PHCN).
Whether in the absence of others or in their presence, this use of language serves as a means of getting rid of nervous energy when you are under stress.
b.
Thinking People tend to be both visual and verbal thinkers and engage in both forms depending upon their activity.
Verbal thinking, however, plays an extremely important role in human communication where language functions as an instrument of thought when you speak your thoughts out loud as an aid to problem solving or thinking.
c. Phatic Interaction Another function is phatic interaction where messages with no factual content help maintain a comfortable relationship between people.
Such commentary as “Bless you” to a sneeze, and “Good morning” or Nice day” as a greeting are examples of phatic messages.
The topic of phatic communication can be culturally diverse.
Rundi women in Burundi, Central Africa, for instance, are likely to say “I must go home now or my husband will beat me” as a phatic form of leave taking.
In other cultures, the people prefer silence and little is said in a phatic sense.
d. Control of Reality Communication may also function to assist in the control of reality.
The use of prayers or blessings which involve supernatural beliefs, involves the use of language to control the forces that are believed to control one’s life.
For instance, in the Roman Catholic Church, the speaking of 15PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION the words “This is my body” is believed to identify the moment when the communion bread becomes the body of Christ.
e. Keeping of History Language also function as a record for facts, which is represented by all kind of record-keeping ranging from historical records, geographical surveys and business accounts to scientific reports, legislative acts, and public record data banks.
This arena “is an essential domain of language because the material guarantees the knowledge-base of subsequent generations which is a prerequisite of social development and the perpetuation of cultures.
f. Identity Expression The last major function of language is the expression of identity.
Many social situations involve the use of language that unite the participants rather than presenting information.
Cheering at a football game or shouting names or slogans at public meetings can reveal a great deal about people.
- In particular their regional origins, social background, level of education, occupation, age, sex and personality.
Beyond shouting slogans or cheers, language functions to express and maintain your social identity.
Your sociolinguistic identity derives from the way in which people are organized into hierarchically ordered social groups or classes.
The way people talk reveals a great deal about their social position and their level of education.
Homo sapiens have over centuries evolved the anatomy necessary to produce and receive sounds: in a short time, they have created cultural systems in which those sounds have taken on meaning by representing things, feelings and ideas.
This combination of evolution and culture has led to the development of four part process that enables you as human being to share your internal states with other human beings.
In short, you can receive, store, manipulate and generate symbols to represent your personalized realities.
But to an extent, your language behaviour is mediated by your culture.
How you use language, the forms of language that you use, and the purposes to which you choose to apply language are subject to cultural diversity.
Cultural diversity in language behavior is one of the most difficult and persistent problems encountered in ethnic conflict and communication.
For this reason we will examine three prominent issues in language.
16PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.2 Language and Culture Language is the key to the heart of a culture, so related are language and culture that language holds the power to maintain national or cultural identity.
Language is important in ethnic and national sentiments because of its powerful and visible symbolism; it becomes a core symbol or rallying point.
The impact of language as a strong symbol of national identity may be seen in the history of the Basques, an ethnic group in the North of Spain.
The Spanish government from 1937 to the mid – 1950s made desperate attempts to destroy the Basque culture and forbid the use of the Basque language.
Books in the language were publicly burn, and Basque names could not be used in baptism ceremonies.
All Basque names in official documents were translated into Spanish, and inscriptions on public buildings and tombstones were removed.
Because of this relationship between language and cultural identity, steps are often taken to limit or prohibit the influence of foreign languages.
Costa Rica for instance, recently enacted a new law that restricts the use of foreign languages and even imposes fines on those who break it.
Under the law, companies that advertise in a foreign language also must include a Spanish translation in large letters.
Likewise, Iran has banned companies from using Western names.
Turkey’s government is considering fining anyone who uses foreign names on the airwaves.
3.2.1 Verbal Processes As already implied, and you should by now suspect, it is impossible to separate language from culture.
In its most basic sense, language is a set of characters or elements and rules for their use in relation to one another”.
These characters or elements are symbols that are culturally diverse.
That is, they differ from one culture to another.
You may readily discover this when you study another language.
Not only are the symbols (words) and sounds for those symbols different, but so are the rules (phonology, grammar, syntax, and intonation) for using those symbols and sounds.
Word differences are obvious in various languages.
In English, you live in a house.
In Spanish, you live in a casa, in Thai, people live in bans.
Phonology also varies culturally.
While in English there are 21 consonant sounds and 5 vowels that are combined to form 38 various sounds, the Filipino language has 16 consonants and 10 vowels forming 26 phonemes.
Grammatical structures are unique to each language as well.
In English there are both singular and plural nouns and pronouns, but in Korean, “the distinction between singular and plural is made by the context of the sentence”.
In English, verb tenses express contrast between past, present and future acts, but in 17PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Vietnamese, the same verb reflects all three and the time of the action is inferred from context.
These examples tell you that if you want to communicate in another language, you must know not only the symbols (words) of that language, but also the rules that govern the uses and symbols.
Language is much more than just a symbol and rule system that permits communication with another person: it is also the means by which people think and construct reality.
Nanda and Warms (2005) point out.
“Language does more than just reflect culture.
It is the way in which the individual is introduced to the order of the physical and social environment.
Therefore, language would seem to have a major impact on the way in which the individual perceives and conceptualizes the world”.
3.2.2 Patterns of Thought You may easily assume that everyone speaks and thinks in the same way – just in different languages.
But, this is not the case: how people think and how they ultimately speak is determined to a large extent by their culture.
This process is known as linguistic relatively.
Roger and Steinhart (2005) define this as “The assignment of meaning to a message concerns human perceptions about the relationship between symbols and their referents.
Language is used to think as well as speak.
Linguistic relativity is the degree to which language influences human thought and meanings.
It purposes that in human thought, language intervenes between the symbols and the ideas to which the symbols refer”.
As verbal behaviour differs from one culture to another, thought processes and perceptions of reality also differ.
The essence of linguistic relativity is exemplified in the theoretical formulations of Benjamin Lee Whoff, which suggest that language determines the categories of thoughts open to individuals.
As Whorf has indicated “We cut up and organize the spread and flow of events as we do largely because through our mother tongue, we are parties to an agreement to do so, not because nature itself is segmented in exactly that way for all to see”.
What has become known as Sapir Whorf hypothesis argues that language is not simply a means of reporting experience but, more important, it is a way of defining experience.
Nanda (2004) provides an excellent example of the Sapir – Whorf concept in practice: If my language has only one term – brother in law that is applied to my sister’s husband, my husband’s brothers, and my husband’s sisters’ husbands, I am led by my language to perceive all of these relatives in a similar way.
Vocabulary, through what it groups together under one 18PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION label and what it differentiates with different labels is one way in which language shapes our perception of the world.
In a similar sense, in the third language, there are no single words that are equivalent to the English words for uncle and aunt.
Instead, Hindi has different words for your father’s older brother, father’s younger brother, mother’s older brother, mother’s older brother-in-law, and so forth.
Although complete acceptance of linguistic relativity is controversial, its application to culture and language is clear; “There is the closest of relationships between language and thought – language may not determine the way we think, but it does influence the way we perceive and remember, and it affects the ease with which we perform mental tasks.
Thus, you can clearly see that culture influences language by way of its symbols and rule as well as your perceptions of the universe.
Equally important is the fact that meaning takes different forms as you move from one culture to another.
3.3 Culture and Meaning As a child, you most likely asked your parents: What does that word mean?’ This question reflects the way language is viewed.
It suggests that people tend to look for meanings in words themselves, but you are incorrect if you believe that words possess meaning.
It is far more accurate to say that people possess meaning and that words elicit these meanings.
The same word can elicit different meanings.
For instance, to one person, the word grass might mean something in front of the house that is green, has to be watered, and must be mowed once a week to another person grass may mean something that is rolled in paper and smoked.
All people draw on their backgrounds, decide what a word means.
People have similar meanings only to the extent that they have had or can anticipate similar experiences.
If your past experience includes baseball, then rope is a line drive.
And it is likely that you and a physician will respond very differently to the word cancer.
A word, then, can elicit many meanings.
Linguists have estimated that the five hundred most used words in the English language can produce over fourteen thousand meanings.
There simply are many more ideas, feelings to represent than there are words to represent them.
If culture is included as a variable in the process of abstracting meaning, the problems become all the more acute, for culture, teaches us both the symbol (dog) and what the symbol represents (a furry, domesticated animal).
When you are communicating with someone from your own culture, the process of using words to represent your experiences is 19PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION much easier because within a culture people share many similar experiences.
But when communication is between people from diverse cultures, different experiences are involved and the process is more troublesome.
Objects, events, experiences and feelings have the labels or names they do because a community of people arbitrarily decided to so name them.
If this notion is extended to the intercultural setting, you can see that diverse cultures can have both different symbols and different responses.
4.0 CONCLUSION From these examples, you can see that culture exerts an enormous influence on language because cultures teaches not only the symbols and rules for using those symbols, but more importantly the meaning associated with the symbols.
Further, culture influences the way people use language.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit has exposed you to several function and importance to which language is used.
It has also shown that culture influences human experience, process, and language use.
In part, because language and perception are intertwined, language use varies from culture to culture.
Words changes over time and from place to place according to individual experience.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify the various functions of language in your community?
2.
What do you think is the relationship between language and culture?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Rothenberg P. S. (2005).
Race, Class and Gender in United States.
New York: McClain Publishers.
Hassan, O.C, and Halliday, B.
(2002).
Language and Culture.
New York: Gilbert Pub.
Inc 20PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION UNIT 4 LANGUAGE BARRIERS IN CONFLICT AND RESOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Language-Based Barriers to Communication 3.1.1 Meaning can be misunderstood 3.1.2 Language can Shape our Attitudes 3.1.3 Language Can Cause Polarization 3.1.4 Language can be Sexist 3.2 How to Use Language Effectively 3.2.1 Use Accurate Language 3.2.2 Use Vivid Language 3.2.3 Use of Immediate Language 3.2.4 Use Appropriate Language 3.2.5 Use Metaphorical Language 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Although it takes little physical effort to say something to someone, it also takes mental effort to ensure that what is said conveys ones intended meaning.
Even if you create what you think is the perfect message, the possibility always exists that the receiver of that message will misinterpret the message or find it ambiguous.
Therefore, the receiver must also make an effort to receive the intended message.
Misunderstanding and barrier occur for numerous physical mental and cultural reasons, ineffective use of language and communication are chiefly some of this reasons.
2.0 OBJECTIVES Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to: • explain language based barriers to communication • explain effective us of language in communication.
21PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Language–Based Barriers to Communication There are over 450 different languages in use everyday in Nigeria.
The number includes various dialects spoken in various regions of the country.
We must recognize that communication is a symbolic interaction rich in subtlety.
It will never be strictly concrete or objective and always carry the potential for misunderstanding and conflict.
Misunderstandings occur for numerous physical, mental and cultural reasons.
Ineffective use of language is one reason.
Among the most common language based barriers to communication are bypassing, indiscrimination and polarization.
3.1.1 Meaning Can Be Misunderstood What is said and what is heard and understood by the listener often differ.
Such misunderstanding between a sender and a receiver is called bypassing.
How many times have you said to someone “But that is not what I meant?” Bypassing usually results from the false belief that each word has only one meaning and that words have meaning in themselves; but a glimpse at our everyday language quickly illustrates that most words have multiple uses and meanings.
Words acquire many meanings because they change over time and are used and understood differently in various cultures and regions and often they reflect the knowledge and situation of the user.
Therefore it is crucial as communicator and peace professionals to stay alert to the fact that words can be interpreted differently by different people.
Some speakers deliberately introduce bypassing by using euphemisms or double speak to soften or distort meanings.
It is important to be aware of this while you interact with people.
Politicians and advertisers for instance sometimes will say one thing in order to get people to believe or accept something else.
As a listener, you should critically examine what is being said.
Both speaking and listening and conflict situation involve ethical considerations.
Issues of conscience i.e.
what is right or wrong and what is beneficial or harmful are everyone’s responsibility.
How to Reduce Bypassing a.
Be Approachable.
Encourage open and free communication.
The most frequent barrier to effective communication; and consequently dispute and conflict is the unwillingness to listen to others.
Allow others to question and paraphrase your messages and show respect 22PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION for their enquiries; Being patient and receptive is not always easy but the effort will ensure a clear exchange of information b.
Be Person–Minded, not Word-Minded.
Think about words and their meanings, but you should also consider the persons using the words and the meanings they might give to them.
Constantly question your own interpretation i.e.
“This is what the word mean to me, but what does it mean to others.
c. Query and Paraphrase.
Ask questions and paraphrase your message or the meaning you have derived from others message whenever there is a potential for misunderstanding.
Differences in background, age, gender, perception may affect communication.
If you are uncertain, ask others to explain and if it is in a peace workshop you may ask the mediator to paraphrase.
Restating a message in your own words gives you and the other party or the sender a chance, to check that you receive a similar message to what sent.
As the importance and complexity of a message in conflict resolution situation is, so is the need to ask questions and paraphrase.
d. Be Sensitive to Contexts.
Consider the verbal and situational contexts in which communication occurs.
The meaning of a word can be more precisely interpreted by considering the words, sentences and paragraphs that precede and follow it and the setting in which communication takes place.
3.1.2 Language Can Shape Our Attitudes Indiscrimination is the neglect of individual differences and the overemphasis of similarities.
It is also a form of perceptual set in which a person chooses to ignore differences and changes in events, things and people.
Language plays a significant role in our tendency to see similarities between things even when they do not exist.
Nouns that categorize i.e.
teenager, divorce, student, professor, facilitator, northerner, Niger Delta, government official, politician etc, encourage us to focus on similarities.
Statements such as “Politician are crooks and students cheat in exam may be interpreted to include all politicians and all students, instead of some politicians and some students.
They fail to distinguish between individuals.
Such categorization often results in stereotyping.
Stereotype is categorizing events objects and people without regard to unique individual characteristics.
Stereotypes are often negative but they may be positive, for example, all teachers are dedicated professional or all mediators are dedicated peace professionals or “All environmentalists are concerned citizens.” Whether the stereotyping is 23PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION negative or positive, the problem is the same.
Individual qualities are ignored.
Stereotyping is quick and easy to do because it does not require analysis, investigation, or thought.
By precluding distinctions, stereotypes give us neat, oversimplified categories that facilitate our evaluation of people situations and events.
There are ways to reduce discrimination in our interaction.
Indexing points out differences that distinguish various members of a group and thus reduces indiscrimination.
Indexing identifies the specific person, idea, event or object to which a statement refers i.e.
“politicians are corrupt”, athletes are dumb or any statement that lumps people ideas, events, or objects into a single category immediately ask,” which ones are you talking about?” No matter what people may think, not all politicians are corrupt.
Politician A is different from politician B, and politician B is different from politician C. The same is true of Athletes.
They might belong to a class or group that has an identity and whose members have similarities, but the group is composed of individuals, each different from the other.
3.1.3 Language Can Cause Polarization Polarization is the tendency to view things in terms of extremes – rich or poor, beautiful or ugly, large or small, high or low, good or bad, intelligent or stupid though most things exist somewhere in between.
This definitive way of thinking is aggravated by aspects of language.
Polarization can be destructive, escalating conflict to the point at which two parties simply cannot communicate.
This escalation is referred to as the pendulum effect in peace studies.
The pendulum represents a person’s perception of reality, which includes feelings attitude, opinions and value judgements about the world.
When the pendulum is hanging in the centre, a person’s perception is considered to be realistic, virtuous, intelligent, sane, honest and honorable.
Of course, most of us believe that our pendulums are at or near the centre most of the time.
When two individuals disagree in their perception of reality, their pendulum begins to move in opposite directions.
The distance the pendulum swings represents their differences in opinion or conviction.
As the conversation intensifies, each remark provokes a stronger reaction from the party to whom it is directed until both parties are driven to positions at opposite extremes.
For instance, when two roommates argue over whose turn it is to clean, one might begin by saying “it is your turn.
I did it the last time.” The other is likely to respond.
“No I did it the last time.
Now its your turn”.
If the disagreement continues and no solution is found, both will become more entrenched in their positions and their comments may turn into personal attacks”.
The situation can degenerate to the point at which one of the other threatens to move out.
Such an extreme outcome is typical of discussion driven by the pendulum effect.
24PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Emotions can eventually run so high that the differences between the parties seem insurmountable and a mutually agreeable settlement seems unattainable.
Speaker can avoid the danger of polarization by recognizing the potential for misunderstanding and by making statement that do not represent nuanced extreme 3.1.4 Language can be Sexist There is a difference in how men and women may use language and converse with one another.
Some communication and language theorists believe that men tend to use language to assert status whereas women use language to establish and maintain social relationships.
They also believe that men use language to dominate or compete.
The result, according to them is that the game of communication for men and women is the same but the rules are different.
When men and women communicate with each other, there is the potential for class and conflict because of different language use.
The problem is magnified when sexist language is used either consciously or unconsciously.
Our goal should be to use gender- inclusive language.
Language that does not discriminate against male or female.
Unfortunately, English language is structured with an inherent bias in favor of men.
There are, for example, no singular gender – neutral pronouns in the English language.
Therefore, traditionally, the masculine pronouns (he, him, and his) have been used to refer to people in general, even if the referent could be a male or female.
User of the masculine pronoun is not incorrect grammatically, but its use in generic situations is a social issue.
Language sets expectations that at times discriminate against the stereotype use of he and him and the general absence of she or her subtly, but powerfully give the impression that men hold important roles but women do not.
Thus our language creates the expectation that the female gender is inactive and does not hold important roles.
Furthermore, sexist language can be misleading, we use only he or she when describing the symptoms, the effect ,the reasons, and the treatment, the group that was not included in the discussion might believe that it is a “male disease” or a “female disease” and does not pertain to them.
If that happens half or more of the audience members will not pay attention to the speech and thus might not heed the precautions and expose them to greater danger.
Sexual stereotypes and the assumption that the male gender is superior to the female gender characterize sexist language.
In most society, sexist language involves attitude as much as the use of specific words.
Words 25PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION with a positive connotation are used to describe males: independent, logical, strong, confident, aggressive.
Females are associated with words having negative connotations – dependent, illogical, weak.
For instance, a sentence like this could be termed a sexist communication”.
She is the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the company and she is a woman”.
Chizoba got that position because she is a woman”.
These sentences describe women who have risen to high authority positions or that the only reason Chizoba got the position was because she is a woman.
In other words, they imply that women are less qualified than men.
Stereotypes do not occur in a social vacuum.
On the contrary, they often exert powerful influence on the lives of those who are stereotyped.
Gender stereotypes influence perceptions and behaviour of both men and women.
Stereotypes of women affect both how they are treated in society and how they see themselves.
Language and substituting gender – inclusive terms represent a positive step toward doing away with them.
Other stereotypes are reinforced in the use of homophobic language.
When someone asks another to “tell me what to look for so I can recognize gays and lesbians and then avoid them”.
The speaker is demonstrating both insensitivity to individuals and a general negative categorization of a group of people, each of whom is unique.
Metaphors used in our culture to describe men and women are often sexist.
A metaphor is a figure of speech that associated two things or ideas, not commonly linked, as a means of description.
These stereotypical animal metaphors illustrate the use of sexist language.
Men are likely to be described as aggressive wolf, and women as harmless pets i.e.
kitten or chick or as unattractive animals i.e.
cow, pig, dog.
The effective communicator must avoid such negative metaphorical stereotyping.
Find more positive metaphors related to men, and use inclusive language in general.
It is important that the language we use as peace students be inclusive and not demeaning to any group of individuals.
Language influences how we see others around us.
Inappropriate language causes perceptual and social problems that should not be tolerated in any society.
3.2 How to Use Language Effectively The ability to use language efficiently and effectively as peace students will require not good education alone but, years of consistent practice.
Although many variables will influence the effectiveness of language use, five aspects of language according to Seiler (2005) merit special attention.
They are accuracy, vividness, immediacy, appropriateness and metaphor.
26PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.2.1 Use Accurate Language Using accurate language is critical to speaking.
Choosing a wrong word can distant your intended message, misguide your receiver, and undermine your credibility.
When you speak you need to ensure that your goal should be precision.
Do not leave room for misinterpretation.
You should constantly ask yourself “What do I want to say” and “what do I mean?
And when necessary, consult a dictionary to be sure you have chosen the correct word to express your message.
The more words you can use accurately, the more likely it is that you will find the one you need to make your meaning clear.
You must expand your vocabulary.
Two of the best ways to do this are through listening to others and reading.
Pay attention to words that you do not understand.
Whenever, you come across an unfamiliar word, determine the context in which it is sued, and consult a dictionary to find its meaning.
Once you have acquired a new word, try to put it to use.
Words that are not used are typically forgotten.
Expanding your vocabulary takes effort and time, but with practice, it can become part of your daily routine.
A word of warning: As you develop your vocabulary, avoid the temptation to use long or little-known words when short or common words would serve the purpose.
Also be sure you know the shades of meanings and connotations of new words.
Before you use them, remember that words may have different meanings for different people.
Sometimes a message is unclear because it is not structured effectively.
Poor sentence and word usage can wreak havoc on a statement’s clarity.
3.2.2 Use Vivid Language To communicate effectively, make your message animated and interesting.
Direct fresh language given in the active voice can bring a sense of excitement, urgency and forcefulness to what you say.
Such vividness tells your audience that they had better listen because what you have to say is important.
For example, suppose an NGO is trying to raise money for homeless Bakassi people.
It could take one of two approaches in seeking a donation from you: (i) present statistics to illustrate the number of 27PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION people who are believed to be homeless.
(2) Present cases of actual individuals who are homeless, including children and their families.
The first approach is rational, informative, abstract, and emotionally distance.
The second approach is emotional urgent, concrete and forceful.
The vividness of the second approach is likely at least to get your attention and perhaps influence you to contribute.
According to social psychologist, vivid language affects us in several ways.
It is more persuasive than a flat, pallid presentation of information, because it is more memorable and has an emotional impact.
Vivid messages are more likely to create readily retained and recalled mental images.
People tend to listen more attentively to vivid messages than to mainspring or uninteresting messages.
3.2.3 Use of Immediate Language Verbal immediacy identifies and projects the speakers feelings and makes the message more relevant to the listener.
Verbal immediacy draws listeners in and involves them in the subject at hand.
The following statements illustrate different levels of verbal immediacy.
The first sentence displays a high immediacy level and the last displays a low immediacy level: 1.
We certainly will enjoy the football game 2.
You and I will enjoy the football game.
3.
I think you and I may enjoy football 4.
People often enjoy football games The first statement is directly related to the speaker, the listener, and the situation.
It is assertive, and the speaker makes a connection with the listener by using the word we.
In each successive statement, the speaker decreases the intensity of this association with the listener and the event.
The language becomes less immediate, more distant in tone.
Verbal immediacy also makes the speaker appear relaxed, confidence, competent and effective.
Also receivers tend to view messages characterized by immediacy as similar to their own beliefs more readily than those cast in language related to the speaker, topic, or receiver.
3.2.4 Use Appropriate Language 28PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Each time you speak, your listeners have specific expectations about the kind of language you will use.
Different kinds of language are appropriate to different situations.
For instance, the language you would use in addressing the student union president or leader in your school would be much more formal than the language you would use when chatting with friends.
You are not likely to call the president by a nickname and would be equally unlikely to call a friend Dr or Mr. or Mrs. or Ms, except in jest.
Using language that is inappropriate for a given situation damages your credibility and your message might be misunderstood or misinterpreted or disregarded.
It is therefore crucial to assess each speaking situation and adjust your language accordingly.
3.2.6 Use Metaphorical Language According to some language scholars, our way of looking at the world around us is fundamentally metaphorical.
Metaphors help us to structure what we think, how we perceived things, and what we do.
Metaphorical language pervades our everyday language and our thoughts.
A metaphor is a figure of speech in which a word or phrase relates one object or idea to another that is not commonly linked to it.
A successful use of this figurative expression makes an object or idea more clear and vivid.
Metaphorically language is culture bound, and most metaphors have meanings only within a specific language community.
If your receivers cannot identify with a particular metaphor you use, it will be meaningless to them.
4.0 CONCLUSION Learning to use language is important for effective communication in any situation.
The ability to use language determines our success, makes communication personal, and allows us to translate our thoughts, feelings, and experiences into meaningful message to our listener.
The misuse of language is more than simply a matter of misusing words.
It also affects our ability to think.
Since thought and language are inseparable when we cannot find the words to express a thought, perhaps our thinking is not clear.
If our thoughts are not expressed clearly and accurately, misunderstanding is inevitable.
5.0 SUMMARY 29PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION The goal of communication is to exchange meaning and understanding in any conflict resolution situation.
If language did not convey meaning, it would serve little or no purpose.
We tend to associate specific words with specific meanings and to take that relationship for granted, but in reality, words have been arbitrarily paired with meaning.
Words are not actual objects or ideas but symbols that represent objects or ideas.
Meanings therefore are not in words but in people.
As such, language can obscure, distance, or hide meaning and create barriers.
The competent communicator must therefore ensure that he finds ways to understand and be understood.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Which of the language barriers discussed in this unit is most likely to occur in your interactions?
2.
How can language be used or misused.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Aina, S. (2002).
Anatomy of Communications.
Abeokuta: Julian Publishers.
Gundersen D. F. (1988).
Communication and Law Enforcement.
New York: University Press of America.
Gamble T K and Gamble M. (2002).
Communication Works.
New York: McGraw Hills Publishers.
Thomas Kilman (1972).
Resolving Conflict.
New Orlean: Ralple Publication Inc. UNIT 5 LANGUAGE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 30PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Cross Cultural Meaning 3.2 A Semantic Approach 3.3 Rich Points and Key Words 3.4 Theme and Metaphors 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Conflict resolution is a basic human activity that is articulated and conducted in forms that significantly vary across cultures.
Differences in approach rest on contrasting understanding of the nature of conflict and societies.
A good way to study these differences is through a comparative study of language.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify the limits of language in conflict resolution • discuss the limitation of English language as a standardized medium usage in conflict resolution.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cross Cultural Meaning While it is legitimate for English speakers to use their native paradigm as a baseline against which to measure non-English versions, other languages are equally entitled to consider their own paradigms as normative.
It is clear that conflict resolution should be studied with full regard for the source language in which it is articulated and conducted.
Doubt must be cast on the working assumption that foreign languages can be ignored in research about conflict.
The starting point for this unit is the view that communal life is possible only because members of a community possess a set of shared meanings, enabling them to make coherent sense of the world.
The stock of meaning constitutes the common sense of the community and underpins all communication and organized activity.
The mother tongue 31PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION or L1, in Nigeria is the main repositioning of a community’s common sense.
Other systems of symbolic meaning that demarcate communities include religion, population culture, and non-verbal behaviour.
Among the most crucial activities of a community is its handling of conflict, for unless it can contain disagreement and control violence, it has little hope of surviving.
From the premise that language constitutes a community’s shared stock of meaning, we can conclude that the study of language may provide an excellent entry point for investigating how members of a group understand and handle conflict.
A comparative study of conciliation vocabularies reveals that concepts that seem self-evident and straightforward to the native English speaker may weigh significantly different in other languages or not exist at all.
Cross-cultural differences in the depiction of reality are hard to accept, precisely because we take the picture of the world conveyed by our native language to be self evident and project it onto everyone else.
3.2 A Semantic Approach This means comparison of the meaning of key terms across language, and its adoption to study cross-cultural variations in conflict resolution.
This approach is advocated as effective because communication is an essential tool in conflict resolution.
As a complex, interconnected chain of non-verbal and verbal messages and conciliation can advance only when there is synchronized and consecutive understanding at every stage of the process.
For information to be exchanged and the Issues at stake to be discussed, the parties must be able to draw on a shared store of meaning.
Yet, before they can meaningfully discuss substance, they must first arrive at an understanding on form and procedure.
To negotiate peace, rivals must agree on what it is “to negotiate” and what “peace” is looking at language rather than culture as such also helps to avoid cultural stereotyping and sidesteps inconclusive theoretical debates about the nature of culture.
Different languages convey different versions or reality, to group what people think about, for example, the term “reconciliation”, we must first find out what they mean by the equivalent concept in their own language.
What they will expect of; reconciliation will be informed by the local knowledge that informs their understanding of the term.
If reconciliation implies in their language the replacement of hatred by love, then different conduct will be appropriate than if it simply means restoring the routine of day to day life.
32PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION By comparing and contrasting the semantic fields and connotations of concepts like “conflict” and “resolution” in various languages, we can shed light on similarities and differences.
At a practical level, this can help identify potential pitfalls and openings in real life conflict resolution across cultures.
A good point at which to start a linguistic and cultural exercise of this kind is the common place observation that the meaning of a word is lodged within the way of life and outlook of the society that speak it.
By “meaning” I allude to reference, usage, and connotations not just dictionary definition.
Languages do not exist in isolation as abstract systems of signs but within unique, organic habitats, complex ecologies of sensibility and interaction.
This is another way of saying that language and culture are inseparable: language reflects culture and culture is reproduced by language.
Across language and societies, seemingly functionally equivalent words may depict variant versions or reality.
This will be less true of simple universal objects (stone, leaf, and knife) and whole true of abstract ideas and social constructs (family, teenager, democracy).
Each variant has it own characteristic allusions, flavor, and appropriate range and context of usage.
Rooted in a certain cultural soil, words do not always travel well.
It is hard to; convey the ideas of “homeless” or “retirement colony” adequately in cultures where the group comes first, and it is almost unthinkable for people (especially aged parents) to be detached from the bosom of their families.
When the interpreter tries to transfer such concepts from one habitat to another, their essence may be “lost in translation” To visualize this point, imagine that words cover semantic fields that can be mapped out.
In English, a given word occupies a certain space, which then becomes the common sense meaning of the word to native English speaker.
The foreign language equivalent may cover more or less space, including meaning not prevalent in the first language, while excluding others.
The connotations of the word also may differ across languages for religious, historical, or environmental reasons.
If a map of a word in English is placed over a map of the word, say, in Igbo, they may be seen to occupy overlapping but not identical areas.
The very out of comparison provides insight into how the two societies separately understand and value the segment of the world referred to by the world.
The assumption is that the greater the cultural gap between the ways of life of societies, the greater the potential semantic gap between concepts and their labels across languages.
Just as a society’s conception of 33PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION insider-outsider relations and the obligations of hospitality are faithfully reflected in language, so is its understanding of conflict and conflict resolution.
From this observation, it follows that close attention to language can provide a convenient entry into the study of culturally grounded differences.
3.3 Rich Points and Key Words Rich points are significant “because of the intricate web of associations and connotations that they convey.
Rich points are the linguistic tips of the cultural iceberg, the locations in discount which signal major disjunctions in interpretation.
Rich point can seriously impede intercultural negotiation and conflict resolution.
How do we locate and identify rich points?
The method suggested here is the juxtaposition of key words across language.
A key word may be a word that encapsulates central features of a culture or, in the case of conflict resolution, refers to an important concept (like “conflict or compromise”) 3.4 Theme and Methaphors In a study conducted by Paul Lederach, he believes that words and metaphors provide enormous insight into how people think about, respond to, and experience conflict in their everyday setting.
He also discovered that “key metaphors revolved around heat, feeling trapped or lost with no way out and understanding conflict as embedded in a network of people.
He concludes that language is always more than a vehicle for communication.
It is also a window into how people organize both their understanding and expression of conflict, often in keeping with cultural patterns and ways of operating.
4.0 CONCLUSION English has been discussed here to demonstrate the general point that different languages-with their various religions, historical, and cultural backgrounds configure conflict resolution in diverse ways.
The English- language discourse of conflict resolution may not be a universal applicable criterion that transcends culture.
5.0 SUMMARY 34PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Conflict resolution as a dynamic concept is a basic human activity that is articulated and conducted in forms that significantly vary across cultures.
These differences are witnessed in approaches to both conflict and its resolution in various cultures.
A good way to allay these differences is an approach that rest in contrasting understanding of the nature of conflict and societies.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Make a vivid explanation of the limit of language in conflict resolution.
2.
Explain the limitation to resolution of conflict in a multi-cultural multi-ethnic society you observed around you?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Raymond Cohen (2001).
Language and Conflict: The Limit of English.
Journal of International Studies Revision Vol.
3, No 1 pp.
25-51.
Pound Ezra (2002).
Language and Culture.
New York: Blade-Prentice Thomas Kilman (1972).
Resolving Conflict.
New Orleans: Ralple Publication Inc. MODULE 2 35PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Unit 1 Language and Reinforcement of Ideology Unit 2 Meaning/Definition of Information and Communication Unit 3 Relationship between Communication and Information Unit 4 Importance of Communication Unit 5 Types of Communication UNIT 1 LANGUAGE, COMMUNICATION AND REINFORCEMENT OF IDEOLOGY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Language Ideology and Power 3.2 Politics and Terminology 3.3 Loaded Words and Africans 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Language is integral to cultural process and an important tool in the struggles and politics of any cultural groups.
Dominant groups in any society establish their language as well as knowledge as the legitimate form in that society.
This group, for language, communication and meaning to be socio-cultural is for them to be political, for them to be inseparable from the production and operation of institutionally structured power.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the relationship between language, ideology and power • explain usage of terminologies and words that portrays Eurocentrism and racism.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 36PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.1 Language, Ideology and Power Language theorists have been concerned with the way in which meanings constructed in text produce and reproduce and maintain power.
Because language is integral to the cultural process, it plays a central role in the struggles and politics of cultural groups.
Dominant groups in any society establish their language (as well as knowledge, pedagogical preferences and so on) as the legitimate form in education and society in general, Halliday and Hassan (1985) posit that “…..for language, communication and meaning to be socio-cultural is for them to be political, for them to be inseparable from the production and operation of institutionally structured power.
Langsheat (1997) also add that “Language is deeply and inescapably bond with producing reproducing and maintaining arrangements of power which are unequal.
A critical view of language and literacy encourages scrutiny of attitudes, values and assumptions about social knowledge i.e.
gender relationships.
The reading of texts depending on how one is positioned in relation to that text, and the privileging of particular meanings in text.
Gilbert (1993) posits that “To explore the social context of language practices is inevitably to explore the network of power that are sustained and brought into existence by such practices.
It is to explore how language practices are used in powerful institutions like the state school, the law, the family, the church, and how these practices contributes to the maintenance of inequalities and injustices.
In any complex society (for instance Nigeria) many different ideologies operate, often competing in different discourses and texts.
Texts are defined here as the product of any language event, hence a text can be oral, written, or visual.
Over time certain view-points become embedded in the language and come to be seen as natural, for instance in Nigerian political terminologies you have words like, Northerner, South West, Niger delta, resource control, progressives e.t.c words in this way influences language user’s choices if options in making and showing meaning.
Through the ideologies in our language a particular reality is provided that seems like common sense to the users, but may be in conflict with others view of the world.
What is your own opinion about resource control and other controversial political issues in Nigeria that are represented and produce in texts.
Language is a means of communication and control; we can be both informed and manipulated by texts-often at the same time.
One of your responsibilities therefore as peace study student is to “unpack” the 37PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION ideologies underlying texts and assist others to become aware of how texts may be manipulating us.
Halliday’s functional linguistic theory (1985) provides us with a way of viewing power relationships in language, which are always present.
He sees language as something that desires from a context of a situation.
In any situation users takes on roles and adopt certain styles of language appropriate to the role.
Hence in any text two major functions are always present: it formulates some sort of interpersonal stance.
Halliday refers to these functions as ideational and interpersonal.
Users of a language make choices as to what roles are appropriate.
We make assessment or the power relations involved i.e, between parent and child, teacher and student, husband and wife, doctor and patient and choose certain linguistic features used to describe this as “positioning”.
Speakers writers, film producers ascribe social positions to their listeners/recorders/viewers and take on social “stances” when using language.
The positions we ascribe and the stances we take depend on how we perceive our role and that of others in a group.
Even in friendship some individuals take on more ‘power’ than others, that is they command more attention than others for instance how will you compare a public commentary on controversial political issue by Chief Gani Fawehinmi and another obscure political commentator, you will discover that the news worthiness’ of the two individual will not be same.
In any society, some members may not be in the position to speak or be listened to.
The positions we construct generally conform to appropriate institutionalized behavior and values (culturally determined).
Texts present information in particular ways (based on ideologies) and construct subjectivities i.e that is (the ways people come to see themselves and the value positions they take up) in certain more or less predictable ways.
In some romantic novels authors tend to construct males as active and female as passive.
Advertisements aim to position reader/viewers to construct certain images of modern life and persuade them to take on a product or service as socially desirable.
We position ourselves and others through language.
Language users, speakers or sign-language users, writers and readers use language for some purpose in varying social contexts.
As such, language users draw on their power and status in particular social groupings.
The use of language involves positioning others in certain ways.
It creates certain kind of subjectivities that express or reflect particular cultural values and power orientations.
For example, the reports on asylum seekers trying to reach Europe often used terms such as “illegal” or “cue jumpers”.
An alternative construction is to talk about them as “refugees” or dispossessed people”.
38PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.2 Politics and Terminology “Culturally deprived”, “economically disadvantaged” and “underdeveloped” are other terms which mislead and distort our awareness of reality.
The application of the term reflects a value judgment.
Burgest (2003) suggests that the term ‘economically disadvantaged” be replaced by economically exploited while culturally deprived should be replaced with culturally dispossessed.
These terms present a perspective and implication that provide an entirely different frame or reference as to the reality of the third world experience in the western societies.
Similarities, many nations of the third world are described as “underdeveloped”.
These less wealthy nations are generally those that had suffered under colonialism and neo-colonialism.
The developed nations are those that exploited their resources and wealth.
Therefore, rather than referring to these countries as underdeveloped, a more appropriate and meaningful designation may be exploited.
Terms such as ‘technologically disadvantaged’ or ‘economically disadvantaged’ is better appreciated and this places the responsibility for their own conditions on those being so described.
This is known as ‘blaming’ the victim.
It places responsibility for poverty on the victim of poverty.
It removes the blame from those in power that benefits from, and continues to permit poverty.
Another example of ideological imposition through words involves the use of ‘non white; minority or third world’ to describe people of other color as non-white is to use whiteness as the standard and norm against which to measure all others.
Use of the term third world; to describe people of other color suggests inherent bias for non-white.
The term ‘third world’ gained increased usage after the 1955 Banding Conference of non-aligned nations which represented a third force outside of the two world superpowers.
The first world represents the United States, Western Europe and their sphere of influence.
The ‘second world’ represents the Soviet Union and its sphere.
The “Third World’ represents, nations that were, or are, controlled by the ‘first world’ or west.
Better parts of these are nations of Africa Asia and Latin America.
3.3 Loaded Words and Africans 39PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Conflicts among diverse peoples within African nations are often referred to as ‘tribal warfare’ while conflicts among the diverse peoples within European countries are never described in such terms.
If the rivalries between the Igbo and Hausa or Yoruba in Nigeria are described as ‘tribal; why not the rivalries between Serbs in former Yugoslavia, or Scots and English in Great Britain, Protestants and Catholics in Ireland.
Conflicts among African peoples in particular have religious, cultural, economic and /or political roots.
If we can analyse the roots of conflicts among European peoples in terms other than ‘tribal warfare’, certainly we can do the same with African peoples, including correct reference to the ethnic groups or nations involved.
The generalized application of ‘tribal’ in reference to Africans as well as the feature to acknowledge the religious, cultural and social diversity of African peoples is a decidedly racist dynamic.
It is part of the process whereby Euro-Americans justify, or avoid confronting, their oppression of third world peoples.
Africans has been particularly insulted by this myopic and selfish treatment which gives Africa a dark image.
This image, widespread in Western culture evokes an Africa covered by jungles and inhabited by uncivilized, cannibalistic, pagan, savage, barbaric and peoples.
The dark Africa image avoids the geographical reality.
Less than 20 percent of the African continent is wooded savanna, for example.
The image also ignores the history of African cultures and civilizations.
Ample evidence suggests this distortion of reality was developed as a convenient rationale for the European and American slave trade crime.
The western powers, rather than exploring, were exploiting and christianizing “uncivilized” peoples.
4.0 CONCLUSION While we may not be able to change the language, we can definitely change our usage of the language; we can avoid using words that degrade people as peace study students.
We can also make a conscious effort to use terminology that reflects a progressive perspective, as opposed to a distorting perspective.
It is also important for educators to provide students with opportunities to explore racism in language and to increase their awareness of it as well as learning terminology that is positive and does not perpetuate negative human values.
Students need to become aware of the beliefs and ideologies operating in texts and consider other ways of constructing texts that are less oppressive.
40PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 5.0 SUMMARY To recognize the racism in language is an important first step.
Consciousness of the influence of language on our perceptions can help negate much of that influence.
What is needed is not so much a change in language as an awareness of the power of words to condition attitudes.
If we can at least recognize the underpinning of prejudice as peace study students, we may be in a position to deal with the effects in our relationships.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What in your own opinion is the relationship between language ideology and power?
2.
Make an analysis of the terminologies that portray Euro-centrism and racism that you have studied in this course?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Rothenberg P.S.
(2005).
Race, Class and Gender in United States.
New York: Macline Publisher.
Hassan, O.C.
Halliday, B.
(2002).
Language and Culture.
New York: Gilbert Publisher Inc. Gundersen D.F.
and Hopper Robert (1984).
Communication and Law Enforcement.
Boston: Hamper and Row, Publishers, Inc. UNIT 2 MEANING/DEFINITION OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 41PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Information Communication 3.2 Components of Communication 3.3 Channels or Media of Communications 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Information and communication are two sides of a coin in the process of disseminating knowledge, education and resolution of conflicts among human beings.
It is also of utmost relevance to all human activities.
In the process of communicating, information is disseminated and exchanged.
What then is information and communication?
That is exactly what this unit is all about.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: • explain communication and information • identify the relationship between information and communication • explain components of communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Information Communication Information has been severally defined, and it means many things to different people.
Information is regarded as news, facts, knowledge and processed data.
However, information can be defined as processed data, that is, data that has been processed into worthwhile form.
When information is seen from this perspective, it is being regarded as an assemblage of data in a detailed form capable of communication and use.
This implies that information entails attaching meanings to raw facts.
Information can also be considered as what it is known beyond random chance prediction.
When it is seen in this way, information must reduce the uncertainty the recipient has about a particular issue or state of the world.
Also, information can mean an idea communicated from one individual or group to another individual or group.
The idea 42PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION communicated pass through a medium which can be oral, written or by electronic means.
From the definitions or descriptions provided above, we can draw some basic characteristics of information.
These are: • Information increases the level of recipient knowledge • Information resolves uncertainty • Information adds value to decision making • Information extends the frontiers of knowledge, it is a surrogate of knowledge • Information is available in published and unpublished formats.
• Information is relevant only when it is organized, available to users, and used.
Also, Buckland (1991) viewed information from three perspectives.
These perspectives are: • Information as a process i.e.
when someone is informed of what he/she does not know or knows little about.
Information in this sense refers to the act of informing or communicating knowledge, news or some facts.
• Information as knowledge i.e.
pieces of information being made known to a recipient, serve to reduce uncertainty and improve existing knowledge.
Information in this sense refers to the knowledge communicated.
• Information as a thing or as an object.
This is used attributively for object such as data in documents because they are regarded as being informative or having the quality of communicating or imparting knowledge.
In the developed worlds of Europe and America, high premium is placed on information and information is deemed to have become one of the factors of production, and the most important too.
Economic and technology sectors in those countries continue to achieve remarkable progress via research, and the availability of efficient system to communicate research findings.
In Africa and other third world counties too, the relevance of information to their socio-economic development have been realized.
As such, effective transfer of scientific and technical information that originates locally from within has been identified as a major contributor to the attainment of social, economic, technology, and cultural development.
Information is crucial to human interaction and management activities.
The basic purposes of information are basically to provide information; platform of evaluation; persuasion or organization of other information 43PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION to bring about changes; creation of new concepts, identification of problems, provision of basis for solving problems and decision making; and planning, motivating, and controlling of human activities.
However, for information to be meaningful and serve these purposes, it must be timely, relevant, authoritative, appropriate in scope and medium of dissemination and recent.
Communication on the other hand is seen as a process through which we share information, ideas, and feelings.
The process involves not only the spoken and written words but also the body language, personal mannerism, and styles i.e.
anything that adds meaning to a message.
Also, it is seen as a process whereby people share information about ht things they want to know about.
Encyclopedia Britannica (2004) considers communication as “the exchange of meanings among individuals through common system of symbols”.
Onatola (2004) defines communication in a simple way when he states that: Communication is a process whereby people share information about the things they want to know or hear about.
Information is the man element in communication; information is being communicated in the process of communication.
Communication of information involves transmission of information to individuals, group of people, organizations, devices etc anywhere in the world.
Information can be communicated in many ways, it could be by written language body language, or by electronic device.
It can be between two individuals or between an individual and a group via printed materials, computer message or broadcast.
Communications like information facilitate pleasure, research, teaching and learning, and crucial to decision making and conflict resolution.
3.2 Components of Communication From the definitions of communication provided above, we can draw out certain elements peculiar to communication.
These are: • Source (Sender and Receivers of Message): senders are individuals who decode messages, and receivers are individuals who encode messages.
All human communication are people oriented, they send and receive information simultaneously.
• Message (Contents of Communication): The ideas and feelings that a sender-receiver wants to share.
What is talked about, the words used to express thoughts and feelings, the sound involved and other non-verbal expression constitute the contents of communicative act.
Ideas and feelings in the communicative act are represented by symbol which can be verbal and non-verbal.
A 44PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION symbol is a sign that represent something else.
Verbal symbols are the signs in language that represent distinct concepts or ideas.
Non-verbal symbols are communication without using words.
It involves the use of facial expression, gesture, posting, appearance etc to pass a message or an idea.
Everything a sender or receiver says (verbal) and does (non-verbal) is a potential message as long as the statement or the act can be interpreted, and effect changes.
3.3 Channels or Media of Communication These are the means through which a message is sent.
The medium of communication is crucial and can affect the understanding of the idea to be communicated.
Messages are sent and receive via all the five human senses (sight, sound, touch, taste, smell).
Sight messages are received when we observe things or people; we send or receive sound messages when we hear respective voice, noise or verbal message; we receive message by touch when we touch the smoothness of otherwise of objects, handshakes, huge etc; taste messages are received when taste with our tongues.
Thus, the senses are the channels through which messages are sent, and everything a sender does or says via the sense organs are potential message as long as there are people to receive and interpret the action.
• Context of Setting: Context is the environment in which communication takes place.
The environments have significant influence on communication and can affect communication without realizing it consciously.
The environment can be formal and informal.
For example, lecturers, speeches and other presentations are better done in boardroom and auditorium.
Whereas, discussions, conversations and other interpersonal discussions are better done in rooms that will permit facial contacts.
Mood of the parties in the communication is also part of context of communication.
Mood of the parties to communication determines the way they interact and nature of their communication encounters.
Mood to a large extent determines how certain environments alter or modify the posture, mannerism, attraction and interaction of the sender and receiver.
• Noise: This is another factor that determines the success of communication or otherwise.
“Noise is anything that interferes with or distorts the message”.
Noise in the context of communication can be internal, external, or language.
Internal noise has to do with the attentiveness or state of mind of the sender and receiver of the message.
It can also be attributed to the psychological make-up, intellectual ability, or physical 45PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION conditions of the parties to communication.
This occurs when their minds, thoughts or feelings are focused on something other than the issue being communicated.
Distrust, prejudice, lack of interest, and beliefs are also the sources of internal noise.
External noise is environmental constraint that prevents proper understanding of the message being passed across.
Example of this are noise from passers-by around offices, homes etc, noise from people unconnected with the communication, noise from communication media such radio, telephone etc.
and uneasy feelings between the parties in communicative act due to some unbearable conditions (hot, cold, noise, unorganized environment).
Language of communication can also be noise in communication.
This occurs when language of communication is not understood by the receiver or he is uncertain about the actual meaning of words used by the other party to the communication.
Ambiguous, profane, racist, ethnic, sexist etc words constitute noise in the process of communication and they can distort all or part of the message.
• Feedback: This is the reaction of the receiver on the extent of comprehension of the message sent to him or her i.e.
information returned to the sender of message.
Feedback is crucial to communication because it allows the parties to the process to know whether ideas, thoughts or feelings have been shared in the desired way.
Feedback can be positive and negative, and can originate from internal and external sources.
Positive feedback encourages positive behaviour or action; negative feedback discourages positive reactions.
It can be corrective in nature and can help in eliminating unwanted behaviours.
Positive and negative feedback emanate internally, when from the feedback one gives himself or herself from a transaction and behavior; and externally when the feedback is from others involved in the communication.
Effective communication is dependent on sensitivity to feedback from oneself and others.
• Effect: This is the main essence of communication.
Ideas thoughts, and reaction shared in the process are to cause change or influence behaviors, knowledge and education.
The effect of communication can be emotional, physical, cognitive or combination of the three.
Effect of communication will be emotional when it raises feelings of anger, joy, or sadness.
It is physical when it causes violent reactions, argument and public disobedience; and cognitive when it brings about new insights, new knowledge or idea, silence, confusion, or formulation of new opinions or reconsideration of the existing ones.
46PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION And the effect can be combination of the three human domains as earlier stated.
A message can cause anger (emotional reaction) which may lead to public disturbance (physical reaction) that may eventually result into public order and new insights (cognitive reaction).
4.0 CONCLUSION From the above so far we have shown that communication is distinct from information.
Although, the two are often used interchangeably, or confusedly applied in different situations to connotes the same meaning.
In real sense this unit has shown that they are quiet different from each other in both context and usage.
5.0 SUMMARY Information and communication as shown in this unit can be summed up thus; - communication is an act while information is the content.
• Communication is a abroad term that not only involves talking to people but also entails listening to them.
Thus it includes a mutual exchange of facts, thoughts, opinions or emotions.
• Information, on the other hand, is the knowledge obtained from investigation, study or instruction.
• Information forms the background for solution to identified problems and makes real and potential contribution to serious human endeavours.
It can be gathered, and recorded but may not necessitate response.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Give an explanation of the terms information and communication as a distinct and related units of study?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Gundersen, D. F. and Hopper Robert (1984).
Communication and Law Enforcement.
Boston: Hamper and Row, Publishers Inc. Urmila Rai and Rai M. (2002).
Effective Communication.
Mumbai, Indian: Himalaya Pub.
House.
47PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Oyedokun, A.A. (2007).
Third World Information Service.
Ibadan: Information Service Ltd. UNIT 3 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 48PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Self Understanding and Insight 3.2 Establishment of Meaningful Relationships 3.3 Influence and Persuasion 3.4 Information and Conflict 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have attempted conceptual definition of information and communication in Unit of this module.
Information is considered as processed data that can advance knowledge and add value to decision making.
The relevance of information is underscored in its use in planning, decision making, and execution of plans.
Communication on the other hand is seen as transfer of information (message) from an individual to another or group of individuals.
The process involves people, message, channels, environment, feedback and effect.
Going by these, we can conclude that information and communication are inextricable complements.
Information is the main constituent of communication.
This unit looks into the relationship between communication and information.
Information and communication serve some function sin human lives; this is due to their interrelatedness.
Information and communication provide self understanding and insight to other peoples behaviors; information and communication help in establishing meaningful relationships, and attitudinal change.
Also, their relatedness can be viewed from their continued relevance to human race.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the relationship between information and communication • explain the relationship between information and conflict.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Self-Understanding and Insight Information and communication provide opportunity for self- understanding and insight to behaviour of others.
When one gets to know about an individual, certain information about him/her is 49PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION communicated.
This shows that information communication is necessary to develop self-awareness, and getting to know other people.
Let us bear in mind that communication process involves sender and receiver, messages (information), channels, setting, feedback, noise and effect.
The feedback in communication process provides meaningful information for self understanding and discovery.
Through the pieces of information received as feedback, it is possible to learn about trusting and understanding, to take decision on conflicts, and to resolve conflicts.
3.2 Establishment of Meaningful Relationships Meaningful human relationships exist in the atmosphere of peace, mutual trust and understanding, concern for the needs and wants of others in relationship.
Effective information communication facilitates interpersonal, small group, public, media and computer-assisted communication contacts.
Also information and communication facilitated the human need for inclusion i.e.
the need to be with others and the need for social contact, need for control, and need for attention.
Human beings by nature value acceptance and appreciation from fellow human begins, and as full partner in relationship.
It also promotes the need for control; this is the feeling that one is capable and responsible, has ability to manage situations and influence other people’s behaviour.
The need for affection is human desire to show love and receive love from people.
Furthermore, interaction among person whose cultures are different is common in today’s world.
Information communication facilitates this interaction and exchange of ideas with cultural diversity.
One ethnic group can learn about norms and values of another and vice-versa too intral cultural exchange of ideas; values and personal reality is also enhanced by information communication.
People of the same ethnic group, race or nation will have different values, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviours.
These individuals’ differences require understanding in order to have a conflict free society and mutual understanding.
It is of relevance to note that insensitivity to an individual’s needs and acceptable ways of interacting can affect negatively the ability to relate effectively.
3.3 Influence and Persuasion Influence is the ability of an individual or thin to affect others or to product effects without the use of physical force precaution on the other hand is the extent to which a sender of information influences the values, beliefs, attitudes or behaviour of another person or group (receiver).
The influence is crucial to persuasion in interpersonal, small 50PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION group, public and online communication.
During the process of information communication, individuals have opportunities to influence and persuade other to accept their ways of lives, thinking, behaviours, and attitudes.
Efforts at influencing others and persuading them to do our biddings may sometimes be successful and may not, and to a large extent, successful persuasion depends on effective information communication, and understanding of values, beliefs, and attitudes of the receivers.
3.4 Information and Conflict Conflicts are wherever there are unresolved difference among people or groups in an organization or a community.
Conflicts may arise in response to interpersonal and intercommunal or cultural differences and as a result of defective system of communication.
Conflict can also be seen as a thinning point of events between two individuals or groups that have been having some kind of relationships.
These relationships may exist between employers and employees, teachers and students, government and the governed, communities, nations etc.
Robinson (1998) started that conflict is a lay term in search of scholarly meaning and cannot be defined to cover all the dimension of conflict situations.
He however identified certain element that can be found in any conflict situation.
These elements are: • A conflict situation is acute rather than chronic, although its length is usually unspecified; • Conflict result in behaviour that is frequently pathological such as inefficiency and scape goating; • Conflict threatens the goal of individuals or group involved; • Conflict is relative, what is conflict for one party or participants may not be fore another and; • Conflict causes tension in societies and organizations.
• Conflict has its cost and benefits on individuals, organizations or communities involved in conflicts.
The costs of conflicts are: - Infliction of emotional and physical pains; - Reduction in productivity and quality production as all efforts and time are devoted to conflicts; - There will be disinformation, misinformation and breakdown in communication.
On the other hand, the benefits of conflicts are: 51PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION - Innovation and change; - New method of communication and information provision may develop; - Collective participation in decision making; - Emergence of new power and mode of allocating resources and; - Feeling of oneness among the fending parties.
Information is crucial and central to conflict situation in organizations and societies.
It is one of the courses of conflict, and a veritable means of resolving it.
Inadequate information communication and its breakdown between the government and the governed, and within organizations can result into conflict.
Also, when there are deficiencies in information dissemination system, conflict results.
Information deficiency means that there is misinformation in the community or organization and this can result into discontentment with government policies, can cause information distortions, communication failure, and lack of understanding among the people.
Effective conflict management requires proactive measures in understanding the potential causes of conflict in the society or workplace and devising means of managing them.
Other potential causes of conflict, as identified by Katman and Katman (1990) are: • Individual differences • Intercommunal relations/inter departmental relations • Environmental stress • Unfavorable government actions or policies Dealing with conflict situations require effective problem solving skills and management of information.
Effective management of information dissemination ensures hitch free or conflict free societies or organizations.
Information on government activities and policies should be carefully packaged and disseminated to the members of the society.
Also meetings can be effectively used to resolve conflicts.
At meetings, information are sent and received by the participants, and issues relating to the conflict resolve.
This is because conflict by nature involves two or more individuals or communities.
The meetings for conflict resolution should be problem solving in nature and must be guided by the following principles as postulated by Katman and Katman (1990).
• What is the issue to be resolved?
• Who are the stakeholders?
Who has essential information?
• What role will the participant play: are they to recommend, made the final decision, or provide background information to someone else?
52PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION • When must the decision be made?
Without specific deadlines, the group can wander aimlessly.
What should be on the agenda?
Distribute the agenda before the meeting participants may want to gather information before the meeting.
4.0 CONCLUSION Information and communication are objectively interrelated, and they are inextricable components.
Information is disseminated as messages via communication, and communication is meaningless without information that is being showed or passes across.
Information and communication influence human interactions, understanding; and peaceful co-existence.
5.0 SUMMARY Conflict and information have been discussed in this unit.
Conflict management and its relationship with information examined, information is identified as crucial to conflict because information mismanagement can result into conflict, and at the same time, information is an effective means of resolving conflict.
Also explored in this unit are costs, benefits, and sources of conflict in society and organization.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is the relationship between information and communication?
2.
How useful do you think information is in peace and conflict situations?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Kathman, J. M. and Kathman (1990).
“Conflict Management in the Academic Library.” The Journal of Academic Librarianship Vol.
16 (No.
3) Pp.
145 – 149.
Onanusi, Seye.
“Achieving Industrial Harmony”.
In The Guardian, 11th March, 1997.
Lagos: Guardian Newspaper Limited, P. 25.
53PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Robinson, J.
A.
(1998).
“Crisis” International Encyclopaedia of Social Sciences Vol.
3 New York: Collier-Macmillan.
Pp 510-513.
Ajayi, W and Idakwo, V. (1996).
Communication in English.
Ilaro: Limbs Press.
Gamble, M. (2002).
Communication Works.
New York: McGraw-Hill Publishers.
UNIT 4 IMPORTANCE OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Physical Needs 54PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.2 Identity Needs 3.3 Social Needs 3.4 Practical Needs 3.5 Other Importance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Communication, like other human activities is undertaken to fulfill a purpose, or to meet a need.
Communication, as already established in the period us unit is part and parcel of human being.
Human existence, sustenance and interaction depend on communication.
This unit will however, focus on identifying the importance of communication.
2.0 OBJECTIVES Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the importance of language • identify examples of the physical, identity, social and practical needs that you attempt to satisfy by communicating.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Research in communication has shown that importance of communication has been around longer than you might think.
Contemporary research has found less dramatic ways to illustrate the importance of communication.
In one study of isolation, five subjects were paid to remain alone in a locked room.
One lasted for eight days.
Three held out for two days, one commenting “Never again” the fifth subject lasted two hours (Schouhter, 1959).
While, it is true that all of us need solitude, often more than we get-on the contrary, each of us has a point beyond which we do not want to be alone.
Beyond this point, solitude changes from a pleasurable to a painful condition and in other words, we need people and we also need to communicate.
3.1 Physical Needs Communication is so important that its presence or absence affects physical health.
Studies confirm that people who process a negative experience by talking about, it report improved life satisfaction, as well 55PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION as enhanced mental and physical health relative to those who think privately about it.
According to Adler (2004) in a study conducted by medical researchers and social scientists were it shows that “satisfying relationships can literally be a matter of life and death for people who lead normal lives.
They said further: • People who lack strong relationships have two to three time the risk of early death, regardless of whether they smoke, drink alcoholic beverages or exercise regularly.
• Terminal concern strikes socially isolated people move often than those who have close personal relationship.
• Divorced, separated and widowed people are five to tem times likely to need metal hospitalization than their married counterparts.
• Pregnant women under stress and without supportive relationships have three times more complications than pregnant women who suffer from the same stress but have strongly social support.
• Social isolation is a major risk factor contributing to coronary disease, comparable to physiological factors such as diet, obesity and lack of physical activity.
• Socially isolated people are four times more susceptible to the common cold than those who have active social networks.
• Research like this demonstrates the importance of satisfying personal relationship, and it explains the conclusion of social scientists that communication is essential in peaceful co-existence.
3.2 Identity Needs Communication enables us to survive and indeed, it is the major way by which we learn who we are.
Our sense of identity comes from the way we interact with other people.
Are we of smart or stupid, attractive or ugly, skillful or inept?
The answers to these questions don’t come from looking at the mirror but rather, from how others react to us.
Once we are deprived of communication with others, we would have no sense of identify.
Each and every individual enters the world with little or no sense of identity.
We gain an idea of who we are form the way 56PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION others define us.
The messages we receive in our early childhood are the strongest identity shapers, but the influence of others continues throughout life.
3.3 Social Needs Besides helping define who we are, some social scientists have argued that communication is the principal way relationships are created.
Sometimes we deal with social needs directly by discussing our relationships with others.
But more often, communication satisfies a variety of social needs without our ever addressing them overtly.
Rubin (1988), identifies six categories of social needs we satisfy by communicating: Pleasure (“because it’s fun”, to have a good time”), affection (“to help others, “to let others, know I care”), inclusion (“because I need someone to talk to or be with”), escape (“to put off doing something I should be doing”), relaxation (“because it allows me to unwind”) and control (“because I want someone to do something for me,” to get something I don’t have”).
As you look over this list of social motives, imagine how impossible life would be without communicating.
Because relationships with others are so vital, some theorists have gone so far as to argue that communication is the primary goal of human existence.
3.4 Practical Needs Communication is the tool that lets us tell the hair stylist to take just a little off the sides, direct the doctor to where it hurts, and inform the plumber that the broken pipe needs attention now!
Beyond these obvious needs, a wealth of research has demonstrates that communication is an essential part of effectiveness in a variety of everyday settings.
The abilities to speak and listen effectively have been identified as the most important factors in helping graduates students gain employment and advance in their careers: more important than technical competence, work experience, and academic background.
Communication skill is also seen as the top characteristic employers seek in job candidates.
Beyond work environment communication, married couples who were identified as effective communicators reported happier relationship than less skillful husbands and wives.
3.5 Other Important Needs that Communication Serves is as follows: 57PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Provision of Information and Knowledge During the process of communication, information is disseminated or shared among the communication participants.
When someone is informed what he/she knows changed?
Information in this sense refers to the act of informing or communicating knowledge, news, ideas or facts.
Government policies and programmes of action are carried out through communication before implementation.
Such communication will better inform and educate the populace about the activities of government.
Communication as a Means of Persuasion Communication is also relevant in effecting attitudinal change and persuasion.
It can be used to make individuals or groups have a change of attitude or stance on issues in contention.
Communication here, is used to convince feuding parties or communities to adopt a peaceful cause of action rather than violence.
Entertainment Role Communication do not only inform, persuade and foster goodwill, it also entertains.
Communicative acts mean to entertains are witty and less serious in contents.
It is done with intent to amuse, to reduce tension, and for relaxation.
Examples of these communicative acts are jokes comic relief, words of praise.
Communication informs educate and entertains respectively and collectively.
An act of communication can play these roles at once.
A drama sketch staged to entertain may also educate the audience about some government policies, and at times inform them of the benefit of such policies.
4.0 CONCLUSION An act of communication is done with intent to achieve a purpose.
That intended purpose and the needs it serve to meet makes communication important and relevance.
The importance and relevance of communication boarders on its roles in social, physical, identity and practical needs.
From the fore going one can conclude that communication is crucial and an indispensable factor in human existence and relationships.
58PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 5.0 SUMMARY Communication is important for a variety of reasons.
Besides satisfying practical needs, meaningful communication contributes to physical health, plays a major role in defining our identity, and forms the basis for our social relationships.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the importance of communication?
2.
What needs does communication serve in an interpersonal interaction or relationships?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Onanusi, Seye (1997).
“Achieving Industrial Harmony”.
In The Guardian, March 11.
Lagos: Guardian Newspaper Limited, P. 25.
Ajayi, Wale and Idakwo (1996).
Communication in English.
Ilaro: Limbs Press.
Aina, Sina (2003).
Anatomy of Communications.
Abeokuta: Julian Publishers Gunderson D. F. (1984).
Communication and Law Enforcement.
London: Harper & Row Publisher Inc. Gamble, M. (2002).
Communication Works.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
UNIT 5 TYPES OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Intrapersonal 3.2 Interpersonal 3.3 Group Communication 59PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.4 Large Group Communication or Public Communication 3.5 Mass Communication and Intercultural Communication 3.6 Online or Machine Communication 1.0 Conclusion 2.0 Summary 3.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 4.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Communication can be categorized according to the number of parties unsolved and the process that re common to each mode.
The different types of communication by this categorization are: • Interpersonal communication, involving usually two people on one-to-one basis.
• Group communication, involving three or more people.
It can further be categorized into small-group and large group communication.
• Public communication, involving interaction with fairly large number of people, usually audience requiring information or persuasion.
• Mass communication, involving transmission of messages which may have been processed before the messages are sent to large audience via print or electronic media.
• Inter cultural communication, involving two or more people of different cultures e.g.
Hausa and Yoruba cultures.
• Online or machine assisted communication, involving the use of computers, and other information communication technology.
Each of the above listed types of communication is further discussed below.
2.0 OBJECTIVE Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to: • list and explain the various types of communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Intrapersonal 60PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION This is communication process that is centred on an individual.
An individual is the sender-receiver.
It is a communication within an individual and it involves thoughts, feelings and the perception of oneself.
In the process, an individual thinks about, talks with, learns about, reasons with, and evaluates himself or herself.
The process peculiar to intrapersonal communication are: • The message, which is made up of the thoughts and feelings about oneself.
• The channel of communication is the brain that processes the thoughts and feelings • The feedback is the feeling of satisfaction or otherwise one gets by talking to oneself.
Intrapersonal communication is influenced by interaction with other people and the experience got from such interactions.
For example, if an individual falls short of expectation during an exercise or a performance, such a person is likely to have feelings of failure or anger.
Alternatively, if an individual performed excellently in an activity, he or she will definitely be happy with himself or herself.
The individual will have positive thoughts and feeling of satisfaction.
3.2 Interpersonal Communication This is communication exchanges in which two or more people take part.
Interpersonal communication usually involves two persons engaged in face-to-face exchange of ideas, interaction, and learning about each other in ways that help sustain or terminate relationship.
Interpersonal communication employs all the constituents of communication process.
The processes are: Sender-Receiver: Each party in the process serves as sender and receiver of message because each party brings his or her background and experience to the conversation; The message consists of both verbal and sound (they can see and hear each other); The feedback is instant; and noise level can be minimized because they can see each other, they sit closely, and they can easily know when a party is distracted.
3.3 Group Communication 61PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION This involves three or more people.
Group communication facilitates interaction with a limited number of people.
During the process, the people involved interact to share information, develop ideas, make decision, solve problem, offer support, or have fun.
Group communication can be into two small group communication, and large-group communication.
Small group communication occurs when a small number of people, meet and interact on issues or to solve problems.
Small group communication is an extension of interpersonal communication because the group must be small enough to facilitate interaction among members.
The small group communication process is made up of several sender-receivers which make the communication process more complicated than what obtains in interpersonal communication.
However, messages are more structured because the group meets for a purpose and there is opportunity for instant feedback.
The channel in small group communication is similar to that of interpersonal, participant sit face-to-face or in a circle, and the setting is more formal because of its problem solving nature.
3.4 Large Group Communication or Public Communication This usually involves individuals who are more than a handful of individual that constitute small group; the individuals can be up to several hundreds.
It is a speaker-audience situation where the sender-receiver (the speaker) sends a message (the speech) to the audience.
Large-group or public communication is being used to inform and persuade the audience to hold certain attitudes, values or beliefs so that they can think, believe or act in a particular way.
Examples of these types of communication are speeches lectures, political campaign, orientation programmes, concerts; etc.
Messages in large-group/public communication are structured; the channel is the same as in interpersonal or small-group communications, and the channel is more elaborate.
In this type of communication, the setting is formal, the speaker’s voice is louder, and his/her gesture expansive due to the large audience, and can use other visual aids during the speech.
Feedback during the communication is both verbal and non- verbal.
The participants usually have opportunity at the end of the speech to ask questions.
Non-verbal feedback to the speech is also possible and that can be positive or negative.
A positive feedback is when the audience pays total attention to the speech, applaud the speaker, or nod.
Negative feedback may be when they start showing discontentment, fail to pay attention or leave the setting in venue of the speech.
62PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.5 Mass Communication This involves individual transmitting information knowledge to numerous audiences at a different location of the same time.
It is a one-to many communication and the media such as newspapers, radio, television, etc are the means through which the message is communicated.
These media entertain, inform, and educate the audience at about the same time, with relatively restricted opportunities for the audience to communicate back to the source.
Restriction in feedback opportunity is the main a difference between mass communication and other form of communication.
Feedback in mass communication may take the form of writing letters to the producer, which may take some time, and telephoning in the case of life programmes.
Many people are involved in the production of messages in mass communication which serve as gatekeepers.
They decide what the audience should receive and as such serving an agenda-setting function.
Such people are producers, writers programme directors, technical staff, actors, presenters.
Each of those personnel have some influence on the programmes and ensure that the messages are kept simple so that as many audience as possible can understand them and thus reduce the need for feedback.
3.6 Intercultural Communication This takes place across ethnic nationalities and cultures.
Culture here refers to a group of people who share a distinct set of norms, values, symbols, attitudes, and beliefs.
Inter cultural communication occurs whenever two or more people fro different culture interact.
This type of communication requires mutual understanding among the parties to it.
The people communicating must understand that they have different cultures, values and beliefs.
The sitting arrangement, channel and feedback in intercultural communication are similar to that of interpersonal communication.
However, non verbal communication varies from one culture to another.
Hissing may be a way of expressing disgust among a tribe, it may mean different thing among another.
Also, nodding among the Nigerian means acceptance of ideas, or opinion, whereas, it may mean a different thing among the Bushmen of the Kalahari.
3.7 Online or Machine-Assisted Communication Online communication or machine-assisted communication is similar to mass communication because both require the use of machine or electronic media in the process of communication.
Online 63PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION communication builds relationships through computer and the internet, and GSM networks.
These networks provide opportunity for conversation, exchange of ideas, conduction of research, and dissemination of information.
Computer mediated communication is done through Internet chart room; vide teleconferencing, e-mail and other networks.
4.0 CONCLUSION Discussed above are types of communication.
These are intrapersonal communication described as communication with oneself; interpersonal communication, a communication process involving at least two individuals; Group communication, which can either involve small or large group of individuals; mass communication; intercultural communication; and online or machine assisted communication.
Whatever the nature or type of communication individuals engage in certain elements characterize its success.
These are: honesty, fairness, respects for the rights of parties involved; and mutual trust.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have taken a look into five types of communication and their peculiarities.
The types of communication discussed are interpersonal, interpersonal, group (small and large group) communication.
Mass communication involves transmission of message from a source to numerous recipients via the mass media (print and electronic) many people are usually involved in the production of the message in mass communication.
Inter cultural communication occurs when people of different cultures or ethnic learning engage in communication.
Online or machine assisted communication is the communicative acts carried out via the internet and other electronic machines.
The unit concludes that success of all the types of communication discussed rest squarely on honesty, fairness, and mutual understanding.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and explain some types of communication that you have studied in this unit.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS W. (1982).
Men, Women, Messages and Media.
New York: Harper and Schram Row.
64PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Gamble, T.K and Gamble.
M. (2002).
Communication Works.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hybels, S and Weaver R.L.
(2001).
Communicating Effectively 6th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
MODULE 3 Unit 1 Relationship in Communication Unit 2 Interpersonal Communication Unit 3 Dealing with Conflict Communicatively Unit 4 Control Communication and Conflict Resolution Unit 5 Perception Influence in Relationship 65PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION UNIT 1 RELATIONSHIP IN COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Accessibility 3.2 Strangers 3.3 Acquaintances 3.4 Friends 3.5 Managing Relational Tension 3.5.1 Signs that Show a Relationship is in Trouble 3.5.2 Relational Repair Strategies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Any single communication can have several meanings, depending on the situation in which it occurs.
Context may include the weather, time of day; age of the communicators, involved and other factors the communication context.
Situation is best understood in terms of the relationship among or between the people doing the communicating i.e.
No single factor has overriding control over communication as does the relationship of the communicators.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completing this unit you should be able to: • discuss the dependence of communication on the relationships in which it occurs • identify at least three levels of relationship • understand the two aids to developing and maintaining stable and healthy relationship.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT You may not be surprised to learn that the way you communicate with close friends or members of your family is quite different from the way that you communicate with most people you meet.
Have you ever considered that nearly everything you say and nearly every scrap of non- verbal communication you use can be interpreted with respect to your 66PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION relationships with others?
Every message you send or receive can be interpreted in terms of its relationship meaning as well as its content.
What forms does relationship information take?
Suppose an elder stops a teenager for questioning.
The teenager’s eyes are flashing, indicating anger at being interrogated.
The teenager answers all the elder’s questions by saying “Yes, Sir or Yes, Ma in an exaggerated fashion while sneering opening.
How would you feel if you were the elder?
How successful would the encounter probably be?
In this description, the teenager’s use of eyes, sneer, and exaggerated “Politeness” are all relationship indicators.
It is often the case, you can’t tell much about the relationship between the teenager and the elder by just looking at the words that are spoken.
Just examining the words “Yes sir and “Yes Ma” gives a mistaken impression of what is going on between the elder and teenager.
Rather, information about the relationship can be found in two places (1) in non-verbal messages and (2) in the context of the surrounding circumstances.
Within contexts, the actions of communicators take on implications that have little to do with the meaning of those actions under other circumstances.
For instance, suppose two friends pass by each other on the street.
One of the friends smile at the other and says “Ol boy how you dey?
This appears to be a question about either the emotions or the health of the second person.
This is one way by which context of being acquainted is a major point in helping interpret some set of message or messages.
3.1 Accessibility The major item of context that you have to evaluate to understand relationship messages accurately is the degree of accessibility the communicators allow between themselves.
Accessibility means the degree of closeness, trust, friendship, or interpersonal sharing within a relationship.
Your accessibility to another person is the degree to which that person knows you and can read your messages accurately, the degree to which that person understand your feelings and your secrets can predict what you are likely to do.
As other persons become accessible to you, the topics you discuss are likely to change, for instance, with a stranger or an acquaintance you are likely to talk about issues within the context of meeting i.e.
weather, or how the premiership teams are doing; with closer friends, you may talk politics or religious issues or share some personal opinions.
To your friends, you may talk about your personal life or your tasks in recreation or how better your team in the premiership is doing.
67PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION The process of revealing information about oneself is called self disclosure.
You may be highly interested in talking about yourself to others or not interested at all.
You can tell another person a lot about yourself in discussing your ideas about politics or law enforcement or social issues, just as you can tell another person your feelings in more direct ways.
Either way is better.
It is by self disclosure that we build trust.
But self disclosure is also risky.
When we willingly give information about ourselves to others, we take chances that the information may be misused.
Unfortunately, we can’t have it both ways.
Either we stay rather distant from other people or we let them through some of our protective walls or space, taking some risks.
3.2 Strangers On one end of the accessibility scale are strangers.
Nearly everyone in the world fits into this category .Strangers are persons with whom we have essentially no relationship, probably we do not even know their names.
Those you met at the bus stop every morning while going to work are familiar figures, though, they still may be strangers.
Ordinarily, we relate to strangers by acting as though they do not exist.
The main tactic we use for doing this is not to look at them if they are at a far distance off, but if they come within about 6 to 8 feet, we usually look away.
A good illustration of this is what we do with our eyes when we get on an elevator.
Most elevator passengers look at the lights as if they are very interested in which floor they are approaching.
Check yourself the next time you’re on an elevator.
You will find yourself watching those lights as though there is a surprise possible.
Perhaps six won’t come before five this time.
What you are really doing is avoiding personal contact with strangers i.e.
you are engaging in what is called “civil inattention”.
We may note in passing that while strangers spend a lot of time ignoring each other, public servants can be an exception to the rule.
People can stop to ask question and need not worry about personal involvement.
3.3 Acquaintances People who know each other’s names, have had some brief conversation, or who have been introduced once but have not had a lot of interaction can be classified as acquaintances.
Acquaintances say, Hi, there “to each other as described earlier.
Acquaintances rarely have 68PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION long conversations.
Their language is highly predictable.
Words such as “hi” and “hello” will be used, as will topics such as health and weather.
Once people have reached this stage of relationship development, they can no longer engage in ‘civil inattention.
3.4 Friends People who we know more intimately than we know acquaintances can be classified as friends, though this group of people varies a great deal.
Some friends are very close to each other.
Others are rather casual friends, little more than acquaintances.
The difference is in how accessible the parties are to each other.
For instance, suppose a friend calls you at two in the morning to discuss a fairly important issue, not a death in the family or a terrible crisis, but nonetheless something quite important to that person.
How will you feel when you answer the phone and find out who is calling and why?
Will you be angry?
Will you feel that the person did the right thing in calling you?
These feelings indicate how accessible you feel to the other person.
Close friends have a high degree of accessibility to each other.
You may get up and part bail for a friend; you probably will not for an acquaintance.
3.5 Managing Relational Tension How we deal with the tensions in our lives create some interesting communication challenges for each of us.
It is also important to understand that relationships have both private and public dimensions and that relationship do not exist in vacuum.
There are many tensions or pushes and pulls from outside a relationship as well as inside that can directly or indirectly affect how the parties in a relationship deal with or manage their dialectical tensions.
Communication scholars Leslie Baxter and Barbara Montgomery suggest a number of approaches to enable us manage our dialectical tensions.
The least helpful in dealing with tension is denial that tension exists.
How many times have you heard someone who is facing stress or tension say, “Every thing is fine – there is no problem”.
The denial strategy is avoidance or cover up, which often leads to lying or deception, if not to yourself, then most certainly to others.
The dialectical tension does not disappear by denying its existence; it must be dealt with through communication.
Baxter, in a 1990 study, suggests that most people utilize a variety of strategies to manage their dialectical tensions.
The most chosen strategies are selection, segmentation, reframing, mod ration and reaffirmation.
The strategy of selection is a strategy in which one end of the dialectical tension is chosen over the other.
For example, a married couple finding themselves in the dilemma with their in-laws might choose to go along with the in-laws rather than do what they want to do 69PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION so as not to create hardship or more distancing between themselves and the in-laws.
In other words, they are choosing predictability over novelty.
The strategy of segmentation is a tactic in which a couple compartmentalizes different aspects of their relationship for example, a couple might manage the tension between being open and being close with each other by deciding to share information about them but not to discuss their past romantic encounters with each other because that might be too hurtful or too insensitive.
Thus some things are agreed to be open for discussion, and others are closed.
Reframing is a strategy that allows tensions to be redefined so as to dilute the tension, or make it less obvious or even make it disappear.
Couples who have long distance relationships, for example, might say that being apart has brought more intimacy and closeness to their relationship.
Even though there is a great deal of stress in the relationship due to their physical separation, the couple have reframed it to mean that distance allows for great intimacy and closeness – but does it?
The strategy of moderation is characterized by compromises in which deals are struck to help reduce tensions.
For example a parent wants to know everything about your private life and is constantly asking you questions about personal things that you really do not want to share.
You choose to answer some of the less private questions but ignore the most personal ones, thus reducing some of the tension created by the questions.
Reaffirmation is the strategy in which individuals recognize that dialectical tensions will always be present and therefore we should accept them and even embrace the challenges they produce.
We should not ignore them or deny them, but we should consider dialectical tension as part of being human.
Relationships are always going through push and pulls, and to grow and obtain a lasting relationship the parties must manage and control the tensions through communication.
The result of not managing and controlling tensions will likely be conflicts.
3.5.1 Signs that Show a Relationship is in Trouble Before we concede that a relationship is over, certain signs as well as some possible repair strategies might help to prevent its dissolution.
Aggressive Behavior: A preliminary warning sign that a relationship is heading for trouble is when one of the parties becomes a little too aggressive by aiming hurtful communication at the other party.
All of 70PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION us, at one time or the other say something that we wished we hadn’t said to someone about who we care.
However, whether intentionally or not, when people communicate hurtful statements to one another it is a possible sign that their relationship is in trouble.
Lies: Another warning sign that a relationship is in trouble is when one person deceives another by lying about something.
Whether the lie is significant or trivial, it weakens the relationships foundation, which is trust.
Most of the time, acts of deception have consequences that people don’t fully consider when justifying their reasons for lying.
You can probably think of many such consequences not only for the person being deceived but also for the deceiver.
A relationship built on deceit is not likely to succeed for very long.
Betrayal: Another warming sign that a relationship is in trouble is betrayal.
Betrayal can happen when someone trusts another person and, in one way or another, that trust is broken.
For instance, if you tell a friend a personal secret and especially ask for complete confidentiality and the friend then spreads the story to others, you have been betrayed.
Deception and betrayal are similar; in fact, they are almost synonymous.
The difference is that betrayal violates a confidence and an agreed-on expectation.
Some common examples of betrayal include extramarital affairs, gossip and harmful criticism especially in one’s absence.
Relationship that are injured by deception and betrayal are often not repairable because of the amount of hurt such breach of trust cause.
However, situations such as arguments that have gotten out of hand or misunderstandings can often be corrected or resolved.
In these cases, competent communication can help repair and possibly save the relationship.
3.5.2 Relational Repair Strategies For situations in which both parties in broken relationship are willing to preserve their relationship.
Duck (2004) has suggested the following repair tactics.
• Engage in more open and honest communication and exhibit a willingness to listen to the other person with an open mind.
• Be willing to bring out the other person’s positive side.
71PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION • Evaluate the potential rewards and costs for keeping the relationship together versus the rewards and costs for changing or ending it.
• Seek the support of others to help keep the relationship together.
• Both parties must be willing to focus on the positive aspects of their relationship.
• Both parties must be willing to reinterpret the other’s behaviours as positive and well intentioned.
• Both parties have to be willing to reduce negative try and try to keep a balanced perspective.
Repairing relationships requires cooperation and mutual agreements both parties must be willing to keep the relationship together in order to solve their differences.
It also requires effective interpersonal communication.
4.0 CONCLUSION Communication is one variable common to all relationships.
As a result of communication, we establish and nurture or withdraw from, and end relationships.
Relationship plays many role in our lives.
They fulfill our needs for inclusion and affection.
Without communication, relationships hardly survive.
Any relationship that is worth your time and energy depends on effective communication to sustain and nourish it.
Your desire and motivation to communicate are key ingredients in the establishment and growth of any relationship 5.0 SUMMARY Effective relationships are essential ingredient in a peaceful relationship.
In order to form effective relationships, some degree of accessibility is necessary.
This may create problems for those who fear the vulnerability it implies.
It is necessary to let some of your internal feelings be seen by others to relate to them effectively.
Different level of closeness or accessibility has different consequences in interactions.
People generally do not speak to strangers at all unless those strangers have something they need.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify some level of relationships that you have studied in this unit?
2.
How would you explain the dependence of communication on relationship?
72PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Gamble, T.K and Gamble, M. (2002).
Communication Works.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gundersen, D.F.
and Hopper Robert (1984).
Communication and Law Enforcement.
Boston: Hamper and Row, Publishers, Inc. Brookover.
A.
(2000).
Interpersonal Conflict.
New York: The Dosey Press.
UNIT 2 INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Interpersonal Communication 3.2 Basic Concept of Interpersonal Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 73PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There can be no communication unless the communicators give and take information, the basis for interpersonal transactions is the sending and receiving of messages in such a way that they are successfully encoded and decoded.
The more experiences the communicators have in common and the more openness they have between them, the more likely it is that their communication will be successful.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After completing this chapter, you should be able to: • define interpersonal relationships • define interpersonal communication • explain basic concepts of interpersonal communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Before one can define interpersonal communication, it will be appropriate to consider the context in which it occurs within our interpersonal relationships.
On the simple level, interpersonal relationship may be defined as associations between two people who are interdependent, who use some consistent patterns of interaction, and who have interacted for an extended period of time.
First, interpersonal relationships include two or more people.
Often, interpersonal relationship consists of just two people – a boy and a girl dating, a single parent and a child, a married couple, two close friends, or two co-workers.
Interpersonal relationship can also involve more than two people, a family unit, a group of friends, or a social group.
Second, interpersonal relationships involve people who are interdependent, interdependence refers to people being mutually dependent on each other and having an impact on each other.
Friendship easily illustrates this concept.
Your best friend, for example, may be dependent on you for acceptance and guidance.
You, on the other hand, might require support and admiration.
When individuals are dependent of each other, or when dependence occurs only in one direction, we do not define the resulting association as an interpersonal relationship.
Third, individuals in interpersonal relationships use some consistent pattern of interaction.
These patterns may include behaviours generally 74PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION understood across a variety of situation, as well as behaviours unique to the relationship.
For instance, a husband may always greet his wife with a kiss.
This kiss is generally understood as a sign of warmth and affection.
On the other hand, the husband may have unique nicknames for his wives that are not understood outside the relationship.
Fourth, individual in interpersonal relationships who generally have interacted for some time.
When you nod and smile at someone as you leave the facilitation session, when you meet a girl-friend’s siblings for the first time or when you place an order at a fast – food counter or eateries’, you do not have an interpersonal relationship.
Although participants use interpersonal communication to accomplish these activities, one time interactions do not constitute interpersonal relationships.
Our interpersonal relationships bring together the most important people, roles, contexts, and energies we experience.
We should note, however, that interpersonal relationships might last for varying length of time – some are relatively short, and others continue for a life time.
3.1 Interpersonal Communication The term “interpersonal communication can be defined as communication that is based on communicators recognition of each other’s uniqueness and the development of messages that reflect that recognition”.
It can also be described as a process in which two people send and receive messages.
Two primary themes include this process: Communication necessitates give and take, and communication involves relationships and information.
On relational level, family and relational communications is dependent on one’s ability as a competent interpersonal communicator.
Communication professionals view interpersonal communication as communication that occurs between or among a small group of communicators that is, usually in a face to face setting and with the opportunity for immediate feedback.
But interpersonal communication in this manner would include our interactions with strangers, with market women and with waiters in restaurants as well as our close friends, our lovers and our family members.
This definition is no longer accepted as useful.
Rather interpersonal communication is now defined qualitatively as communication that occurs within interpersonal relationship.
This simple developmental perspective suggests that it is limited to those 75PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION situations in which we have knowledge of the personal characteristics, qualities or behaviours of the other person.
The definition also suggest that when we make guesses about the outcomes of communication based on sociological or cultural information, we are communicating in a non- interpersonal way.
When we make predictions based on more discriminating information about the other specific person, we are communicating interpersonally.
When we communicate with others on the basis of general social interaction rules such as engaging in turn taking, making pleasantries and discussing non-personal matters, we are engaging in impersonal or non-personal matters, we are engaging in impersonal or non-personal communication.
When we communicate with others based on some knowledge of their uniqueness as a person and a shared history, we are communicating interpersonally.
None of our interpersonal relationship is quite like any of our other interpersonal relationships.
The friendship that you might have had with a senior secondary school friend is not the same as your new friendships in the university.
Your relationship to your mother is not the same as your relationship to your father.
Even if you have several intimate relationships with people, you will find that none of these is quite the same.
Several other features distinguish qualitative interpersonal communication from less personal exchanges.
The first is: a. Uniqueness: Whereas impersonal exchanges are governed by the kind of social rules we learn from parents, teachers and etiquette books, the way we communicate in a truly personal relationship is unlike our behavior with anyone else.
In one relationship you might exchange good-natured insults, while in another you are careful never to offend your partner.
Likewise, you might handle conflicts with one friend or family member by experiencing disagreements as soon as they arise, whereas the unwritten rule in another relationship is to withhold resentments until they build up and then clear the air periodically.
Communication scholar Julia Wood (2002) coined the term “rational culture” to describe people in close relationships who create their own unique ways of interacting.
b. Irreplaceability: A second characteristics of qualitatively interpersonal communication is irreplaceability.
Because interpersonal relationships are unique, they can’t be replaced.
This explains why we usually feel so sad when a close friendship or love affair cools down.
We know that no matter how many 76PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION other relationships fill our lives, none of them will even be quite like the one that just ended.
c. Interdependence is a third characteristic of qualitatively interpersonal relationships.
Here, the fate of the partners is connected.
You might be able to brush off the anger, affection, excitement or depression of someone you are not involved with interpersonally, but in an interpersonal relationship the other’s life affects you.
Sometimes interdependence is a pleasure and at other times it is a burden.
In either case, interdependence is a fact of life in qualitative interpersonal relationships.
d. A fourth yardstick of interpersonal communication is disclosure of personal information.
In interpersonal relationships we don’t reveal much about ourselves, but in many interpersonal ones, communicators feel more comfortable sharing their thoughts and feelings.
This does not mean that all interpersonal relationships are warm and caring, or that all self disclosure is positive.
It is possible to reveal negative, personal information.
In impersonal communication we seek payoffs that have little to do with the people involved.
You listen to professors in class or talk to potential buyers of your used items in order to reach goals that have little to do with developing personal relationships.
By contrast, you spend time in qualitative interpersonal relationships with friends, lovers and others because of intrinsic rewards that come from your communication.
It does not matter what you talk about i.e.
developing the relationship is what’s matters.
Because interpersonal communication is characterized by the qualities of uniqueness, irreplaceability, interdependence, disclosure and intrinsic rewards or value, it forms a small fraction of our interaction.
The majority of our communication is relatively impersonal.
We chat pleasantly with shopkeepers or fellow passengers on the bus, we discuss the weather or current events with most classmates or course mates and neighbors; we deal with co-workers and facilitators in a polite way, but considering the number of people with whom we communicate, interpersonal relationships are by far the minority.
3.2 Basic Concepts of Interpersonal Communication As you read about interpersonal communication you need to keep these in mind.
1.
Communication takes place within a system.
As we enter into communicative relationships with others, we set a pattern by 77PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION which we will interact.
For example, in a family, there are flow patterns of message sending and receiving: who speaks to whom, who controls the interactions, who has the power to praise and punish, who can encourage or stop the message flow.
If you examine any relationship you are in you will recognize pattern by which communication flows.
A change in the system results in a change of the communication.
If someone in the system changes role, there may be resistance to changing the system because this may also shift the power structure.
If your friend likes being in control and you are proposing a change.
Problems may arise.
At the extreme, there also may be situations in which the system requires adjustment so that a person is forced to assume responsibility after having been dependent on someone else.
Whatever happens in the communication system remains unchanged as long as the status is maintained.
2.
We teach others how to treat us.
The system in which communication takes place needs to be structured.
Each person plays a role when a system is developing: if both people accept their roles, then those roles become part of the system.
If it is rejected, then it does not become a system rule.
Often we wonder why people treat us as they do.
In many instances, it is because when they treat us in a particular way, we don’t object therefore, it becomes the pattern.
For example, habitual physical abusers at one point hit people, who do not object or feel that they lack power to defend themselves.
Therefore, the next time the abuser got angry, he or she will repeat the action.
The circle is set.
3.
We communicate what and who we are.
Every time we communicate we tell a great deal about ourselves.
Our selection of words, the tone of our voice, and the gestures we use combine to give a picture of our values, like and dislikes and self perceptions.
We give clues to our background by our pronunciation patterns and the attitudes we express.
As receivers, we form conclusions about senders and react to these conclusions based on our own cultural background, experiences and beliefs.
4.
Much of our interpersonal communication centers on our wanting others to act, think or feel as we do: in other words, much of it is an attempt at persuasion.
In our interpersonal relations with parents, children and friends, we often attempt to alter or reinforce behaviour, exhibit compliance give advice, or elicit some type of action.
5.
Meaning is in people, not in words.
A word has a meaning only by virtue of the meaning people give to that word.
In communicating with others, we must be aware of what a particular symbol mean to 78PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION us is not necessarily what it means to the other person.
An individual hearing the word grass may think of the lawn.
A drug counsellor probably thinks of marijuana.
Unless some basis for understanding exists, ineffective communication may be the result.
Thus, we must define terms and give examples, keeping our audience in mind and adjusting our messages accordingly.
6.
We communicate even when not talking.
Communication does not necessarily stop simply because people stop talking and listening.
Suppose you do not answer a question your facilitator has asked.
Or suppose you sit quietly at the dinner table instead of joining in the conversation.
In these cases, you are still sending messages, although your lips are silent.
Remember that much communicating is done below the verbal level.
You may think that if you do not actively participate, you are not sending messages – but you are!
In many instances, your body is communicating nonverbally and the very fact that you are not saying something may be interpreted as if you were telling the other person that you are not interested, do not care or you disagree with what is being said.
7.
People react to our actions.
We are constantly demonstrating the action – reaction principle.
When we smile, others are likely to smile back; when we display anger, others tend to do the same.
Try an experiment.
The next time you walk down the street, smile as others come towards you.
You probably will find that the people you pass smile back, often saying hello or as their action – reaction.
Think back to the last time you had an argument.
If you raised your voice, what did the other person do?
No doubt that person also raised his or her voice – action – reaction.
8.
We do what we do because in the end we expect to achieve happiness.
When we choose to enter into communication, we do hoping to gain from the experience, but certainly to be in no worse psychological shape than when we entered.
Consequently many people try to avoid any situation in which they feel they may get negative feedback or be unsuccessful in communicating their ideas.
9.
We cannot always have the same understanding and feelings as others.
As we communicate we must recognize that because of differences in cultures, the only areas we share are those in which we have a common experimental background.
To illustrate this, let us assume that all our knowledge and experience is contained within one circle and that all the knowledge and experience of the person with whom we are communicating is contained within another circle.
The only commonality – the only place when our ideas, concepts, beliefs, and vocabulary will overlap is where we have had similar exposure.
79PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 4.0 CONCLUSION If you want a relationship to grow beyond superficiality, you must engage in self-disclosure.
Self disclosure is the process of communicating oneself to another person, telling another who you are and what you are feeling.
Much of the activities in interpersonal communication is about self disclosure and as a relationship develops and disclosure increases, they often get larger in such relationship.
5.0 SUMMARY Interpersonal communication, or one to one communication, is necessary to function in any society.
It helps you connect with others and develop empathy, and it contributes to your mental and physical health.
All relationships begins with attraction.
Although, the basis of attraction might vary greatly from one relationship to another, you probably are most attracted to people with whom you have similarities and frequent contact.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What does interpersonal communication means to you?
2.
How will you define interpersonal communication?
3.
Explain some basic concepts of interpersonal communication that you have studied in this unit?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Gamble, T.K and Gamble, M. (2002).
Communication Works.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hybels, S and Weaver, R.L.
(2001).
Communicating Effectively 6th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill Roy, M.B.
et al.
(2004).
Communicating: A Social and Career Focus.
Boston: Houghton Mifthin Comp.
80PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION UNIT 3 DEALING WITH CONFLICT COMMUNICATIVELY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Internal Conflicts and Interpersonal Conflicts Resources, Goals and Power 3.2 Avoiding Crises 3.3 Productive Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 81PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 1.0 INTRODUCTION Conflicts are part of the normal everyday communication.
If you find yourself engaged in a lot of quarrels, this fact does not label you as an ineffective communicator and if you are asked to intervene in a conflict, do not assume that the conflict itself is undesirable.
Rather, it may just be disturbing the peace or endangering life and social peace.
Misconception about conflict and how to deal with conflict communicatively is what this unit is all about.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify internal conflicts and interrelated views with interpersonal conflict • identify the influence of resources, goals and power on conflict • explain the techniques of crises avoidance.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT In order to deal effectively with any conflict situation you must understand conflict as a part of everyday human communication.
The potential for conflict is a constant part of human affairs.
People must make difficult decisions some of which affect the live of others, who may disagree with the decisions.
Individuals also engaged in encounters with institutions.
For instance, suppose last month’s PHCN or Water Bill was N3, 000 and your call to either Water Works or PCHN office showed that they seriously expected you to pay this bill?
In this case, you would enter into a conflict – not with another individual but with an arm of the government that is providing social services.
Most human being seems to think that conflicts should be quickly settled or avoided altogether.
The fact is conflicts seem to be a pretty necessary part of living.
There is for us all a time when we get ready to fight over issues we care about.
Conflict is a natural and important part of communication.
Properly managed, it can be productive.
The job of effective conflict resolution expert should be to help conflict proceed in rational, orderly, and productive ways so as to stop noise and property destruction.
A second misconception that many people hold about conflicts is that they always result from poor communication.
This is simply not true 82PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION the problem does not vanish because an outsider steps in and shows more orderly possibilities for dealing with the situation.
Sometimes, clear communication shows that a conflict cannot be resolved at all to the satisfaction of both parties.
For instance, suppose that two people are considering marriage when the woman announces that she intends not to change her name after the wedding.
The man not only disagrees but is angry to have the topic brought up.
What are the possibilities in this situation?
The woman can avoid the conflict by not bringing up the issue.
That would prevent the fight but would not make things better, eventually if she resents the name she is bearing for the rest of her life.
Another possibility is that the husband to be can give in, although it may gall him for the rest of his life whenever he thinks of being married to a woman who will not share his name.
Another possibility is that they can break-up the relationship to avoid facing the issue.
Or they can decide not to discuss it until later.
It is also worth discussing one final misconception about conflict: the notion that all conflicts can be settled successfully, with everyone going home happy.
There seem to be many conflicts, such as the ones between police and crime that go on forever.
Do you know of any conflicts that have good outcome?
Sporting events are examples of conflicts that are not harmful.
When the conflict is over, there is no more game.
And what about the conflict between labor unions and management?
The battles get ugly, but the workers and managers alike are probably better off because the conflict occurs.
Conflicts are normal.
This unit focuses on better ways to deal with them.
You also discover technique for your communication use or perhaps more importantly, you can help others find some of these methods, when you are called in to help settle a dispute.
3.1 Internal Versus Interpersonal Conflict Commonly, we think of conflict as a dispute between two people.
Surely, these interpersonal conflicts are events we commonly see, and mediator or conflict expert are ordinarily called to settle such dispute between parties.
But there are also many internal conflicts ranging within each individual in society.
Internal conflicts are battles we fight now over how much attention you wish to pay to an aging parent, or how hard you wish to work at your studies or job, or which career choice to make or choose.
Interpersonal conflicts are more obvious than internal conflicts because interpersonal conflict is observable.
Even if you were to ask an individual about his or her internal conflict, you might not get a straight answer.
But internal conflicts are basic and important.
Perhaps you can 83PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION recall situations from your childhood in which you had to choose between doing two things that both seemed fund.
Perhaps you could either go for snacks with one group of friends or go playing football with another group but you could not do both.
It is also likely that you learn to rationalize; to justify yourself that you had chosen the best thing to do.
Rationalization is perhaps the most important form of internal conflict resolution.
Decision about what to do for fun does not require much thinking for most of us.
But in bigger decisions, such as which institution to attend or which course to study or whether to marry – we sometime experience enough internal conflict to make us uncomfortable.
Most of us prefer to think that we make such decisions rationally, evaluating our needs, considering all alternatives, and deciding the best course of action.
Later we may feel guilty, or resentful, or exploited.
These feelings can lead to interpersonal conflicts.
When two people are having a quarrel, each is often having an internal quarrel.
In order to deal with the interpersonal quarrel, it would be helpful to try to understand the internal ones.
A person who is being defensive probably is engaged in an intense internal conflict.
Commonly, this internal conflict has one of two sources, role conflict or value conflict.
Role Conflict is internal conflict over which kind of person we are.
Each person in the world plays out multiple roles each day.
You may be a mediator, a lawyer, a parent, a PTA vice president, or a marriage partner.
Each of these facts represents one part we play in the drama of living.
Usually this role playing causes little problem for being a good judge seems to go quite well with being a caring parent, for instance, your work as a judge get you into a position where you have to reprimand a child, for instance you may feel some internal conflict from your “parent” role that urges you to be more merciful.
Where roles come into conflict with each other, we ordinarily make priority decisions, taking the action we feel is best.
The role that is acted out is in this way strengthened and other roles are allowed to “slide”.
Closely related to role conflict is value conflict.
Value refers to items or behaviors of worth to you.
Some things you may value are money, avoiding bad behavior, personal freedom, possessions, jobs with a lot of rewards, strong friendships.
Values, like roles, may become sources of priority conflicts.
Some individuals seek jobs that are secure and settle for less money or personal freedom in exchange.
In order to work in law enforcement, a person may have to get-up early in the morning, encounter personal risk, and live on less money.
Value conflicts are often called into play by public or political issues, such as the issue of making city streets safe for transportation and various healthy, enjoyable activities i.e.
Lagos Megacity Plan especially 84PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION after dark.
One proposal for improving conditions is to punish all street criminals severely and to have officers patrol the streets to investigate anyone who looks suspicious.
That kind of solution serves values associated with safe streets desires, to travel to be safe from fear, to protect private property.
Unfortunately, it also sacrifices some important values concerned with fairness and justice.
If there is extensive police harassment in the street, it focuses heavily on poor people and members of urban slam who use the street as the only available space/place to congregate.
The value of fairness can come into conflict with the value of safety and property.
Value of conflicts, such as the one over Safe Street, is not easy to resolve.
Many such conflicts cannot be resolved at all.
The point of this example is to illustrate that not all important conflicts are between people.
Some are between values that are really, internal to each of us.
3.2 Resources, Goals and Power All interpersonal conflicts are not alike.
If you look back to conflicts that were resolved in ones favor or to conflict in which you did not do so well, you may realize that each situation is a whole new ball game.
There are three dimensions of any conflict that you can use as conflict expert to find out how to approach its resolution.
These dimensions of conflict are resources, goals, and power.
Resources are what you are fighting over, the payoffs.
Some conflicts are over scarce resources – things that not everyone can have.
The outcome of a sporting event is the best example of a conflict over scarce resources.
There may be two teams in any game, or dozens of individual players in a tournament, but there can be only one winner in any event.
Winning is a scarce resources, if somebody is the winner in a sporting event, the scarce resource has been used up; nobody else can win.
Some conflict, however, are over plentiful resources.
In such cases, it is possible for both parties to win.
Many domestic quarrels are over things that can be treated as abundant resources – how much members of a family care about each other.
For instance, if you love your mother a lot, it does not follow that you love your father any less.
Some jealous persons treat care for anyone else as insult, but in actuality love is a plentiful resource.
If a conflict is over plentiful resources, you are in a situation in which more than one person can come out of the conflict with a satisfactory solution.
In a domestic quarrel, either parties settle and live amicably or both lose.
It is rarely a matter of scarce resources no matter how much 85PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION the party may think they have to win.
But such solutions become less likely if antagonists go all out to “win”.
In sum, all conflicts are not alike, and many of the most devastating quarrels seem to be over scarce resources.
Often conflict professionals find themselves in situations in which they can treat resources as plentiful thus increasing the number of “winners”.
Goals that persons wish to achieve represent a second major dimension of conflicts.
In some conflict situations, participants seek the same goals; in others, they seek different goals.
It is often helpful for the goals of participants in every conflict to be clear to both parties.
For example, if a married couple is quarrelling and considering divorce, one party to the discussion may either assume that the person has been playing falsely.
If it may seem that you would always want goals to be clear to the other party in a dispute.
This, however, is not the case.
If you bargain for or over the price of a used can, it is probably to your advantage not to tell the other person the highest price you would be willing to pay, since that destroys any bargaining advantage you have.
Some bargaining strategies demand secrecy about goals.
A third and final characteristic of any conflict is the relative power of the participants.
In some situations, the parties to a conflict are about equal in power; in others, one party clearly dominates the other.
When a mediator or conflict expert is confronted with an ongoing situation or scenario, it often takes quick thinking to avoid violence and also preserve safety.
Thinking about resources, goal scarcity and power can provide ways for deciding the best courses of action.
Some combinations of these three variables are presented below: Situation 1: Forcing • Power of parties unequal • Goals unclear • Resources scarce If one party to a conflict has all the marbles, it is generally a pretty shout conflict that ends up satisfactorily for that person and unsatisfactorily for the other.
This is called a forcing strategy.
If power is unequal, the individuals with more power can have all they want and make the others go without.
86PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION The only defense, either strong or weak parties have in this situation is secrecy.
If the other side knows your goal; it is assured they will try to keep you from attaining it.
Forcing situation can get pleasant.
War between countries or rival street gangs usually assumes a forcing character.
The parties test each other’s strength, treating victory as scarce and guarding information from the enemy.
Each side blames the other for the conflict.
Situation 2: Compromise • Power of parties equal • Goals unclear • Resources scarce The compromise situation is like the forcing situation except that neither antagonist is clearly able to overpower the other.
Compromise strategies for settling conflicts are fairly well regarded by most people but if you look closely, you find that compromise actually creates a lose- lose situation.
Both sides know there can be only one winner; both fear that if they make their goals clear, their bargaining power diminishes and they lose.
The prototype of a compromise situation can be found in ancient Israel.
Two women came to King Solomon, each claiming that a child was hers.
There seemed to be no way to tell which woman was lying.
Solomon purposed a compromise to cut the child in half.
Of course, Solomon’s fabled wisdom lay not in offering the compromise but in the fact that he was only bluffing.
Take a more common situation.
Two children see a newspaper outside on the front porch.
They both ran to it and grab an end.
Parties have equal power finally, they compromise and cut the paper in half, and both parties lose.
The shortcoming of this compromise strategy is that neither side nor person actually explored the objective of the conflict.
When compromise strategies are followed there emerges a tendency not to discuss their needs, they might have discovered that one of them wanted to read the sports page, and the other was interest only in the editorials.
It would have been possible to treat the conflict as a potential win-win situation.
Situation 3: Problem Solving • Power of parties equal • Goals clarified • Resources plentiful 87PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Problem-solving situations are compromise situations in which the participants are willing to discuss their goals in good faith.
If both describe what they absolutely must have, there are often enough goodies to go around and satisfy everyone.
Problem-solving techniques are used by many professional bargainers or negotiators to get out of problems created by win-loose situations.
For example, suppose a strike is near, and union negotiators meet with management to work out a settlement.
The union representative presents a list of demands, and the management offers considerably less.
At this point, one side can try to force the other to acquiesce, or the two sides can compromise.
Most commonly at this point, however, experts recommend moving toward a problem solving atmosphere by accepting the suggestion demands of each other or sides as good faith bases for discussion.
Each demand or offer can be discussed individually in a rational atmosphere to find out how important it is, how much it would cost to actualize and how soon.
By the time research on these tasks is completed, the bargainers on both sides are familiar with the reasoning behind the suggestions of the opposition.
At this stage of negotiations, every effort is made to treat resources in the conflict as fairly plentiful and to be as clear as possible about goals.
Many problems become less severe under such scrutiny, and solutions that satisfy everyone can be found.
The implication for mediator or conflict resolutor is to persuade parties to clarify their goals and to encourage a rational and sane forum for discussion.
Of course, the mediator is not a counselor or a judge.
Obviously one is not suggesting that a mediator will be able to solve a marital problems of a couple married for 20 years in 20 minute intervention, however, an intervention with tactic will prevent you from returning to these source conflicts time after an again.
3.3 Conflict Avoidance as Communication Strategy Avoidance is a style that is often characterized by non assertive, passive behavior.
The person does not openly pursue his own concerns or those of the other person, but effectively goes weak; refusing to engage openly in the conflict.
The avoider may sidestep the issue by changing the topic or simply withdrawing from dealing with the issue.
Interestingly enough, just as the competitive style does not mean that you will get what you want.
This is because you interdependent with the other party, avoidance as a style do not mean that the avoider will be ineffective.
For instance, if a person is having a conflict with a large organization 88PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION that overcharged for some goods or services, the organization can enhance its position by not responding to correspondence on the matter.
By pretending that the conflict does not exist, the high-power party is free from dealing with the lower-power party.
Avoidance can serve similar functions in interpersonal conflicts as well if two roommates are both dating the same woman, they may refuse to discuss the subject openly, even if both of them are aware of the problem.
Avoidance is a way of dealing with conflict by trying not to overtly recognize its existence or your part in its creation.
Its or final example, in intimate relationships the style of avoidance is often involved on sensitive matters.
If a couple is having some difficulty in dealing with each other’s families, they may not feel free to discuss the problem.
Avoiding a conflict, however, does not prevent it.
Conflict occurs when parties have the perception of incompatible goals, regardless of the style they choose to use in responding to this perception.
The avoidance is just simply an alternative mode of conflict expression.
4.0 CONCLUSION People often react to conflict with particular style.
They enact those styles that, to them, are reasonable choices.
There are many possible styles one can use in conflict i.e.
competition compromise, forcing and problem solving.
The style relation will also involve other variables like power, goal and resources that the parties have at their disposal.
5.0 SUMMARY Conflict expert often find themselves involved as mediator of disputes and conflicts.
Usually the issues are complex, at times using facts in communication management style help best as all round rule to follow.
In addition, recall the following facts: 1.
In every interpersonal conflict, each party to the conflict is also having internal conflicts over some of the issues.
Don’t be intimidated by strong statements; the antagonists probably do not feel as strongly a their words indicate.
2. if forcing strategies can be prevented and people can be steered towards clarifying each other’s goals, many problems can be solved.
Win-lose situations can be transformed into win-win situations through problem-solving strategies.
89PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are differences and similarities between intrapersonal and interpersonal conflict?
2.
Identify the influence of the following on conflict, power, recourses and goals.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Gamble, T.K and Gamble, M. (2002).
Communication Works.
New York: Hocker, J. L and Wilmot, W. W. (1978).
Interpersonal Conflict.
Lowa: Web Publishers.
Thomas Kilman (1972).
Resolving Conflict.
New Orleans: Ralple Publication Inc. UNIT 4 CONTROLLED COMMUNICATION AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Assumptions of Control Communication 3.2 Analysis of International Conflict 3.3 Communication and International Conflict 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
90PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 1.0 INTRODUCTION The purpose of this unit is to explore procedure involved in controlled communication as an approach to conflict resolution.
Also, the theoretical assumption upon which it was based especially with regard to the nature of international conflict and intergroup conflict within the state.
2.0 OBJECTIVES Upon completion of this unit, you should be able to: • explain control communication • identify and explain uses of control communication in international conflict.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Controlled communication is primarily a social psychological device for altering the attitudes and perceptions of the representatives of states in conflict, so that on the basis of reduced hostility and tension they may be able to come together for serious and productive negotiations.
Controlled communication is designed not to resolve international conflict between warring parties but to provide a basis for conflict resolution by persuading states to re-perceive their conflict in a manner that will contribute to peaceful settlement.
In this regard, controlled communication draws heavily on the insights of the social and behavioral sciences, especially psychology and sociology.
These two disciplines are responsible for much knowledge of the dynamics of individual and inter group conflict.
Alteration of perceptions and attitudes confirmed through the application of such knowledge may be usefully applied to the peaceful settlement of international conflicts and disputes.
While some scholars and conflict resolution may be skeptical of the contributions of the behavioral sciences to conflict resolution at the international level, Sydney Bailey has argued that ‘however extravagant some of the claims of social and behavioral scientists may seem to those at home with more traditional approaches, it would be a pity to reject out of hand non-traditional studies, methods and techniques” – despite the fact that there are bound to be uncertainties and obscurities, and for some time to come research will necessarily tend to be speculative”..
It is in this spirit that a critical examination of controlled communication, an approach that relies upon the observations of the 91PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION behavioral scientists will be the concern of this discussion.
The close relationship between controlled communication hypothesis and those derived from conflict resolution experiences within the nation-state was suggested by Burton when he asserted that of all the recent methods for the analysis of conflict such as gaining, simulation, and mathematical techniques, none permitted the social scientist “to analyze international conflict and its resolution by case-study methods in a clinical or controlled environment, which have proved so valuable in the analysis of individual and small group conflict”.
This implies that international conflict may be controlled or directed in a manner similar to the control or direction of conflict between individuals and groups within the state.
Control communication requires the skills of the professional who attempts to deal with problems of the individuals and to assist him in coping with his environment.
While the professional does not deal with the parties in conflict as in the international system:- the experience of case work is relevant; it demonstrates the extent to which acts must be viewed as neither right nor wrong, legal or illegal, just or unjust, but as behavioral responses to a set of circumstances.
Conflict behavior is thus predicted on difficulties which states encounter in adjusting to their environment, and not as a result of conflict of interest with other states.
The hope is that controlled communication will stimulate practical consequences in the eventual resolution of international disputes between parties exposed to controlled communication and also, for the knowledge it might provide about the analysis of international conflict and its resolution.
According to Burton, -- controlled communication was inspired originally by the need to establish a means by which certain hypothesizes could be examined; and by the observation of the inadequacies of diplomatic procedures and of international institutions in resolving conflict.
Traditional techniques of mediation and conciliation are also assumed inadequate because they involve varying degrees of coercive pressures imposed upon the parties to a dispute.
Essential to meaningful conflict resolution among nation-states is a solution they reach voluntarily, rather than one imposed by third parties .A conflict is resolved as distinct from settled when the outcome is self supporting and for this to happen the new relationship must be negotiated freely, and be wholly acceptable to the parties involved.
The preceding definition of conflict resolution involves a distinction between resolution and settlement: settlement involves an externally imposed solution, while resolution comes about only through an agreement voluntarily negotiated by the parties.
Usually, these terms are used interchangeably.
Even if they are not, it is not appropriate to characterize the traditional procedures of peaceful settlement as coercive or to consider that coercion is absent in diplomatic negotiations; 92PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION mediation conciliation, arbitration, adjudication and international organization procedures all suffers from the common limitation of voluntarism that limits that efficacy in terms of the ultimate disposal of disputes and conflicts.
This voluntarism takes two forms: The parties must voluntarily agree to submit their conflict to third party intervention whether political or legal; and, in all modes of conflict resolution except, arbitration and adjudication, proposals submitted by third parties require the consent of the states involved if they are to be binding.
Further, while external pressures may be minimal in the event the parties decide to resolve their differences through diplomacy, both sides exert pressures in order to maximize their preferred solutions or outcomes.
Actually, most serious conflicts involve both third party settlement attempts and bilateral diplomacy in order for resolution to the accomplished.
3.1 Assumptions of Controlled Communication The followings according to Burton are the basic assumptions of controlled communication in conflict resolutions:- 1.
The first step in conflict resolution is to re-establish communication where it has been disrupted.
2.
Communication between the disputants is controlled by third parties, while the analysis of conflict remains the responsibility of those in conflict, the intervention of third parties providing information on the nature of conflict is necessary in order that the disputants may gain an adequate understanding.
3.
Academic participants in controlled communication operates primarily as case workers, guiding the disputants to an enhanced understanding of the nature of conflict and thus to a more accurate perspective of their own conflict.
4.
Analysis and resolution of conflict cannot be separated.
Analysis may suggest means of resolution and the success or failure of resolution procedures may illuminate analysis.
5.
Controlled communication does not impose judgments nor seek accommodation or compromise.
The parties are helped to stand back from their conflict, and to understand its origins and manifestations.
Once each party is in a position to perceive the problem from the behavioral point of view of the other, communication is effectively controlled and tends to become constructive.
93PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 6.
Controlled communication assumes that the resolution of conflict is possible only where a non-zero sum outcome is achieved through a mutual enhancement of the values of each party.
7.
The aim of controlled communication is the institutionalization of conflict resolution by one process or another.
Once a basis for resolution is discovered, governmental decision maker can implement it.
3.2 The Analysis of International Conflict Crucial to an analysis of controlled communication is an understanding of the theory of international conflict upon which it is based and on the basis of this theory, what controlled communication may achieve as a conflict resolution device.
In this regard, the key assumption is that.
Conflict of interests is subjective, and that experience and knowledge alter these components, thus, producing altered relationship.
The components of conflict behaviour that may be altered through controlled communication consists of the external perceptions of decision-makers, their selection of foreign policy goals and their assessments of means of achieving goals in relationship to the cost of conflicts.
If the subjective character of international conflict is not accepted, then controlled communication must also be rejected, then controlled communication must also be rejected; for if conflicts of interest are considered to be objective, the alteration of subjective perception and attitudes toward conflict may have little effect on conflict abatement.
Controlled communication is designed to bring out these subjective elements in mutual discussions with the parties, inducing them to adopt alternate means to satisfy their goals in a non-coercive manner.
A third position on the nature of conflicts of interest among nation-states is also possible.
According to this view, international conflict is the result of both subjective misperceptions and distortions; and objective clashes over concrete interests.
Sydney Bailey (2000) for example, asserts that even if we allow for subjective misperceptions and their possible removal “there may still remain objective incompatibilities of goal between the parties.
While this view may appear more reasonable than the conception of international conflict as primarily subjective or objective, it is not free from difficulties.
Even if we accept the notion of a mix of subjective and objective elements in specific international conflict, sub-national factors than Burton, who implies that only deficiencies of organization and decisional process are at fault.
94PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.
Communication and International Conflict The preceding discussion has focused on the centrality of communication as a crucial factor in mitigating international conflict.
The study has highlighted that conflict occurs as a result of ineffective communication and that its resolution, therefore must involve processes by which communication can be made to be effective.
Or is it possible that this factor has been overstressed, and that consequently controlled communication as an approach to conflict resolution may be less significant than Burton has postulated?
It is to this question that a critical examination is approached.
While it is obviously desirable for state in violent conflict to maintain formal or informal communication to inhibit unnecessary escalation and as a means for eventual peaceful settlement, communication is at best a necessary but hardly a sufficient condition for conflict resolution.
If inadequate communication were the principal cause of interstate conflict, then it would be a relatively simple matter to rectify.
But the factors that precipitate conflict arise out of objective incompatibilities of interest, as well as subjective distortions and faulty images.
An improvement of communication patterns may make states more aware of their differences.
When this is the result, the approach of controlled communication may increase the risks of exacerbating conflict, not diminishing it.
So even if foreign policy makers are eventually exposed to controlled communication both sides may perceive more accurately their states of mutual rivalry, rather than discover alternative means which remains the problem of empirically ascertaining their relative influence.
Consequently, most students of international conflict than to gravitate to one extreme or the other.
Political scientists tend to follows Hans Morgenthan, who defines international politics in terms of an irreconcilable struggle for power moderated only by the operation of the balance of power and the techniques of diplomacy.
Psychologist and sociologists on the other hand, are likely to be drawn to John Burton’s conception that stresses the subjective basis of international conflict.
In terms of the source of international conflict, Burton deduces that… international conflict is in reality a problem, not of international organization and repression of aggression, but of internal political organization within states.
The seeds of conflict are probably not within the international system.
They may be found within the decision making process of the states.
This explanation is thus consistent with the view that conflict is subjective, emanating from the misperception and faulty images of decision-makers rather than arising out of the structure of the state system.
95PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Yet this conception of the nature of international conflict is inconsistent with the general systems theory perspective that guides most of the assumptions of controlled communications.
Systems theorists, of whom Burton is a leading exponent, have largely analyzed international conflict at the macro rather than the micro level.
In this respect, they view the causes of conflict in terms of the inadequacy of conflict controlling mechanisms in the international system in the form of either balance of power arrangements or international organizations; they assign secondary influence to the role of the state as a producer of conflict.
Even if the minority of systems theorists who believe that the causes of conflict reside in the state rather than within the state system do so on the basis by which their goals may be attained and conflict terminated.
In international relations, effective communication resolves disputes only where the parties have come to appreciate that their national interest will be better served by resolution rather than prolongation of conflict.
In the Korean War, for instance, lengthy communications in the form of negotiations were unavailing until both sides recognized that neither could win the war and both would have to accept a stalemate.
In terms of resolution of conflict, Burton assumes that analysis will reveal after perceptions are corrected, that neither side may be required to compromise and that solutions will be found by which all gain but he is silent on how the alteration of perceptions will lead to such solutions.
The notion of compromise recording to Burton, between states in conflict is thereby ruled out.
It is based on the false assumption that the outcome of compromise is in the form of a zero-sum game in which one party wins and one party loses.
Yet the essence of compromise is precisely the opposite of bargaining which involves states of relatively equal power capacity/capacities.
In such situations, the resolution of conflict approximates symmetrical compromise, whereby both parties agree to a settlement that mutually enhances their interests; so that they are both better off as a result.
Both may have yield from their original negotiating positions, but both will gain by resolving their conflict as a non-zero sum outcome.
It is unlikely that serious disputes can be settled without compromise.
Because the predisposition of states engaged in conflict to misperceive render ordinary means of communication ineffective and nothing short of face-to-face discussion within a controlled framework is likely to be adequate.
4.0 CONCLUSION Finally, controlled communication has been offered as a substitute for orthodox techniques of peaceful settlement because the parties involved 96PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION were willing to cooperate in a new approach without necessarily risking having solutions imposed upon them.
As suggested earlier, this view represents a misunderstanding of the traditional techniques of conflict resolution such as recommendatory they may involve varying degree of pressure but are entirely non-binding.
Even the legal methods of arbitration and adjudication require the voluntary assert of states before binding awards and decisions may be imposed.
Thus, the willingness of parties to participate in the controlled communication does not prove the irrelevance of more traditional techniques of conflict resolution.
5.0 SUMMARY The development of the procedure of controlled communication by John Burton is an attempt to utilize insights and findings drawn from social case work for application to states in international conflict.
It rest on the assumption that a new approach to the analysis and resolution of international conflict is needed, since traditional techniques have become obsolete and irrelevant to the needs of nations states.
On the basis of critical examination by experts, controlled communication has only been successful in altering attitudes and perceptions of subordinate governmental officials and has not been applied to key decision makers of states in conflict.
It has not led to resolution of any international conflict.
At best, controlled communication may be a useful device in supplementing preexisting conflict resolution procedures not in replacing them 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What in your own understanding is controlled communication in conflict resolution?
2.
Mention some assumptions of controlled communications?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Burton, J.
(1969).
Conflict and Communication.
New York: Free Press Baileys (1970).
Peaceful Settlement of Disputes.
New York: UNITTA.
Yalem, R. J.
(1970).
Controlled Communication and Conflict Resolution.
In Journal of Peace Research, vol.8 no ¾. Pp263-272.
97PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION UNIT 5 PERCEPTION INFLUENCE IN RELATIONSHIP CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Perception 3.2 Why Does Difference in Perception Occur 3.2.1 Selection 3.2.2 Organization 3.2.3 Interpretation 3.2.4 Negotiation 3.3 Perception Checking 3.3 Building Empathy 3.3.1 Requirements for Empathy 4.0 Conclusion 98PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit we will focus on the perception, and how communication differences in perception affect events, others, and ourselves.
Consequently, perception affects self concept, self-efficacy, our relationship with others and presentation of self.
In turn, perception influences our experience and assessment of others and communication with them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe factors that shape your perception of people and event • use perception checking to clarify your understanding of another person point of view.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Perception The way you sense the world – the way you see, hear, smell touch, and taste – is subjective, uniquely your own.
Nobody else sees the world the way you do and nobody experiences event exactly as you do.
The uniqueness of human experience is based largely on differences in perception.
Perception therefore is the process of becoming aware of objects and events from the sense (De Vito, 1986).
Since our perceptions are unique, communication between and among people becomes complicated.
At time, experts tend to see perception as passive.
Passive perception means that, like video recorders, people are simply stimuli.
Today, perception is considered to be more active.
Active perception means that your mind selects, organizes and interprets what you sense.
So, each person is a different video camera, and each person aims the camera at different things; each person’s lens is different; each person sees different colours; and each person’s audio picks up different sounds.
Perception is subjective in that you interpret what you sense; you make it your own, and you add to and subtract from what you see, hear, smell and touch.
Subjective perception is your uniquely constructed meaning attributed to sense stimuli.
3.2 Why Does Difference in Perception Occur?
99PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Perception is subjective, active and creative.
Difference in perception may be the result of physiological factors, people’s past experiences and roles, their cultures and co-cultures, feelings and circumstances.
Think of an event that recently occurred around you in which your perception of what happened might be quite different from the perception of others.
3.2.1 Selection Expert in communication psychology believe that we are often exposed to more input than we can possibly manage.
The first step according the theorist in perception is the selection of which data we will attend to.
There are several factors that course us to notice some messages and ignore others.
Stimuli that are intense often attract our attention.
Something that is lower, larger, or brighter stands out.
This explains why, other things being equal you are more likely to remember extremely tall or short people and why someone who laughs or talks loudly at an occasion or event attracts more attention than do more quiet guests.
Expert believes that repetitions stimuli also attract attention.
Attention is also frequently related to contrast change in stimulation or better still, mechanizing people or things become less noticeable.
This principle offer an explanation for why you will take consistently wonderful people for granted when you interact with them frequently.
It is when they stop being so wonderful or go away that you appreciate them.
Motives also determine how you perceive people.
For instance, someone on the look out for a romantic relationship will be especially aware of attractive potential partners, whereas the same person in an emergency might be oblivious to anyone but security personnel.
3.2.2 Organization After selecting information from the environment, you will need to arrange it in some meaningful way in order to make sense of the world.
We call this stage organization.
The raw sense data you perceive can be organized in more than one way.
We do this by using perceptual schema, cognitive framework that allows us to give order to the information we have selected.
We use four stages or types of schema to classify others.
As you read about each one, think about how you use it to organize your perceptions.
100PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Physical constructs classify people according to their appearance: beautiful or ugly, fat or thin, young or old, and so on.
• Role constructs use social position such as student, lover, wife.
• Interaction constructs focus on social behaviour, friendly, helpful, aloof and sarcastic, for example.
The final organizing schema uses.
• Psychological constructs: generous, nervous, insecure and so on.
The kinds of constructs we use strongly affect the way we relate to others.
For instance, boys between eight and eleven years old tend to categorize peers according to their achievements, what they like and dislike, and personality, whereas girls in the same age range tend to perceive them according to their background and family.
What constructs do you use to classify people you encounter in your life?
Consider how your relationships might change if you use different schema.
Once we have selected and organize scheme to classify people, we use that schema to make generalizations about members of the groups who fit our categories.
For example, if you are especially aware of a person’s sex, you might be alert to the differences between the way men and women behave or the way they are treated.
If religion plays an important part of your life, you might think of members of your faith differently than do others.
If ethnicity is an important issue to you, you probably tune into the differences between members of various ethnic groups.
There’s nothing wrong with generalizations as long as they are accurate.
In fact, it would be impossible to get through life without them.
But when generalization loses touch with reality, they lead to stereotyping – exaggerated beliefs associated with a categorizing system.
Stereotypes may be based on Kernel truth, but they go beyond the facts at hand and make claims that usually have no valid basis.
Two characteristics distinguish stereotypes from reasonable generalizations.
The first involves categorizing others on the basis of easily recognized but not necessarily significant characteristics.
For example, perhaps the first thing you notice about a person is his or her skin colour – but that may not be nearly as significant as the person’s intelligence or achievements.
The second feature that characterized stereotypes are ascribing a set of characteristics to most or all members of a group.
For example, you may unfairly assume that all men are insensitive to women’s concerns.
101PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Stereotypes can plague interracial communication.
Study has shown that most ethnic groups in Nigeria have one stereotype or the other against each other.
By adulthood, we tend to engage in stereotyping frequently, effortlessly, and often unconsciously.
Once we create and hold stereotypes, we seek out isolated behaviours that support our inaccurate beliefs.
For example, men and women in conflict with each other often remember only behaviours of the opposite sex that fit their stereotypes.
They then point to these behaviours – which might not be representative of how the other person typically behaves – as “evidence” to suit their stereotypical and inaccurate claims.
“Look!
There you go criticizing me again.
Typical of women!
One way to avoid the kind of communication problems that come from excessive stereotyping is to “decategorize” others giving yourself a chance to treat people as individuals instead of assuming that they possess the same characteristics as every other member of the group to which you assign them.
Perceptual differences don’t just involve the general categories we use to classify others.
We organize specific communication transactions in different ways, and these differing organizational schemes can have a powerful effect on our relationships.
Communication theorists have used the term ‘punctuation’ to describe the determination focuses and effects in a series of interactions.
You can begin to understand how punctuation operates by visualizing running quarrel between husband and wife.
The husband accuses t he wife of being a nag.
While she complains that he is withdrawing form her.
Notice that the order in which each partner punctuates this cycle affects how the dispute looks.
The husband begins by blaming the wife: “I withdraw because you nag.” The wife organizes the situation differently, starting with the husband: “I nag because you withdraw”.
Once the cycles get rolling, it is impossible to say which accusation is accurate.
The answer thus, depends on how the sequence is punctuated.
If you have seen two children argue about “who started it” you can understand haggling over causes and effects aren’t likely to solve a conflict.
In fact, the kind of finger pointing that goes along with assigning blame will probably make matters worse.
Rather than argue about whose punctuation of an event is correct, its far more productive to recognize that a dispute can look different to each party and then move on to the more important question of “what can we do to make things better”.
102PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.2.3 Interpretation Once we have selected and organize our perceptions, we interpret them in a way that makes some sort of sense to us.
Interpretation plays a role in virtually every interpersonal act.
There are several factors that cause us to interpret a person’s behaviour in one way or another.
The first is our degree of involvement with the person.
For example, research suggests that we tend to view people with whom we have or seek a relationship more favorably than those whom we observe from a detached perspective.
Relational satisfaction is a second factor that influences our interpretation.
The behaviour that seems positive when you are happy with a partner might seem completely different when the relationship is not satisfying for example, couples in unsatisfying relationships are more likely than satisfied partners to blame one another when things go wrong.
A third factor that influences interpretation is past experience.
What meanings have similar events held?
If, for instance, you have been gouged by landlords in the past, you might be skeptical about an apartment or property manager’s assurances that careful house-keeping will ensure the refund of your clearing deposit.
Assumptions about human behaviour can also influence interpretations.
Do you assume that people are lazy, dislike work, avoid responsibility, and must be slave driven to do things, or do you believe people exercise self-direction and self-control, possess creativity, and seek responsibility!
Imagine the differences in a boss who assumes workers fit the first description versus one who assumes they fit the second.
Knowledge of others affects the way we interpret their actions.
For instance, if you know a friend has just been jilted by a lover or fired from a job, you will interpret his aloof behaviour differently than if you were unaware of what happened.
If you know a lecturer is rude to all students, then you will not likely take his remarks personally.
3.2.4 Negotiation The process by which communications influence each other’s perceptions through communication is known as negotiation.
One way to explain negotiation is to view interpersonal communication as the exchange of stories.
This stories is called narratives, virtually every interpersonal situation can be described by more than one narrative.
These narratives often differ: children may say their parents 103PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION are too controlling, while the parents talk about their children as irresponsible and naive.
People who value cleanliness and sloppy, while those neighbours as dirty and sloppy, while those neighbors describe a concern for tidiness as obsessive.
When our narratives clash with those of others, we can either hang on to our point of view and refuse to consider anyone else’s or try to negotiate narrative that creates at least some common ground.
Consider an example of negotiating narratives in the world of work.
Communication theorist studied the conversations of employees who talked with one another about the “differential treatment” their fellow workers had received from management about matter such as time off, pay, or work assignments.
Although most of us like to think we make judgments about others on our own, the research shows that sense making is an interactive process.
In other words, reality in the workplace and elsewhere is not “out there” rather, we create it with other through communication.
Shared narratives provide the best chance for smooth communication.
For example, romantic partners who celebrated the successful struggles against relational obstacles are happier than those who do not have this shared appreciation.
Likewise, couples that agree about the important turning points in their relationships are more satisfied than those who have different views of what incidents were most important.
3.3 Perception Checking So far, you can appreciate how difficult our perceptions of one another can be.
It can be.
It is easy to understand how those distorted perceptions can be.
It is easy to understand how those distorted perceptions can interfere with our communication.
What we need, are tools to improve the accuracy of our attributions and thereby preventing likelihood of conflict.
The skills of perception checking provide a better way to share your interpretations.
A complete perception check has three parts: 1) A description of the behavior you noticed; 2) Two possible interpretations of the behavior 3) A request for clarification about how to interpret the behavior.
Perception checks for the above example would look like this; 104PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION “When you storm out of the room and slammed the door (behavior), I wasn’t sure whether you were mad at me (first interpretation) or just in a hurry (second interpretation).
How did you feel?
(request for clarification)” Perception checking is a tool to help us understand others accurately instead of assuming that our first interpretation is correct.
Because its goal is mutual understanding, perception checking is a cooperative approach to communication.
Besides leading to more accurate perceptions, it signals an attitude of respect and concern for the other person, 3.4 Building Empathy Perception checking can help you decode messages more accurately, but it does not provide enough information forms to claim that we fully understand another person.
For example, parents whose perception checks reveal that their teenager’s outlandish behavior grows from a desire to be accepted by others do not necessarily understand what it feels like to crave that acceptance.
What we need, then, to understand others more accurately or completely is empathy:- The ability to recreate another person’s perspective the world from his or her point of view.
Although, it is impossible to achieve total empathy, but with enough effort and skill, we can come closer to this goal.
Empathy has three dimensions: Perspective Taking - The ability to take on the viewpoint of another person.
This understanding requires a suspension of judgment so that for the moment you set aside your own opinion and take on those of the other person.
• Emotional contagion: This means that we experience the same feelings that others have.
We know their fear, joy, sadness and so on.
• Concern for the welfare of others.
Not only do we think and feel as others do, but we have a sincere interest in their well-being.
3.4.1 Requirements for Empathy Empathy may be valuable, but it is not always easy to achieve.
In fact, research shows that it is hard to empathize with people who are radically 105PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION different from us in age, sex, socio-economic status, intelligence and so forth.
To develop such perceptual leaps, you need to develop several skills and attitudes: Open-Mindedness – One important characteristic of an empathic person is the ability and disposition to be open-minded i.e.
to set aside for the moment your own beliefs, attitudes and values and to consider those of the other person.
Being open-minded is often difficult because people confuse understanding another’s position with accepting it.
These are quite different matters.
To understand why a friend disagrees with you, for example doesn’t mean you have to give up your position and accept hers.
Imagination – You will also need enough imagination to be able to picture another person’s background and thoughts.
A happily married or single person needs imagination to empathize with the problems of a friend considering divorce.
A young person needs it to empathize with parent facing retirement.
A teacher needs it to understand the problems facing students, just as students cannot be empathic without trying to imagine how their lecturers feel.
Commitment – Because empathizing is often difficult a third necessary quality is a sincere desire to understand another person.
Listening to unfamiliar, often confusing information takes time and isn’t always fun.
If you aim to be emphatic in your relationship with people, be willing to face the challenge.
This is because, you will need a combinations of determination and skills.
4.0 CONCLUSION Our perceptions are often affected by common perceptual tendencies.
We are more likely to blame others than ourselves for misfortunes.
We are influence by our expectations.
We are also influenced by obvious stimuli, even if they are not the most important factors.
We cling to first impressions, even if they are mistaken.
We assume other are similar to us.
5.0 SUMMARY Communication challenges arise because of differing perceptions.
The process of interpersonal perception is a complex one, and a variety of factors causes each person’s view of reality to vary.
These factors involve four phases: selection, organization, interpretation, and negotiation.
106PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION One way to verify the accuracy of interpretations is through perception checking.
Instead of jumping to conclusions, communicators who check their perceptions describe the behaviour they notice, offer two equally plausible interpretations, and ask for clarification from their partner or other party.
Empathy is the ability to experience the world from another person’s perspective.
There are three dimensions to empathy: perspective taking, emotional involvement and concern for the other person.
And requirement for empathy include open-mindedness, imagination and commitment.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is perception?
2.
What are the factors that determine perception?
3.
Perception checking is a difficult exercise how true is this statement with regards to this exercise?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Berko, Roy M. and Wolfing, A. D. (2001).
Communicating: A Social and Career Focus.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Comp.
Adler, Roland, B. and Rosenfeld L.B.
(2004).
Interplay: The Process of Interpersonal Communication.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Hybel, Sandra and Weaver, R. L. (2001).
Communicating Effectively.
New York: McGraw Hill Company.
107PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION MODULE 4 Unit 1 Effective Communication Unit 2 Theories of Communication Unit 3 Listening Unit 4 Resolving Conflict through Listening Unit 5 Media Role in Peace and Conflict UNIT 1 EFFECTIVE COMMUNICAITON CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Effective Communication 3.2 Factors Affecting Communication 3.2.1 Clarity of Message 3.3 Communication Media 108PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 3.3.1 Inattentiveness and Absent Mindedness 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the process of communication, the parties or group of people involved are transmitting knowledge and effecting desired changes in an individual, group of individuals, or the society as a whole.
Consequently, every party in the act need skills that will ensure effective communication.
Effective communication brings success and pleasure, changes the way other people act and behave, and helps in maintaining and improving relationships.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able: • explain what effective communication is • discuss other factors that affect effective communication.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Effective Communication However, there are certain factors that are pre-conditions for effective communication.
These factors are the basic requirements for effective communication: Messages and ideas to be communicated must be concrete, that is, the message must be real and solid, and must not be in abstraction.
Words and sentences selected must be appropriate and unambiguous.
Technical language and jargon should be used only where appropriate, and there should be proper description of items or objects involved in the message.
As a rule, the message must be real, and have clear meaning to the parties involved in the communicative acts.
a. Correctness and Conciseness of Message Effective communication requires correctness and conciseness of message being transmitted.
The parties must ensure that the message is 109PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION correct and facts provided are accurate because a message with incorrect contents may not achieve its desire.
It may lead to wrong actions and waste of time and resources.
Also the message must be brief and straight to the points.
Only words that have relevance to the message should be selected and unnecessary ones avoided.
b. Brevity and Clarity Sender of the message must ensure brevity and clarity of his/her message to retrain desire result.
Clarity of messages being communicated is very essential and as such, messages should be clear and devoid of meaningless, awkward and complex expressions.
Technical jargons, legal maxims and rare words should be avoided as much as possible, and where they are necessary, they should be explained in the message.
The need for all these in communication is to ensure that the recipient have the clear picture of the message as conceived by the sender.
c. Courtesy and Consideration Ethics of communication require courtesy/politeness and respect for parties to a communicative act) and consideration (through and serious deliberation of subjects of the communication).
These elements are essential to effective communication and closely related too.
Sender – receiver in communication must be courteous, polite, patient, and attentive to each other.
Furthermore, necessary response or information should be provided during the communication in order to meet the needs for communication.
Also, consideration should be given to peculiar needs and demands of different parties in the act, and the use of appropriate channel of communication.
Both the sender and receiver of messages must be thoughtful, sensitive, responsive, and time conscious.
d. Completeness Completeness of message of communication is crucial to effective communication.
The message must be complete in all its requirements.
Parties to the communication process must not mince words or be economical with truth.
Written communication must be including the documents necessary as attachment, and that can make the message meaningful and complete to the receiver.
In other forms of communication, participants must be prepared to provide detailed and complete message to their receiver.
3.2 Factors Affecting Communication 110PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION The issues discussed above are basic requirement of effective communication.
However, there are certain factors that constitute barriers to effective communication.
They hinder effective dissemination and receipt of information.
These factors are discussed below: Language of communication and semantic stood by the parties to the act.
The language must be kept simple, be of appropriate expressions and devoid of ambiguity.
Mathematical and scientific languages or jargons must be avoided when the message is intended for individuals not familiar with the field.
Such individuals are better addressed or communicated to in words.
3.2.1 Clarity of Message Besides the need to use simple and appropriate language in communication, there is also need for clarity of message being sent.
The message must have a focus, a dominant theme, and a direction.
The extent to which these elements are present in a message determines its clarity and meaning that receivers can make of it.
Euphemism and abstraction must be avoided completely in communication because such words may mean different things to different people and this affect effective communication.
3.3 Communication Media Appropriate communication channel is essential to effective communication, and it can affect the understanding of the message being sent.
The message and the category of audience determine the media to be employed.
If the message is less formal and meant for one or two persons; if the message is formal and meant for a small group of individuals, small group communication suffices etc.
Inappropriate selection of medium will definitely affect communication.
Also, if communication situation requires visuals, the use of visual resources is necessary.
The physical and health conditions of the recipient of the message must be considered e.g.
individuals with sight problems will appreciate audio message more than graphic ones etc.
3.3.1 Inattentiveness and Absent Mindedness Inattentiveness referred to as the lack of concentration of a party to communication act, and absent mindedness refers to the recipient state of mind, or lack of interest in the issue being discussed.
These two conditions can cause the misunderstanding of the messages sent.
Noise 111PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION around the communication channel can also constitute to recipient inattentiveness.
This may cause distraction in audibility of the message, or may divert the attention of the recipient.
Health and emotional factors also have to do with the recipients states of minds.
Other issues such as preconceptions and perceptions of views by individuals to communication, world view, perspective or individual’s disposition to life, and stereotyping negatively affect communication.
These issues adversely affect communication because preconceptions and perceptions of contents of a message may be wrong; individuals perspective of a message can exaggerated; and our fixed pattern of looking at issue may not be appropriate at all times.
4.0 CONCLUSION Every communication is a transaction, viewing communication as a transaction focuses on the people who are communicating and the changes that take place in them as they are communicating.
Communication can be improved if you concentrate on several important areas that have been discussed in this unit.
Find out what communication skills are important to.
Discover the kinds of communication that are most difficult for you and work to improve them.
Seek out people who will help you develop these skills and give you support and feedback, and set realistic time table for improvement.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit dwells on effective communication.
It describes effective communication as the one that achieve desired change or produced positive effects.
Certain factors that can facilitate effective communication identified and discussed are: • Concreteness of message • Correctness and conciseness of messages • Clarity of message • Courtesy and consideration and • Completeness of message.
Furthermore, the unit discussed certain barriers to effective communication.
These barriers must be carefully handled in order to have effective communication.
These barriers are: • The language of communication and semantics • Clarity of message 112PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION • Communication media • Inattentiveness and absent mindedness • Other issues such as perception, preconception, and stereotyping.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Name and explain ways in which you can be an effective communicator.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, Wale and Idakwo, Victor (1996).
Communication in English.
Ilaro: Limbs Press.
Bovee, C. L. and Thill, J. V. (1989).
Business Communication Today, 2nd ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Company.
Ajala, V. O.
(2001).
Public Relations: In Search of Professional Excellence, 2nd ed.
Ibadan: Maybest Publications.
Encyclopaedia Britanica (Vol.
4).
Chicago Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc. P. 1005.
UNIT 2 THEORIES OF COMMUNICATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Shannon and Weaver’s Models, 1948 3.2 Harold Lasswell’s Model 1948 3.3 Braddock’s Extension of Lasswell’s Model 1958 3.4 Defleur’s Pschodynamic Model, 1966 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Theories of communication are represented in models by communication theorists.
Models are graphical demonstration of 113PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION concepts, theories and abstract thinking.
Due to their graphical nature, they can be used for teaching aids and research purpose in peace and conflict studies.
Models are used to relate the nature of the process involved in communication in order to ensure better understanding.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the theories of communication • explain in logical terms the use of these various theories.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Some of these theories and models are: • Shannon and Weaver’s model, 1948 • Harold Lasswell’s model, 1948 • Braddock Extension of Harold Lasswell’s model 1958 • D.M White’s model, 1950 • New Comb’s model, 1953 • Wesley and MacLean’s model, 1957 • George Gerbner’s model, 1956 • Jacobson’s model 1958 • Defleur’s model, 1966 e.t.c In this unit, we shall pay particular attention to four of the above listed models.
3.1 Shannon and Weaver’s Models, 1948 Shannon and Weaver are telecommunication engineers interested in offering a model that will explain the process of telecommunication, and at the same time enable the telecommunication engineers find solution to problems relating to information transmission.
Shannon and Weaver developed a simple abstract model of communication.
Since this model is abstract in nature, it is applicable to many situations, which contribute to its broad scope and power.
They developed a model that presented communication process thus.
Message Encoder Channel Decoder Message Source Receiver Channel 114PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Shannon and Weaver Model Message source in the model is simply the entity that creates the message.
Often the message source can be human, animal, computer, or some other inanimate object.
Encoder in the model; refers to the object that connects the message to the actual physical signals that are being sent.
In the case of two individuals hearing telephone conversation, the actual speech produced by one person can be considered the messages, and the telephone mouthpiece and its associated electronics can be considered the encoder, which convert the speech into electrical signals that travel along the telephone network.
The channel refers to the medium that caries the message.
This may be cables, the airwaves, in the case of radio and television transmission.
The channel can also be letters, words sent through messages, telephone lines etc.
Noise is anything that interferes with the transmission of signals.
Noise can be from people shouting and other interference where two or more people are conversing.
In telecommunication, noise can be from faulty equipment, interference from other line etc.
The effect of noise on the communication is that it could affect the transmitted signals so much that the received signals would have been altered.
The model recognizes the possibility of noise getting into the process of communication.
However, they recognized its occurrence only in the channel.
The decoder is the object that converts the signal as received into a form that the message receiver can comprehend.
In the case of telephone, the decoder could be the earpiece and other electronic circuits.
In the case of radio and television transmission, the decoders are the radio ad television set of the receiver.
The message receiver is the object that gets the message.
The receiver could be a person, an animal, a computer set, satellite stations etc.
Shannon and Weaver’s model is however characterized by the following shortcomings: • Lack of feedback in the model.
Without feedback there is no way a message sender can establish the success or failure of the message.
• The model’s characterization of communication is monologic.
It presents communication as of one way affairs, from the source to the 115PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION receiver.
Dialogic notions of communication consider communication as a two-way, sharing process.
• The model is linear in nature.
This implies that “communication could be an end-stop and not open-ended process”.
3.2 Harold Lasswell’s Model 1948 Harold Lasswell’s verbal and Linear model presents an analytical means with which any Human communication can be analyzed.
Lasswell described human communication process as the following elements-Who, says what, in which channels, to who, and with what effect.
These elements are presented in diagrammatic form with questions that matched the various elements or stages of communication thus: Who Say what In which To whom With what Communicator Message channel medium Receiver effect Harold Lasswell’s Model Lasswell in this theory saw communication as a means of influencing the receivers, and a means to achieve attitudinal change, that is, an act undertaken to have a desired effect on the receiver.
It is this are that linear, process-based formular has proved particularly useful.
The flaw in this model is the absence of representation of feedback stage of communication.
3.3 Braddock’s Extension of Lasswell’s Model 1958 Braddock improved upon Lasswell’s model by adding two stage of communication to it.
He made the additions to the original formula by virtue of two issues that were left out of Lasswell’s model.
The issues are: Circumstances surrounding the sending of message, and purpose of the message.
These issues were added to Lasswell’s theory to produce the Braddock’s model.
The model is presented below: Who Says what Through which To whom medium Under what circumstance?
For what purpose?
With what effect?
116PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION Braddock’s Extension Model Braddock’s model just like the Lasswell’s model is attempting to improve upon, does not include feedback.
However, this model is still relevant in analyzing communication process.
3.4 Defleur’s Psychodynamic Model, 1966 This model is a modification of Shannon and Weaver’s model.
He postulates that receivers of messages respond to them not because of the persuasive power of the messages but due to their state of mind or because of predisposition within their psychological make-up.
He consequently suggested that when individuals come in contact with messages meant to persuade them, / such messages are successful only when they match up with the psychological processes within those individuals.
“It is the psychological predisposition wheel set in motion the behaviour of the individuals.
These postulations are represented below: Message Alters of activates latent Achieves change in Persuasive psychological process direction of visible e.g.
attitude change behaviour Defleur’s theory emphasizes that meaning is made into the information contents by the state of minds of the receivers.
He further identified the fact that noise can affect communication at any stage of the communication process.
This idea is represented diagrammatically bellow: Mass Medium Device Destination Source Transmitter Channel Receiver NOISE Destination Receiver Channel Transmitter Source Feedback Device 4.0 CONCLUSION A theory is a set of ideas which provides an explanation for something.
Theory of communication is a set of ideas which provides explanations 117PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION on the relevance of communication for human society.
Theories on communication are selective, as no one has succeeded in explaining everything.
They are therefore selective in terms of their priorities and perspectives, and the issue they consider significant.
As such, they provide a particular and partial view of reality.
This explains the differentiation in the views of the theorists discussed in this unit.
All of them present distinctive but related explanation of communication.
5.0 SUMMARY There are several theories and models on communication, each of them attempting to provide insight into communication.
From the several theories, we probed into four of them.
They are Shannon and Weaver’s model, 1948; Harold Lasswell’s model, 1948; Braddock Extension of Harold Lasswell’s model, 1958; and Defleur Psychodynamic Model 1966.
Shannon and Weaver described communication as a process moving message source, Encoder, Channel, Decoder and message receiver.
They identified the incidence of noise at the channel level only.
The model failed to recognize the need for feedback.
Harold Lasswell’s model is analytical.
It attempts to analyse human communication through question.
The questions are: Who (communicator), Say what (message), in which channel (medium), to whom (Receiver) with what effect (Effect).
The model also failed to provide for feedback like the Shannon and Weaver’s model.
Braddock’s model attempted to improve on Lasswell’s model by adding two stages to the communication process identified by Lasswell.
These stages boarder on circumstances surrounding the message, and purpose of the message.
This model also failed to provide for feedback.
Defleur psychodynamic model viewed the success of communication on the state of mind of the receiver.
He believed that success of any communication is dependent not on the will or power of the communicator but in psychological make-up of the receivers.
The model recognized the interference of noise at any stage of the communication.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain sources of communication theories that you have studied in this unit?
118PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 2.
What is the relationship between Shannon and Weaver’s communication theory and Harold Lasswell’s model of 1948?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, W and Idakwo, V. (1996).
Communication in English.
Ilaro: Limbs Press.
Encyclopaedia Britannica on DVD, 2004.
Sammie, M.B.A. (2000).
Business Communication and Use of English with Practical Persuasive Communicating Skills.
London: M & B Handbooks.
Haralambos, M. and Heald, R.M.
(2003).
Sociology: Theories and Perspectives.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
UNIT 3 LISTENING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Hearing is not Listening 3.2 Components of Listening 3.3 Culture and Listening 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Listening is the most important part of communication, if we do not hear what the other person or a party is communicating, we can not be active participant in the communication process and as such can not resolve conflict that must have ensued from such misunderstanding.
Active listening means not only listening to what another person is saying but also to what is said by intonation and body language.
Thus, the active 119PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION listening process involves letting the speaker know that he or she has been heard.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the differences between hearing and listening • explain what listening involves • discuss cultural differences as they affect listening.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Hearing is not Listening A lot of people confuse hearing and listening.
In reality, they are two different things, the process we call hearing is purely a physical activity by which sound waves strike the eardrum and cause vibrations that are transmitted to the brain, while, listening occur when the brain reconstructs these electrochemical impulses into a representation of the original sound and then give them meaning.
Listening may be referred to as the psychological process that allow us to attach meaning to the patterned of energy we hear.
Your ears will pick up sound waves and transmit them to your brain whether you want them to or not.
However, listening is not so automatic.
Many times we hear but do not listen.
Sometimes we deliberately do not listen.
Instead of paying attention to words or other sounds, we avoid them.
We block irritating sounds, such as roar of nearby traffic.
We also stop listening when we find a subject unimportant or uninteresting.
All the potential problems, which typically arise from differences in perception, come into play in the listening process.
A cocktail party effect will provide a good example of the difference between hearing and listening.
At a cocktail party there are usually several conversations going on simultaneously in the same room or hall.
Everyone present at the party is aware of these conversations in that they can be heard the other hand, we usually have to make a conscious effort to listen to any one of these conversations.
We are physically capable of changing all or most of the acoustic energy in the room into electrochemical energy.
We are much less capable of attaching meaning to all these electrochemical impulses.
120PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION There are also cases when we honestly believe we are listening whereas we are merely hearing.
For example, recall times when you think you have “heard it all before”.
It’s likely that in these situations you might claim you were listening when in fact you had closed your mental walls to new information.
You also may remember times when you were able to repeat on demand what a person just told you; like children do when their parents pause in the middle of a conversation and ask, “Are you listening?
What did I just say?” the ability to repeat a statement does not guarantee understanding of course; it only means that listener has heard the message and can replay from short-term storage.
3.2 Components of Listening By now you can begin to see that there is more to listening than sitting quietly while another person speaks.
Listening consist of five separate elements, hearing, attending, understanding, remembering and responding.
Hearing is the physiological aspect of listening.
It is the nonselective process of sound waves impinging on the ear.
Hearing is the most fundamental part of listening.
It can be diminished by physiological disorders, background noise, and auditory fatigue, a temporary loss of hearing caused by continuous exposure to the same tone or loudness.
When you hear you also receive, when you listen to a message from a speaker, the message you receive are both verbal and non-verbal, these message consists of words and gestures, facial expressions and variations in volume and rate.
At the receiving stage, you note not only what is said (verbally and nonverbally) but also what is omitted.
You received for instance, a summary of good deeds to your friend as well as the omission of all the broken promises.
The following are activities to pay attention to while receiving messages: • Focus attention on the speaker’s verbal and non-verbal messages, on what is said and what isn’t said • Avoid distractions in the environment • Focus attention on the speaker or the party during conflict resolution workshop or session and not what you as listener will rather say next.
121PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION • Maintain your role as listener and receptor of information and avoid interruption/interrupting.
Understanding This is the stage at which you learn to pay attention to a message but note that, even close attention to a message doesn’t guarantee that you will understand what is being said.
Understanding is composed of several elements; first, you must be aware of the syntactic and grammatical rules of the language in which the conversation or speech is made.
But beyond this basic ability, understanding a message depends on several other factors.
One is your knowledge of the source of the message, such background will help you decide, for example, whether a friend’s insulting remark is a joke or a serious attack.
The context of a message also helps to you understand what is being said.
A yawning response to your comments would probably have different meaning at midnight.
Finally, understanding often depends on the listener’s mental abilities.
Generally speaking, the ability to make sense of a message is closely related to the listener’s intelligence.
(Waldhart, 2005) relates successful understanding to factors that include verbal ability, intelligence, and motivation.
Timothy Plax (1979) found that the personality fronts of listeners also affect their ability to understand messages.
People who are good at interpreting disorganized messages are especially secure, sensitive to others, and willing to understand the speaker.
Listeners successful at understanding disorganized speech proved to be more insightful and versatile in their thinking.
At this stage as listeners you should: • relate the new information the speaker is giving to what you already know • see the speaker’s message from his point of view: avoid judging the message until you fully understand the speaker intent • ask questions for clarification, if necessary ask for additional details or examples if needed • rephrase (paraphrase) what the speaker ideas means to you or in your own words.
Remembering 122PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION The ability to recall information once we understand it, or remember is a function of several factors; the number of times the information is heard or repeated and whether the information may be “rehearsed” or not.
In a small group of public speaking situation or conflict resolution workshop, you can augment your memory by taking down notes or tape recording the messages.
In most interpersonal communication situations, however, note taking is inappropriate, although you often write down a GSM or telephone number, or an appointment or directions.
For instance, when Kunle says he is planning to get married, the effective listener remembers this and will later ask for the wedding date proper.
When Chidi says his mother is ill, the effective listener remembers this and enquires about her health at a latter meeting.
What you remember way not actually be what was said but what you think (or remember) was said.
Memory for speech is not reproductive; you do not simply reproduce in your memory what the speaker said.
Rather, memory is reconstructive; you actually reconstruct the messages you hear into a system that make sense to you.
Early research on listening revealed that people remember only about half of what they hear immediately after hearing it (Baker; 1971) they forget half even if they work hard at listening.
The high rate of forgetfulness isn’t as depressing as it might seem.
While most people recall very few details o their conversations, they do retain an overall impression about the speaker, especially in important relationships.
Fisher and Adams (1994) posited that “the more intense, intimate, trust, and committed a relationship is the more we pay attention to what others are saying”.
Thus, high recall is one characteristic of healthy interpersonal relationships.
The following are activities of an effective listener at remembering: • Identify the central ideas and the major support advanced.
• Summarize the message in a more easily retained form, but be careful not to ignore crucial details or qualification of the presenter.
• Repeat norms of and key concepts to yourself or if or when appropriate, aloud.
Evaluating consists of judging the messages in some way.
At times you may try to evaluate the speaker’s underlying intentions or motives.
Often this evaluation process goes on without awareness.
For instance a friend tells you that he is up for a promotion and he is really excited about it.
You may then try to judge his intention; he wants you to use 123PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION your influence with some members of promotion committee or he is pre- occupied with the promotion and tell everyone, he is looking for compliment.
In other situations, your evaluation is more in the nature of critical analysis.
Generally, in evaluating what you listen to, try to: • Resist evaluation until you fully understand the speaker’s point of view.
• Assume that the speaker is a person of good will, and give the speaker the benefit of doubt by asking for clarification on position to which you feel you might object.
• Distinguish facts from inferences, opinion and personal bias, interpretations by the speaker.
• Identify any biases, self-interests, or prejudices that may lead the speaker to slant unfairly what is presented.
Responding: All the steps that have been discussed so far are internal activities.
A final part of listening process involves responding to a message that is giving observable feedback to the speaker.
This occurs in two phases (1) responses you make while the speaker is talking and (2) responses you make after the speaker has stopped talking.
These two responses are the feedback information that you send back to the speaker.
This information tells the speaker how you feel and what you think about his or her messages.
Good listeners showed that they were attentive by non-verbal behaviors such as keeping eye contact and reacting with appropriate facial expressions.
Listeners’ verbal behaviors for example, answering questions and exchanging ideas also demonstrate their attention.
It is easy at times to imagine how other responses would signal less effective listening i.e.
a slumped posture, bored expression and yawning all point to the fact that the listener is more tuned to the speaker.
Other responses include what non-verbal researchers call back- channeling ones, such as “I see” “Oh yes” “yes” “uh” – huh” and similarly signals that let the speaker know you are listening.
Responses made after the speaker has stopped talking are generally more elaborate and might in most cases include expressing empathy (“I know how you must feel”) asking for clarification (“so you mean that 124PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION this new project plan is to replace the old one?”) challenging (“I think your evidence is weak here”) and agreeing (“you are absolute right on this; I’ll support your proposal”) while responding try to: • Be supportive of the speaker throughout the speaker’s speech by using and varying your back-channeling ; using only one back- channeling for example, saying “uh-huh” throughout will make it appear that you are not listening but are in automatic pilot.
• Express support for the speaker in your final responses • Be honest, the speaker has a right to expect honest responses, even if they express disagreement • Own your responses; state your thoughts and feelings as your own, and use I messages (for instance, I think the new… rather than everyone will…).
• Don’t equate (as we often do) responding to another’s feelings with solving the person problems.
It is usually more productive to view your task in more limited terms; to encourage the person to express and perhaps to clarify his or her feelings and to provide a supportive atmosphere.
3.3 Culture and Listening Cultural differences concerning language, non-verbal communication, style, story versus evidence, credibility and feedback are issues and ideas of many cultural factors that influences listening.
Speech and language: when a speaker and listener speak the same language, they are likely to speak with different meaning and accents.
Every speaker speaks an idiolect: a unique variation of the language i.e.
Oyo, Ijebu and Ijesha Yoruba.
Speaker of this same language will, at the very least, have different meaning for the same terms because they have had different experiences.
Speaker and listeners who have different native languages and who may have learned English as a second language will have even greater differences in meaning.
Translations are never precise and never fully capture the meaning in other language.
Your meaning for “house” in a culture in which everyone lived in their own house with lots of land around it is going to be very different from someone who learn the word living in a neighborhood of high-rise tenements.
Although you will each hear the same word, the meanings you’ll each create will be drastically different.
In adjusting your listening especially when in an intercultural setting-understand that the speaker’s meaning may be different form yours even though you are each speaking the same language.
Can you 125PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION compare somebody form Victoria Island and Ajegunle in Lagos meaning of the word “house”.
It is evidence that meaning and understanding of this word to them will differ.
Differences in Non-Verbal Behaviour: Speakers from different cultures have different display rules, cultural rules that govern which non-verbal behaviours are appropriate and those inappropriate in a public setting.
As you listen to another person, you also “listen” to their non verbal cues.
If these are drastically different from what you expect on the basis of the verbal message, you may see them as a kind of interference or perhaps as contradictory message, also, different cultures may give very different meanings to the same nonverbal gesture.
Direct and Indirect Styles: Some culture for example favour direct speech in communication: they advice us to “say what you mean and mean what you say”.
Many Asian cultures on the other hand, favour indirect speech: they emphasize politeness and maintain a positive public image rather than absolute truth.
Listen carefully to persons with different style of directness, consider the possibility that the meanings the speaker wishes to communicate with indirectness may be very different from meanings you would communicate with directness.
Credibility: What makes a speaker credible or believable will vary from one culture to another.
In some cultures, people may claim that competence is the most important factor in choosing a member to be included in a negotiating team for peace.
In other cultures, the most important factor might be the goodness or morality of the negotiator or mediator.
People perceive the credibility of the various media very differently for instance, member of a repressive society in a military regime where the government controls the output of media outlets.
The overall output of such media houses whether electronic or print will be viewed with little or no credibility.
After all, the listener would reason that, television news is simply what the government wants the people to believe.
Feedback: Some cultures give very direct and at times honest feedback.
Speakers from these cultures expect the feedback to be an honest reflection of what their listeners are feeling.
In other cultures in Asia or Oceania countries; it is more important to be positive, so speakers from these cultures may respond with compliments even though when they don’t feel it.
4.0 CONCLUSION Listening is both more frequent and less emphasized than speaking.
Despite its’ relative invisibility, listening is at least as important as 126PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION speaking.
Research shows that good listening is vital for both personal and interpersonal relationship.
There are a variety of reasons why we listen to others.
At the most basic level, we listen to understand and retain information.
Perhaps more importantly, we listen to build and maintain our interpersonal relationship.
5.0 SUMMARY Most people understanding of listening suffer form several misconceptions, which one needs to correct.
Listening, at least listening effectively is quite different from merely heaving a message.
Skillful listening is not easy and requires much effort and talent.
Listening consists of several components; hearing, attending, understanding, remembering and responding.
Culture also plays a vital role in our listening perception.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What makes listening an effective exercise than hearing?
2.
How will you explain the components of listening in your facilitation session?
3.
Are there similarities between culture and listening?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adler, Ronald B., Lawrence B.R.
and Russell, F. P. (2004).
Interplay: the Process of Interpersonal Communication.
New York.
Hocker, J. L and Wilmot, W. W. (1978).
Interpersonal Conflict.
Lowa: Web Publishers.
Gundersen, D. F and Hopper, R. (1984).
Communication and Law Enforcement.
New York: University Press of America.
127PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION UNIT 4 RESOLVING CONFLICT THROUGH LISTENING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Listening in Conflict 3.2 Some Listening Interpretations 3.3 Principles of Listening in Conflict Resolution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Failing to listen well is a major source of conflict beyond the obvious reasons.
Not listening can also convey an impression of hostility, bias or 128PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION critical judgment of the person who is speaking.
Frowns, restlessness, and gestures of impatience can show a lack of interest, disregard, or empathy for the person speaking.
That doesn’t make the speaker feel too good and can create a real strain in the relationship but it may be entirely unintended.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • explain the relevance of listening in conflict resolution • discuss conflicting situations through effective listening.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Nature of Listening in Peace and Conflict If you can make another person feel really listened to, acknowledged, and understood, you’ll minimize your chances of conflict and ill feeling.
You will also profit from whatever information he or she is trying to say.
This doesn’t mean you have to agree with everything the person is saying.
But the person need to feel heard and his or her communication accepted.
It is the same principle as allowing an angry person to vent his or her anger or feelings on you listen receptively.
In this case you need to pay more attention and involve yourself fully.
The ideal thing is to listen with empathy.
You need to show that you accept what the person is saying without judgment.
You need to show that you at least understand how he or she might see things from his or her point of view, even if you don’t see things that same way.
Although, it can be hard to adopt this approach, especially in the middle of an upsetting conflict.
But if you can concentrate on active listening, you will find that this approach can do wonders for resolving the conflict.
It will help to calm the other person if that person is agitated and upset.
It will pave the way for a clearer discussion of the conflict.
And it will make you a better communicator in most of your interpersonal conflict or encounter.
According to communications experts, it is important to listen for two things when you listen attentively.
First is listening for content – what is actually being said.
But second, and very important, is listening for feelings.
In a conflict situation, a lot of feelings can be buried under the outward message you are hearing.
It is essential to bring those feelings out, if you hope for a satisfying, 129PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION lasting resolution.
Otherwise unexpressed hostilities can foster, such as in the case of spouse who finally says “fine, fine, do that” just to end an argument.
Yet, he or she is still seething underneath.
The external argument may be over, but the internal conflict is still going on, and it will heat up again.
If you are in a situation where someone has these underlying negative feelings, chances are you will sense anger and resentment when it is contained in the person’s voice.
You may want to overlook those perceptions to maintain an outward calm.
But the best approach is to acknowledge those feelings, so you sense.
You might even refer to these unvocalized feelings so you can work on truly clearing the air-one way to do this is to say something to suggest what you think the other person may be feelings underneath, such as: “I sense that….
“or” it sounds like… Then, add your interpretation, “you may be feeling…..” This way, by gently suggesting what you perceive (not by trying to impose your interpretation on the other person with a comment like; “you must be feeling”), the other person knows you are just checking, not presuming, and can sense your concern to resolve the problem or conflict, not just get it out of the way.
Then, he or she can let you know if you are correct about these unresolved feelings, and he or she will feel heard and understood.
Once true feelings are out in the open, or consciously set aside after being expressed, you are more likely to achieve a mutual, more deeply satisfying resolution.
3.2 Some Listening Interpretation The following chart illustrates how you might go about interpreting and responding to the meaning you sense from what someone says: What the person What you think What you might say says he/she means or feels to bring out real meaning or feeling “Do what you want” “I don’t like what you ‘I feel like you may want to do, but, I don’t not really want this.
feel like you care What do you really about what I think.
I want, and can we talk feel like you are going about this?” to do it your way anyway”.
“I don’t care’ “I do care, but I feel But you do seem to be frustrated.
You aren’t annoyed by what listening to what I am happened and I am saying” concerned about how you feel.
130PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION “Have it your way” I’m too tired to But I’d like to be sure struggle with you I have your input and anymore, do what you agreement too.
What want, but don’t like it.
would you like to see happen, so we can both get what we want?” Five, “or any other “It’s not fine, and I’m But it sounds like it words of apparent really very angry with really isn’t fine for approval, that are you.
I feel like I’m you.
What do you spoken in a relevant or being pushed around.
really feel about this?
angry tone to voice I’d really like to know”.
3.3 Principles of Listening in Conflict Resolution a - Listen with empathy b - Focus on the issues c - Show positive regard and respect for the other person d - Listen attentively without judgment e - Reflect back on what you think you heard to show the other person you’re listening.
f - Clarify what you don’t understand or are unsure about.
g - Encourage further discussion.
a.
Listen with Empathy: Regardless of how wronged or hostile you may feel, disengage yourself from your own feelings, and listen with an open, receptive mind.
Try to put yourself in the place of the other person.
Picture how the situation looks from his or her perspective.
Imagine how you and your responses sound from the other’s point of view.
b.
Focus on the Issues: Don’t let yourself get side tracked by responding to the person’s personality.
Remind yourself to listen to what the person is saying about the particular issue involved in the dispute.
If the conversation strays, you can ask questions to get the conversation back on track.
c. Show Positive Regard and Respect for the Other Person: Whatever the person says, reminds yourself that you will show respect for each other.
Acknowledge his or her anger or frustration.
Get the discussion in back on the issue by saying something like: “It sounds like this situation is really upsetting to you.
What would you like to do about it?” You might also remind the person about the need to deal with each other with respect by 131PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION saying something like “I know you’ve angry, but let’s try not to call each other names, and let’s work on solving this problem”.
In other words, take the high ground as you listen to try to keep emotions under control.
Then, as soon as you can, get, talk to dealing constructively with the problem.
d. Listen Attentively without Judgment: It is the best way to get to other person to say what he or she really thinks, and let out any feelings that might be getting or standing in the way of working out the problem.
It also allows the other person to “blow of steam” one way to do this is simply to rod from time to time.
You can offer occasional responses like “un, huh” or comments like; “Then what happened?” or “How did you feel?” such gestures and questions show that you’re paying attention.
They also help create an open, non-judgment environment where the other person feels free to express what he or she really thinks.
Ideally, by modeling attentive, non-judgmental listening yourself you ‘u’ be able to encourage someone else to do the same.
That will go a long way toward creating the receptive environment you need to come up with a productive solution to a conflict.
e. Reflect on what you think you heard to show the other person you are really listening: You can do this by using your own words to repeat important points the other person is making.
You might also reflect back on what you think the other person is feeling.
The idea is to be a kind of mirror to the other person to show you are really listening and understanding.
Yet, you’re not just parroting back the words.
You are paraphrasing what the person said, and you are presenting your perception of the persons’ feeling.
This clarifies the person’s message in your mind – and ensures you are not mis-hearing, because you give the other person a chance to correct you if you have heard anything wrong.
In paraphrasing, you might begin by saying something like “Let me see if I understand what you just said”, or “Am I correct in thinking that you’re saying…?
Then, you restate what you just heard in other words.
If you are reflecting the other person’s feelings, you might say something like, you sound/angry, upset, confused….)
about (identify the situation)”.
Be careful not to sound too definite or sure of yourself in reading feelings (“You are confused).
To do so is to lay your own assumptions or perception on the other person.
Rather, say “You seem….
About… “A sympathetic, interpretive comment can be particularly useful when someone seems very upset.
• Clarify what you don’t understand or unsure about: This is an important point for effective listening.
The key here is to get more information if there are facts you don’t understand or if you are not 132PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION sure about what the other person really mean or feel.
This principle may sound obvious, but often people go on in conversations without filling in these gaps.
Then miss-understandings can build and build.
For instance, say things like: “Do you mean that (Fill in what you think is meant)?
Are you feeling (upset, angry, discouraged)?” “Could you explain a little more about what you say happened?” • Encourage further discussion.
If you feel the other person hasn’t fully explained the situation, his point of view, or his feelings, you may encourage the person to say a little bit more.
A good way to do this with open ended comments.
You might say something like: “could you say more about this?” tell me more about it” how did you feel when ….?
Or “Can you tell me why this is so important to you?” when you ask such things, be sure to express your question in a neutral way to encourage the person to open up.
You want to avoid a challenging tone.
Implying that you are questioning the person’s reasons for feeling or responding in a certain way.
This approach is apt to put the person on the defensive.
The idea is to pave the way for more discussion in both your question and your tone.
Non verbal listening responses like smile also encourage the other person to continue talking i.e.
smile when you can, lean towards the speaker, nod, eye content all are indication and signs that you’re listening.
Note, the ultimate goals are to show you hear and understand the other person and care about what he or she is saying.
4.0 CONCLUSION Remember, the goal is to show you hear and understand the other person, and care about what he or she is saying.
It might feel uncomfortable or insincere at first to repeatedly express what you are hearing and understanding.
But you will find that with practice this approach comes naturally.
And if you take it seriously, you will find that your increased concern for the other person and his or her satisfaction becomes genuine.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed you to the act of listening well.
You do so with interest and concern and respect.
You want to show empathy, and to indicate that the speaker is being heard and understood.
Also, you are to listen attentively without interruption or judgment.
From time to time reflect back on what you heard to show the other person you are following the conversation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 133PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 1.
How relevant do you think listening can be in conflict situation?
2.
What are the principles of listening in conflict resolutions?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adler, Ronald B, Lawrence, B.R and Russell, F.P.
(2004).
Interplay: The Process of Interpersonal Communication, New York.
Hocker, J. L. and Wilmot, W. W. (1978).
Interpersonal Conflict.
Lowa: Web Publishers.
Gundersen, D. F and Hopper, R. (1984).
Communication and Law Enforcement.
New York: University Press of America.
UNIT 5 MEDIA ROLE IN PEACE AND CONFLICT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Significance of Mass Communication 3.1.1 Advantage of Mass Media 3.1.2 Disadvantage of Mass Media 3.2 Theories of Journalism in Peace and Conflict 3.3 Media Roles in Preventing and Moderating Conflict 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Mass media involves an array of institutions and individuals who differ in purpose, scope, method, and cultural context.
Mass media will 134PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION include all forms of information communicated to a large group of people, from a hand made sign to an international news network.
There is no standard for how large the audiences need to be before communication becomes “mass” communication.
There are also no constraints on the type of information being presented or telecast.
A film advertisement and a U. N. or African Union resolution are all examples of mass media.
The mass media are sources of information and news such as newspapers, magazines, radio and television, that reach and influence a large number of people.
Charles Wright in Aina (2003), defined Mass Communication in three characteristics.
(a) It is directed towards relatively large heterogeneous, and anonymous audiences (the masses who have varied background and do not know one another).
(b) Messages are transmitted publicly, often timed to reach the audience simultaneously, and are transient in character.
(c) The communicator is, or operates within, a complex organization requiring huge capital.
Because, media is such a broad term, it will be helpful to focus attention on a limited definition of the term.
In general usage, Mass media has been taken to refer to only “the group of corporate entities, publishers, journalists, and others who constitute the communications industry and profession”.
This definition includes the entertainment and news entities.
Another common term, especially in talking about coverage is ‘news media’.
News media include only the news industry.
It is often used interchangeably with “the press” or the group of people who write and report the news.
Distinction between users and entertainment can be at times be fuzzy, but news is technically facts and interpretation of facts, including editorial opinions, expressed by journalism professionals where facts are included, how these facts are reported, how much interpretation is given and how much space or time is devoted to a news events is determined by journalist and management and will depend on a variety of factors ranging from the “editorial judgment” of the reporters and editors, to 135PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION other news events competing for the same time or space to corporate policies that reflect management biases or ‘house style’.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define mass media • discuss theories of journalism in peace and conflict • explain media roles in preventing and moderating conflict.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Significance of Mass Communication Mass communicated media is found everywhere i.e.
television in your living room, the newspaper on vendor’s table, the radio in the car or in office, the computer at work, and fliers in the mailbox are just a few of the media channels daily delivering advertisements news, opinions, music and other forms of mass communication.
Because media are so prevalent in our environment, they have powerful impact on how these populations view the world.
Nearly all news in the Nigeria media comes from a major network (NTA Network Services) or newspapers.
It is only the most local and personal events that are experience first-hand.
Events in the larger community, the state, the country, and the rest of the world are experienced through the eyes of a journalist.
The media do not only report the news, they also create the news by deciding what to report.
The “top story” of the day has to be picked from about one in five (20 percent) of local and (17 percent) of national reporters say they have faced criticism or pressure from their bosses after production or writing a piece that was seen as damaging to their company’s financial interests”.
The drive to increase advertising revenue has led many local news to measure out world events and news in seconds to accommodate longer weather and sport reports.
Apart from control exercised by media owner, there are also government controls and self censorship.
Even the U.
S constitution that guarantees freedom of the press.
Yet one still find an evidence of some control over the media, particularly in times of war or crisis.
In many other countries around the world like in Africa, especially emerging nations and dictatorships, governments impose tight restrictions on journalists, 136PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION including penalties ranging from fines to imprisonment and execution.
In these environments, rigorous self-censorship is necessary for survival.
3.1.1 Advantage of Mass Media Without the media it would virtually be impossible to know events beyond one’s immediate environment.
The further one goes outside of one’s circle of friends and family, the more time consuming and expensive it becomes to get information.
Very few, if any communication one find individuals with resources to say independently informed of world events.
With the news however, all one has to do is turn one a television or buy a newspaper or visit a vendor’s table or turn to the internet.
Even when such news are biased or limited, it is a sum picture of what is happening around the world.
The more sources one is able to compare the more accurate the picture that can be put together.
In addition to the media conglomerates, there are also a range of independent news outlets, though they have a much smaller audience.
Some of these provide an alternatives view of events and often strive to publish stories that cannot be found in the mainstream media i.e.
soft sell magazine like Encomium, City People, Alaroye, P. M. News, etc.
Technological advances in many industrialized (primarily western) countries make it possible to read papers and watch broadcasts from around the globe.
While language skills can be a barrier, it is possible to live in the U.
S and watch Arab-language broadcasts from the Middle East or to get on the internet and read scores of Chinese newspapers.
Having access to these alternative voices limits the power of monopolies over information.
Another important benefit of mass media is that information can be relayed quickly in times of crisis.
Tornado and hurricane announcement can give large populations advance warning and allow them to take precautions and more out of harm’s way.
In a country suffering war, a radio broadcast outlining where the latest fighting is can alert people to areas to avoid.
In quieter times, the media can publish other useful announcements, from traffic reports to how to avoid getting HIV.
The news media also allow elected and other officials to communicate with their constituents.
Frequently, the delegates at a negotiation will find they understand each other much better over the course of their discussions, but that understanding will not reach the larger populations they represent without a concerted communications effort.
If constituents are not aware of these new understandings (and subsequent compromises) during the course of negotiations, they will almost certainly feel cheated when a final agreement falls far short of their 137PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION expectations.
To achieve ratification, delegates must justify the agreement by discussing it with and explaining it to their constituents.
Millions of thins that happened that particular day.
After an event or something is deemed, newsworthy, there are decisions on how much time or spare to give it, whom to interview.
What pictures to use, and how to frame it.
These decisions are often the prerogative of editors, but seldom discussed is how the biases and interests of management will impact these determinations.
All of these decisions will add up to the audiences view of the world, and those who influence the decisions influence the audience.
The media, therefore, have enormous importance/significance to conflict resolution because they are the primary and frequently only source of information regarding conflicts.
If a situation doesn’t make the news, it simply does not ‘exist’ for most people.
When peaceful options, such as negotiation and other collaborative problem-solving techniques are not covered or the successes are not reported, they become invisible and are not likely to be considered or even understood as possible options in the management of conflict.
3.1.2 Disadvantage of Mass Media News media thrive on conflict.
The lead story for most news programmers is typically the most recent and extreme crime or disaster i.e.
Armed robbers invade Bodija Market!
Or flood Wreck Havoc in Lagos.
Such news or conflict attracts viewers, listeners and readers to the media; the greater the conflict the greater the audience, and large audiences are imperative to the financial success of media outlets.
Therefore, it is often in the media’s interest to not only to report conflict, but also to play it up, making it seem more intense than it really is.
On going conflict-resolution processes such as mediation is not dramatic and are often difficult to understand and report, especially since the proceedings are almost always closed to the media.
Thus, conflict resolution stories are easily pushed and throughout the entire process and the media is often used for this purpose.
3.2 Theories of Journalism in Media and Conflict The discussion of media and conflict eventually leads to the purpose and responsibilities of journalists.
Most western audience expects objectivity of its new reports while, most citizens take this for granted, objective reporting has not been the historical norm.
This concept has often been 138PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION the focus of debate.
As Susan Caruthers states “News can never be valued free”, from nobody’s point of view.
It is a sentiment voice by numerous journalism professionals and teachers.
Deciding what the news is requires a value-judgment.
In question news media there is a consensus that news is something unusual which departs from everybody life and is quantifiable for example; the outbreak of war is news, but any fighting thereafter, might not be.
As the war continues, it’s newsworthiness depends on whether the news agency’s home troops are involved, whether the troops of close allies are involved, how many casualties are reported, how photogenic the victims are, whether reporters have access to the fighting and information about it, and what other stores occur at the same time.
News consists of events, not processes.
This bias can result in news reports where events seem to have no context.
In response to the drawbacks of “objective journalism”, some journalists have begun advocating for alternative models, such as “peace journalism” and “public journalism”.
Peace journalism advocates the belief that journalists should use the power of the media to help resolve conflict rather than report it from a distance.
Its detractors argue that “once a journalist has set himself the goal of stopping or influencing wars, it is a shout step to accepting that any means to achieving that end are justified.
Public journalism seeks to explore issues affecting a community and stay with those issues long enough to give the community enough information to understand the conflict and get involved.
This, however, often requires a long term commitment by journalist and news media to follow a story over the course of the conflict.
If the story is of continuing high importance to the readers – such as a war that involves local troops, such coverage is common.
If the story is not deemed continuously ‘newsworthy’, however, it takes a committed journalist to continue to write about it.
3.3 Media Roles in Preventing and Moderating Conflict According to Ted Robert Gurr, who has done the most ambitious data gathering, “every form of ethno political conflict has increased dramatically since 1950’s.
Violent communal protests and open rebellion are both four times what they were a half centuries ago, social violence, in other words, is now more likely to occur than at any other time in human history, and to be devastating in its consequences when it does so”.
139PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION With this in mind and for real politic, humanitarian, and moral reasons, one cannot avoid to ask what more can be done in common interest to reduce and prevent such conflict and the suffering that attends it.
With this proposition, few would disagree.
But why invoke the media in this context?
Because it is clear that taken together, mass media technologies, institutions professionals, norms and practices constitute one of the fundamental forces now shaping the lives of individuals and the fate of people and nations and as a result, this constitute a major human resource whose potential to help prevent and moderate social violence begs to be discussed, evaluated and where appropriately mobilized.
The following are forms of media activities at moderating and preventing conflict at local, national according to United State Institute of Peace.
The media could • Promote and help enforce national or international norms regarding human rights, the conduct of war, the treatments of minorities, or other issues.
• Relay negotiating signals between parties that have no formal communication or require another way to signal.
• Focus the attention of the international community on developing conflict, and by doing so bring pressure on the parties to revolve if or on the international community to intervene.
• Establish the transparency of one conflict party to another • Engage in conflict building measures • Support international peacekeeping operation in countries where they are active and in countries contributing military contingents.
• Educate parties and communities involved in conflict, thereby changing the information environments of disputes which is critical to the conflict resolution process.
• Identify the underlying interests of each party to a conflict for the other • Prevent the circulation of rumors and counteract them when they surface.
140PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION • Identify the care value of disputants, something that is often critical to helping them understanding their own priorities and those of their opposite number.
• Identify and explain underlying material and psychological needs of parties to a conflict, clarifying the structural issues that are perceived to be at stake.
• Frame the issues involved in the conflict in such a ay that become more susceptible to management.
• Identify resources that may be available to help resolve conflicts, or to mobilize outside assistance in doing so.
• Establish networks to circulate information concerning conflict prevention and management activities that have been successful elsewhere • Publicize what should be public and privatize what is best left private in any negotiating process, although the definitions in each case are likely to be highly contested and should not be taken for granted.
• Encourage balance of power among unequal parties where the claims of parties are not equal just, strengthen the hand of the party with the more compelling moral.
• Enable parties to formulated and articulate proposed solution by serving as a non-antagonistic interlocutor • Provide early warning of impending conflicts • Signal the importance of accords that end conflicts by historicizing them as important public occasions in order to embed the solution process in shared social memories.
These are partial account of potential media roles.
A fuller account would describe a complex set of activities undertaken by a great variety of factors operating from institutional bases in independent, multilateral, and governmental institutions in conflict situations of great diversity.
This will of course require the combined efforts of media professionals, diplomats, conflict resolution experts and diverse protagonists.
4.0 CONCLUSION 141PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION The media forms a very important and indispensable tools in any conflict situation .this prominence is in the fact that the media bridge’s the gap between conflict situation and peaceful one.
No conflict situation or society in crisis can carry on without the media.
It is a channel that parties in conflict rely on to ventilate their feeling and needs against the other party.
The media is therefore in a vantage position influence parties in conflict into adopting a peaceful situation or outcome.
By media, we mean all those print and electronic outfits both public and private.
Almost all state governments own print media houses, which publish various newspapers, magazines and gazettes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this last unit, we have looked at the role of the media in peace and conflict.
We begin by giving some various definitions of mass media as an array of institutions and individual who are source of information and news such as newspapers, magazines, radio and television that reach and influence large numbers of people.
Also discussed are mass media significance, their advantage and disadvantage in conflict situations, we equally looked at theories of journalism in peace and conflict.
And finally we, discussed media roles in preventing and moderating conflict according to United States Institute of peace.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How do you adjudge the role of Nigerian media in conflict management?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Young, Christopher (1991).
The Role of the Media in International Conflict.
Canadian Institute for Peace and Security.
Working Paper no 38.
George N. A.
(2005).
The Role of Media in Manpower Development in Nigeria.
In Knowledge Review volume 10 no 2 pp53/56 Aina Sina (2003).
Anatomy of Communications.
Abeokuta: Julian Publishers.
142PCR 375 LANGUAGE AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT IN PEACE AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION 143
