 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COURSE CODE: POL 341 COURSE TITLE: PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGEIRA 1  MAIN CONTENT POL 431 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA Course Writers: Dr. Maryam Omolara Quadri Department of Political Science University of Lagos, Akoka Course Coordinator: Abdul-Rahoof Adebayo Bello School of Arts & Social Sciences National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Editor: Programme Leader: Prof. Remi Anifowose Department of Political Science University of Lagos National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos MODULE 1: BACKGROUND TO THE STUDY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 2  Unit1: Introduction to the Study of Public Administration Unit 2: Nature and Scope of Public Administration Unit 3: Approaches to the Study of Public Administration Unit 4: Principles of Public Administration Unit 5: Private and Public Administration UNIT 1: INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Public Administration – Meaning and Definitions 3.1.1 What is Administration?
3.1.2 Public Administration – Definitions 3.2 Main Components of Public Administration 3.3 Characteristics of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is the first part of the discussion under the broad framework we termed background to the study of public administration.
The unit introduces the student to the basic ideas of public administration.
These include gaining insight into the meaning of ‘administration’ and ‘public administration’ as well as examination of various definitions of public administration as provided by scholars in the field.
Student will also learn the characteristics of public administration and its basic components.
In the next four Units under this Module, we shall be discussing other issues that fall within the purview of background to the study of public administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 3 At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: 1.
Examine various definitions of public administration; 2.
Discuss the characteristics of public administration; and 3.
Discuss the basic components of public administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION – MEANING AND DEFINITIONS 3.1.1 What is Administration?
Administration is a universal process and must exist in any organization set up for a defined purpose or objective.
Whether we think of the church, the army, a university, an industrial or business concern or a purely social organization, there has to be administration because each one consists of human beings brought together in a hierarchical set-up, making use of tools, equipment, human and material resources, all in the quest to attain the objective for which the organization is established (Adebayo, 1981).
Thus administration is seen as a process of management which is practiced by all kinds of organizations from the household to the most complex system of government.
The reason is why administration is a generic term.
Let us consider some definitions of administration as conceived by some writers.
 Administration is the organization and direction of human and material resources to achieve desired ends – Pfiffner.
 Administration is the organization and direction of persons in order to accomplish a specified end – Adebayo.
 Administration is determined action taken in pursuit of a conscious purpose.
It is the systematic ordering of affairs and the calculated use of resources aimed at making those things happen which one wants to happen – Marx.
 Administration is the organization and use of men and materials to accomplish a purpose – Nigro.
The two features of administration are (a) cooperative efforts and (b) pursuit of common objectives.
Administration is thus concerned with organization of men and materials to achieve desired ends.
Administration consists of ‘doing the work’ or ‘getting the work done 4 by the others’.
There are three commonalities for any comprehensive definition of administration; Goals, limited resources, and people.
 Goals - purposiveness of an organization.
 Limited resources – economic resources are scarce, so administrators have to allocate resources for efficient utilization to achieve stated goals.
 People for cooperative action.
Administration involves cooperative efforts to achieve the objectives of the organization.
Administration may be private or public.
When it refers to the activities of a household, corporation or company, it is private administration, but when it refers to the activities of the state as being undertaken by the central, provincial or local government, it is called public administration.
These two types of administration shall be discussed in detail in Unit (5).
3.1.2 Public Administration – Definitions Public administration is the art and science of management as applied to the affairs of state (Waldo).
Woodrow Wilson defined public administration as “detailed systematic execution of public law, every particular application of general law is an act of administration.
Public administration is the fulfillment or enforcement of public policy as declared by the competent authorities.
It deals with the problem and powers, the organization and techniques of management involved in carrying out the laws and policies formulated by the policy- making agencies of government.
Public administration is law in action.
It is the executive side of government (Dimock).
Public administration is that part of the science of administration which has to do with Government and thus concerns itself primarily with the executive branch where the work of the Government is done (Gullick).
Public administration has come to signify primarily the organization, personnel, practices and procedures essential for effective performance of the civilian functions entrusted to the executive branch of government (Morstein Marx).
Nigro provides a more comprehensive meaning and definition of public administration.
According to him, Public Administration: is cooperative group effort in a public setting; covers all three branches – executive, legislative 5 and judicial – and their relationships has an important role in the formulation of public policy and thus, is part of the political process; is more important than, and different in significant ways from private administration; as a field of study and practice it has been much influenced in recent years by the human relations approach and is closely associated with numerous private groups and individuals in providing services to the community.
Public administration is decision-making, planning the work to be done, formulating objectives and goals, working with the legislative and citizens organizations to gain public support and funds for government programmes, establishing and revising organizations, directing and supervising employees, providing leadership, communicating and receiving communications, determining the work methods and procedures, appraising performance, exercising controls, and other functions performed by government, the means by which the purposes and goals of government are realized (Basu, 1994).
All of these definitions identify public administration with:  The formulation and implementation of public policies;  The executive branch of government;  Organizational structures and machinery of administration;  Administrative processes;  Bureaucracy and its activities;  Coordination of group activity or social relationship; and  Interaction between organization and their environment (Basu, 1994).
Public administration is the non-political bureaucratic machinery of the government for implementing its laws and policies in action, e.g.
the collection of revenues, maintenance of law and order, running the railways and postal services, are all acts of administration.
However, the objective of public administration is the most efficient utilization of the resources at the disposal of officials and employees (this includes material, equipment, human resources).
6 In the study of public administration, emphasis is on the notion of efficiency – focus on how to improve the machinery of government for effective service delivery.
3.2 BASIC COMPONENTS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION The basic components of public administration according to Goel (2008) should aim at: a closer focus on results in terms of efficiency and effectiveness and service quality; the replacement of highly centralized hierarchical organizational structures with decentralized management environments, where decisions on resource allocation and service delivery are taken closer to the point of delivery and, which provide scope for feedback from clients and other interest groups; flexibility to explore alternatives to direct public provision, which might provide more cost-effective policy outcomes; new personnel management policies to provide greater flexibility in the deployment of staff (e.g through multi-skilling); The use of mechanisms to improve performance (such as performance contracting) and the creation of competitive and market environment within and between public sector organizations; incentives to improve performance (or at least removing disincentives) through enabling organizations to retain a portion of savings from improved performance; the strengthening of strategic capacities at the center to ‘steer” government to respond to external changes and diverse interests quickly, flexibly and at least cost; and greater accountability and transparency through requirements to report on results.
3.3 CHARACTERISITCS OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION We can talk about the main characteristics or main features of public administration.
Balogun (1983) provides what he describes as the enduring characteristics of public administration.
These include: The primacy of ends, goals or objectives.
The source and origin of administration are the ends which are meant to be served.
7 The interlocking relationship between policy and formulation and policy implementation roles.
From the broad goals identified, policies are formulated and then implemented.
Although the political class sometimes lays claim to exclusive control of the policy formulation process, administrators have a vital role to play in the areas of policy analysis, fact gathering, and options identification, all of which will finally lead to formulation of policy.
The integrative role of organization.
Even when policies are conceived and formulated outside the framework of organizations, the implementation generally takes place in bureaucratic organizations or in ‘programme’ or matrix organizations.
It is in such organizations that human and material resources are co- ordinated and deployed to achieve policy objectives.
The interposition of values and ethics.
Although administration is a universal concept, its practice tends to be conditioned by values prevailing at any particular time and place.
The intrusion of economic values.
If public administration was originally concerned in the main with political values and objectives, it now has to accommodate economic values in view of its intervention in economic spheres.
Any comprehensive definition and consideration of public administration will need to highlight the above characteristics.
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Explain what you understand by Administration.
Discuss the basic components of public administration.
4.0 CONCLUSION From our discussion, we can observe that public administration has to do with people, how they are coordinated to achieve a specified objective (s).
Public administration has to do with the activities of government; in fact, it is referred to as the non-political machinery of government carrying on its work for the welfare of the people according to the laws set up by the state.
It is public administration that provides the visibility of 8 government operations.
When policies and programmes are implemented people can feel their impact.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt what administration is.
You have come across various definitions of public administration and what constitutes its basic components.
You have also learnt the major characteristics of public administration.
As we said in the introduction of this unit, this is a part of the discussion on the background to the study of public administration.
You will come across some other fundamental issues in the study of public administration in units 2, 3, 4, and 5 of this module.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss your understanding of the term ‘public administration’ 2.
Explain the major characteristics of public administration.
3.
Deriving from the various definitions you have come across, identify public administration REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, A.
(1981) Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan.
Spectrum Books Limited.
Balogun, M.J. (1983) Public Administration in Nigeria – A Developmental Approach.
London.
Macmillan Press Ltd. Basu, R. (1994) Public Administration- Concepts and Theories.
New Delhi.
Sterling Publishers Private limited.
Bhagwan, V. and Bhushan, V. (2006) Public Administration.
New Delhi.
S. Chand &Company Ltd. Goel, S.L.
(2008) Advanced Public Administration.
New Delhi.
DEEP &DEEP PUBLICATIONS PVT LTD. 9 UNIT 2: NATURE AND SCOPE OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Nature of Public Administration 3.2 The Scope of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION By now, you should be familiar with the basic ideas about public administration.
In the last unit, you came across some definitions of public administration, its main characteristics as well as its basic components.
In this unit, you are moving further in your knowledge of fundamentals of public administration.
You will learn about the nature and scope of public administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 1.
At the end of the discussion in this unit, you should be able to: 2.
Discuss the nature and scope of public administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nature of Public Administration There are two main divergent views regarding the nature of Public Administration.
Integral view According to this view, public administration is a sum total of all the activities undertaken in pursuit of and in fulfillment of public policy.
These activities include managerial, technical, as well as manual and clerical.
In this manner, the activities of all persons from top to bottom constitute administration although they are of varying significance to the running of administrative machinery (Bhagwan and Bhushan, 2006).
10 Dimock was of the view that administration is concerned with the ‘what’ and the ‘how’ of government.
The ‘what’ is the subject matter, the technical knowledge of a field which enables the administrator to perform his tasks.
The ‘how’ is the technique of management, the principles according to which cooperative programmes are carried to success.
Managerial view According to this view, the works of only those persons who are engaged in the performance of managerial functions in an organization constitute administration.
The job of this group of people is to plan, programme and organize all the activities in an organization so as to achieve the desired ends.
These two views differ from each other in many ways.
The integral view includes the activities of all persons engaged in administration whereas the managerial view restricts itself only to the activities of a few persons at the top.
The integral view postulates all types of activities from manual to managerial and from non-technical to technical, but managerial view takes into account only the managerial activities in an organization.
According to the integral view, administration would differ from one person sphere to another depending upon the subject matter, whereas the managerial view is identified with the managerial techniques common to all fields of administration.
3.2 Scope of Public Administration Several writers in the field of public administration have defined the scope of Public Administration in varying degree.
To Luther Gullick, the scope of public administration will include Planning, Organising, Staffing, Directing, Coordinating, Reporting and Budgeting (POSDCORB).
According to Gullick, the POSDCORB activities are common to all organizations.
They are the common problems of management which are found in the different agencies regardless of the peculiar nature of the work they do.
11 Public administration is concerned with ‘the what’ and ‘the how’ of government.
The ‘what’ is the subject matter, technical knowledge of a field which enables an administrator to perform his tasks.
The ‘how’ is the technique of management.
The major divisions of the subject matter fall into four groupings:  What a government does – determination of objectives, internal administrative policies and plans and the range of governmental business.
 How a government organizes its staff, and finances its work, that is the structure of government organization.
 How administrative secure cooperation and teamwork study of such problems as administrative responsibility, leadership, direction, coordination, delegation, headquarters – field relationship, supervision and public relations.
 How administration is held accountable.
This means study of internal controls, and control of administrative activities by the legislature and the courts (Basu, 1994).
By common consensus, the essential components of administration are planning, organizing, staffing, initiating, delegating, directing, overseeing, coordinating, and evaluating.
The various activities forming part of the scope of public administration are indicated by POSDCORB which we have discussed above.
Walker cited in Bhagwan and Bhushan (2006:8) provides an account of the scope of public administration by dividing it into two parts: - a) Administrative theory, and b) Applied administration Administrative theory This includes the study of structure, organization, functions, and methods of all types of public authority engaged in carrying out the administration at all levels, i.e.
national, regional, and local.
It is a study of all problems connected with external control of 12 parliament and the Cabinet over administration, internal control of administrative machinery, judicial control over administration, administrative tribunals; planning, programming and execution of public actions, recruitment of personnel and problems connected therewith, research, information, public relations.
The emphasis here is to find out certain principles of administrative actions which can be usefully applied in practical administration.
Applied Administration It may be difficult to really state what applied administration should include, however Walker made a classification of the main forms of applied administration based on ten principal functions, which include the followings:  Political: it includes a study of executive-legislative relationship, politico- administrative activities of the cabinet, minister-official relationships.
 Legislative: it includes delegated legislation, preparatory work done by the officials in drafting of bills for enactment.
 Financial: it includes the whole of financial administration from preparation to the enactment of budget, etc.
 Defensive: it includes a study of military administration.
 Social: all administration in the social field such as housing, food, social security and employment etc.
 Economic: it covers all administrative activities in the economic field, i.e., industries, agriculture, foreign trade, commerce, public enterprises, etc.
 Foreign: it covers foreign administration which includes international co- operation, international agencies for international peace and prosperity, diplomacy, etc.
 Imperial: it includes problems and techniques of imperial domination over other nations, etc.
 Local: it covers administration of local bodies.
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Discuss the two divergent views about the nature of public administration.
13 4.0 CONCLUSION The nature and scope of public administration as discussed in this unit reveal that the field of public administration is very wide.
Public administration on one hand can be considered as the implementation of public policy (administering the policies of government).
Performing this task will involve every cadre of the organization; managerial, administrative, technical and non-technical.
On another hand, it can be seen as managerial aspect of an organization where the focus is on the managerial activities.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the nature and scope of public administration.
The section identifies two divergent views of public administration: the integral and managerial views.
We also discussed the scope of public administration.
If we consider the scope of public administration from Walker’s classification, we can then reach a conclusion that the scope of public administration is very wide.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
What are the ten principal functions which form the basis upon which Walker made his classification of the forms of applied administration?
2.
Discuss the two divergent views on the nature of public administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Basu, R. (1994).
Public Administration - Concepts and Theories.
New Delhi.
Sterling Publishers Private limited.
Bhagwan, V. and Bhushan, V. (2006) Public Administration.
New Delhi.
S. Chand & Company Ltd. 14 UNIT 3: APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Approaches to the Study of Public Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will be introduced to different approaches to the study of public administration.
Since 1887 when public administration as a separate academic discipline was born, various approaches have developed.
Basu (1994) distinguish between traditional and the new approaches to the study of administration.
Our focus will be on understanding these approaches.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the various approaches to the study of public administration.
2.
Differentiate between the various approaches to the study of public administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Approaches to the study of Public Administration We shall consider the various approaches as provided by Basu (1994: 65-77).
Historical Approach The historical approach is essentially based on the belief that knowledge of history is essential for an in-depth study of any subject.
For a proper understanding of the subject the study of public administration of the past in particular periods is necessary to link 15 up with the present administrative systems.
If we take Nigeria for example, in order to understand the evolution, the growth and development of its administration, a historical perspective is essential.
This may involve knowing the nature of public administration in the pre-colonial period (Traditional Society), during colonial period and how these developed into the modern public administration.
Legal Approach The legal approach concentrates on the formal legal structure and organization of public bodies.
The approach stresses the formal organization of offices, official duties, and limitations of power and discretionary authority of administrators.
Its main sources are constitutions, codes of law, office manuals of rules and regulations and judicial decisions.
The legal approach is valuable for the understanding of the legal framework within which administrative system has to operate, but by neglecting the informal forces operating in the organization (the sociological and psychological variables), it remains to a great extent an incomplete approach to the study of public administration (Basu 1994:66).
Institutional Approach The Institutional approach tries to establish the linkages between the study of public administration and the institutions of government.
Its focus is on the study of the structure and functioning of separate institutions and organizations of the state – such as the executive, the legislature, the departments, government corporations, boards and commissions.
The Institutional approach considers the study of organizations, their principles, goals and structure as primary to the study of administration.
But just like the legal approach, the institutional approach has its own limitations.
The approach completely neglects the environmental and informal factors on administration.
16 Behavioural Approach Modern behaviouralism developed in the late 30s and 40s and concerned itself with the scientific study of human behavior in diverse social environments.
It started as a protest against traditional, historical, normative and largely descriptive approaches in the social sciences.
The behavioural approach in administrative studies has the following important features:  Its literature is descriptive, rather than prescriptive, with the studies on motivation being an exception.
 Increased attention is paid to the individual based on more realistic research-concerning motivation, decision-making processes and the nature of authority.
 Stress is laid on informal relationships and communication patterns among members of an organization.
 It emphasizes operational definition of terms and empirical study based on rigorous methods, such as field study, laboratory experiments or use of other statistical methods.
 It is chiefly, though not exclusively, concerned with quantification, and formal theory construction.
 It is interdisciplinary in character, and makes considerable use of propositions drawn from other social sciences (Basu 194:68).
Concisely, the behaviouralists sought to adopt an integrated and interdisciplinary approach.
According to the behaviouralists all human actions are motivated by social, economic, political, or psychological environment from which they come.
The behavioural approach has been criticized for being of limited utility in the analysis of all types of administrative phenomena.
The argument is that the complexity and variability of human nature, motivations and behavior preclude the attainment of precision that is so characteristic of the physical sciences.
Again, value oriented or normative problems and issues of organization cannot really be explained or interpreted in terms of the behavioural approach.
17 Structural-Functional Approach The two concepts basic to this approach are structure and function.
All social structures exist to perform certain functions.
While functions concern the consequences of patterns of action, structures refer to the patterns of actions and the resultant institutions of the systems themselves.
The structural-functional framework provides an important mechanism for the analysis of different social processes.
In structural functionalism, social structure is viewed as ‘any pattern of behavior which has become a standard feature of a social system’.
All social structures perform some ‘functions’.
In structural-functional terms, a ‘function’ involves ‘a pattern of interdependence’ between two or more structures, a relationship between variables.
It refers to any consequences of a structure in so far as they affect other structures or the total system of which they are a part.
We should note that all similar structures do not necessarily perform similar functions.
A social structure may perform multiple functions and similarly one function may be performed by more than one structure.
Ecological Approach Various scholars and administrative theorists have often referred to the need to relate public administration to the environment in which it functions.
The ecological perspective in the study of public administration was introduced primarily through the writing of John Gaus, who first elaborated this approach in his Reflections of Public Administration 1945.
Gaus advocated the concept of relating government functions to the environment which included such factors as people, situation, culture, technology amongst others.
These factors must be included in the ‘ecological’ study of public administration.
The ecological approach assumes that administrative behavior is peculiarly moulded by the values of the administrative culture in which it functions, the administrative culture in being an outgrowth of the interaction of values and traits of the administrative system 18 with the social system as a whole.
An administrative system may not act as an independent variable in all circumstances.
It acts and reacts under the influence of various sub-systems surrounding it.
There is a degree of interdependence between all social organizations and their ecological settings (environment).
Organizations, structures, procedures and goals are largely created and changed as a result of the interaction between an organization and its environment.
Thus, if an organization is to survive it must adapt itself to the changing needs and conditions of its external environment.
The merit of ecological approach lies in the value and relevance of studying people in relation to their environment, taking into consideration their peculiar characteristics and problems.
Self Assessment Exercise (SAE) Evaluate the institutional approach to the study of public administration.
Differentiate between legal approach and ecological approach.
4.0 CONCLUSION There are various approaches to the study of public administration.
Each approach emphasizes something unique about public administration.
While some focus on the institutions, goals, structures of organization others stress the environmental and informal factors in organization while some focus on the integrated and holistic method of studying an organization.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined various approaches to the study of organization.
As we observed in this unit, each approach focuses on one unique factor with which we can study organization.
19 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss the features of the behavioural approach to the study of public administration.
2.
Examine the institutional and legal approaches to the study of public administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Basu, R. (1994) Public Administration- Concepts and Theories.
New Delhi.
Sterling Publishers Private limited.
20 UNIT 4: PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles of Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, student will be introduced to basic principles of public administration.
There is what we may call the principles of public administration.
These principles may be expected to serve the practical purpose of providing an essentially conceptual framework to facilitate the study of public administration.
These principles we shall learn in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Discuss various principles of public administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PRINCIPLES OF ADMINISTRATION Bhagwan and Bhushan (2006: 70-77) provide a checklist of the principles of public administration.
Let us consider these principles one after the other.
a) Principle of political direction Public administration is an agency of government.
The subordinate machinery obeys the general directions as issued by the political authority.
It is directed by the political laws and statues.
The objectives of administrative actions are defined and authorized by 21 the political authority in a state possessing to compel members of the society over which it presides to act in certain ways.
Since the ends it pursues are not of its own devising, public administration serves the will of others.
That will is formed and expressed by political, not administrative, machinery.
The administrative only receives the orders from the above and has no initiative left in its own hands.
The only initiative, which an administrative body possesses, is with regard to those activities or spheres which have not been touched by the superior authority and are left to the administrative bodies in their discretion.
b) Principle of authority Public administration is carried by persons who have certain powers or authority.
Authority is the power or right of a person commanding other people to do things and in general of getting work done by them.
The authority comes to an administrator from the nature of things.
It results from the position of superiority occupied by some people over others.
The authority, which a superior exercises, is of three sorts, one legal or statutory, second, which follows from the nature of the position he holds, and the third, from his own personality.
The legal authority is one which is given to him by the rules and regulations of administration.
But sometimes conditions and circumstances may arise not contemplated in the rules and regulations which may call for command on the one side and obedience on the other.
Such command or authority will be said to flow from the nature of the position the superior holds.
The third source of authority is the personality of the superior due to his intelligence, knowledge, experience and the moral value of his personality.
Authority and his counterpart obedience keep administration in order.
c) Principle of public responsibility The third principle that follows is the principle of public responsibility.
Public administration is responsible for all its acts to the political executive which in its turn is responsible to the public through legislature and thus public administration, if not 22 directly, it is indirectly responsible to the people for its acts through political chief.
Public administration must be sure of the grounds on which it acts since it can be questioned at anytime.
It must be able to explain its activities when required to do so.
Adequate records of the grounds and reasons for its actions as well as of the actions themselves must be maintained.
That is why that official business is not conducted orally but by correspondence and by written minutes preserved in files.
Since public administration is ultimately responsible to the public, this responsibility as a whole will tend to require uniformity in administrative action.
Civil servants cannot give special considerations to individuals of a particular group.
Their treatments should be uniform throughout.
It will always be difficult in public administration to justify giving special consideration and treatments to individuals, which is not extended generally to all individual in like circumstances.
d) Principle of social necessity From the above mentioned principles it should not be inferred that administrative responsibility is merely the responsibility of obeying others- as a squad of new recruits obeys a drill sergeant on the parade ground.
Public administration is much more than mere being a faithful servant.
It is the inevitable necessity and the absolute indispensability.
Social action is impossible without administrative action.
In the present age the social machinery cannot run without the aid of public administration, it is the inevitable part of the social link something very essential in the nature of society to set up one set of conditions into another.
So great are the complexities of all the requirements of social action that political machinery alone is unable to plan their execution in all details.
Much has to be left to the administrative action if political ends are to be achieved.
It is, in other words, a necessary part of the government of a country.
23 e) Principle of efficiency No governmental machinery can be successful unless civil service is efficient.
Though efficiency is not of special and exclusive application to public administration, since many other humans’ activities also seek to be efficient, nevertheless the guidance of such a principle cannot be omitted from a set of administrative principles because without it the subject would lack a standard by which its performance could be assessed.
The principle of efficiency therefore holds an important place in the realm of public administration.
f) Principle of Organization This principle draws attention to the need for careful organization or structuring of the administrative machinery.
Upon this principle depends in large measure the value of the contribution public administration can make to social well-being.
Though the organization must be economical, yet it should not be lacking the basic ingredients of a perfect organization.
“Co-ordination”, “correlation” and “integration” are blessed words covering a multitude of administrative virtues.
Every department of public administration must be correlated with each other.
There must not be water-tight separation between the various departments.
The government is a unit and must be run as a unit.
Important and independent activities should be integrated at one place.
Coordination of the work of all the parts of administration is absolutely necessary to make the administrative system work.
g) Principles of Public Relations Public Administration is a means and not an end in itself.
It exists for the welfare of individuals and since it affects their welfare, it is essential that it must understand the needs and desires of the people.
The principle of public relations enjoins effective interaction between administration and the public affected by administration and the public affected by administration.
It points to the need for an integration of democratic experience and will with the administrative agencies designed for its expression.
It is 24 only when public relations have been rightly established that there can be true democratic system of public administration.
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Examine two of the principles of public administration 4.0 CONCLUSION There is what we can refer to as principles of public administration.
They are the statements which succeed in showing the broad dimensions of a subject and at the same time map out its main features.
We can learn different things about public administration from each of these principles.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined the basic principles of public administration as provided by Bhagwan and Bhushan (2006).
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss the principles of public administration 2.
Examine the three types of authority an administrator hold under the principle of authority of public administration 7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING Bhagwan, V. and Bhushan, V. (2006) Public Administration.
New Delhi.
Chand and Company Ltd. 25 UNIT 5: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ADMINISTRATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Differences between Public and Private Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will recall in our discussion in unit, we alluded that administration may be private or public.
When it refers to the activities of a household, corporation or company, it is private administration, but when it refers to the activities of the state as being undertaken by the central, provincial or local government, it is called public administration.
In this unit, you will learn more about the major differences that exist between public administration and private administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Discuss the major differences between public administration and private administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Differences between Public Administration and Private Administration Politics versus Profits One of the major distinctions between public and private administrations lie in the fact that the goals of public administration are grounded in politics and decision making processes that may affect an entire community of citizens, whereas the goals of private administration are founded on the maximization of profit.
Decision making in public 26 bureaucracies is achieved by meeting the objectives of compromise, consensus, and democratic participation.
These objectives are different from the private sector’s emphasis on the concepts of efficiency, rationality, and profit Berkley and Rouse (1994).
Public responsibility Public administration has responsibility to the public.
It has to face the criticism of the public, press and political parties.
Public officials are to act in accordance with the wishes of the people expressed through their representatives, the legislators and the ministers who are held responsible for their fulfillment.
The principle of public responsibility requires the public administration to keep elaborate records and accounts of their actions.
Also, to make public the activities of public servants so that the people may know what is being done by the government and in what manner, so that they may control their activities by their criticisms and may be in a position to offer suggestions for improvements in administration.
Private administration does not have any great responsibility towards the public.
Private administration is not responsible to the public in the sense in which the public administration is.
While public administration is directly responsible to the people to a very great extent, private administration is only responsible to the people indirectly and that too also to secure its own ends and not for the welfare of the people.
Nature of function Public administration is more comprehensive.
It deals with the various types of the needs of the people, for example, public administration maintains railways to facilitate movement of goods and passengers, provides posts, maintains hospitals and health centres to protect public health.
Public administration carries out functions which are vital for the very existence of the people, for example, maintenance of law and order.
Private administration does not usually cover so many aspects of human life.
It is mostly concerned with the economic needs of life.
Again, public administration owns 27 monopoly in some of the services, for example, it alone runs railways, maintains an army.
No private individual can undertake any of these functions.
In private administration more than one organization undertakes the same activity for example, the telecommunication network provider in Nigeria, there are MTN, Globacom, Multilink, Airtel and so on.
Efficiency Private administration is said to be conducted upon a level of efficiency superior to that of public administration.
In a private administration, the incentive of more profits impels the individual to devote himself wholeheartedly to his business.
This incentive is lacking in public administration.
Consequently the administration of public affairs cannot be made equal to the efficiency of private administration.
Organization Although, the principle of organization is relevant to both public and private administration, it has social consequences in the sphere of public administration, which is of far greater influence than in private administration.
This is because a defect in organization of public administration will do more harm to the public than a defect in private administration can do, and even if any harm is done by it, it would be of so less significance that it would be negligible.
Monopolistic In the field of public administration, there is generally a monopoly of the government and it does not allow private parties to compete with it.
In the case of private administration, there are several organizations competing with each other to supply the same commodity or to meet the same need (Bhagwan and Bhushan, 2006).
In spite of the differences discussed above, some points of convergence between public and private administrations do exist.
28 Both types of administration are interested in matters economic as well as socio- political, although the degree of interest will vary depending on circumstances.
Since it also takes place within a dynamic socio-political environment, business administration cannot pretend to have nothing to do with the public, or with the issues of morals and ethics confronting society.
As a process, public and business administration take place within formal organizations.
Public administration may also find itself being regulated not just by public law, but also by private, mercantile law (the enactments on hours of work, employment of women, working conditions and so on) apply as much to the public sector as they do to the private sector (Balogun, 1983).
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Discuss the main differences between public and private administrations 4.0 CONCLUSION Administration as we identified in Unit (1) is a universal process.
It is seen as management of human and non-human material to achieve an objective.
However, administration as practiced in the public sector is different from administration in the private sector.
The above differences we identified show that both the public and private administration are place in different surroundings.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the various ways in which public administration is different from private administration.
From their characterization, public administration is bureaucratic, while private administration is business-like and driven by profit motive.
Public administration is political, while private administration is non-political.
Public administration is complex dealing with varying aspect of public life while private administration operation is limited in scope.
Public administration is subject to the principle of external control of the legislature, while private administration is basically under the control of its owners.
29 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Compare and contrast Public and Private Administrations.
2.
Mention reasons why Public Administration is more complex than Private administration 3.
Assess the the similarities between public and private administrations 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Balogun, M.J. (1983) public Administration in Njgeria – A Developmental Approach.
London.
The MacMillan Press.
Berkley, G. and Rouse, J.
((1984) The Craft of Public Administration.
Madison.
WCB Brown and Benchmark Publishers.
Bhagwan, V. and Bhushan, V. (2006) Public Administration.
New Delhi.
S. Chand &Company Ltd. 30 MODULE 2: PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1: The Study of Local Government Unit 2: Evolution of the Nigerian Local Government Unit 3: The 1950s Local Government Reforms in Nigeria Unit 4: The 1976 Local Government Reforms in Nigeria Unit 5: Local Government in Nigeria Since 1984 UNIT 1: THE STUDY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Local Government – Definitional Issues 3.2 Primary Purpose of Local Government 3.3 Features of Local Government 3.4 Theories of Local Government 3.4.1 Democratic- Participatory School of Thought 3.4.2 Efficiency-Services School of Thought 3.4.3 The Holistic Integrationists School of Thought 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, student will learn the basic idea about local government.
Definitions of local government, purpose of local government as well as the features of local government are the main issues discussed in this unit.
Student will also gain an insight into the main theories that underpin the existence of local government.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define local government; 31 2.
Discuss basic purposes of local government; 3.
Examine the main theories of local government; 4.
Discuss the main features of local government.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT: DEFINITIONS What is Local Government?
Local government is a formal structure of governance at the local level.
A local government usually has a specified territory, population, institutional structure and autonomy.
It is usually establish by legislation promulgated by the upper tier of government but is allowed a reasonable latitude for initiative.
Various definitions of local government as given by different scholars and institutions are presented below:  Local government is the lowest unit of administration to whose laws and regulations, the communities who live in a defined geographical area and with common social and political ties, are subject (Orewa, 1991).
 Barber (1974) says where a local authority has a legal personality with sufficient but limited powers of control over its staff, finances and functions devolved upon it by the central government; it can conveniently be called a local government.
The 1976 Local Government Reform Hand Book defined local government as: Government at the local level exercised through representative councils established by law to exercise specific powers within defined areas.
These powers should give the council substantial control over local affairs as well as the staff and institutional and financial powers to initiate and direct provision of services and to determine and implement projects so as to complement the activities of the state and federal government in their areas, and to ensure, and through devolution of functions to these councils and through the active participation of the people and their traditional institutions that local initiatives and responses to local needs and conditions are maximized.
32 The United Nations defines local government as a political sub-division of a nation (or in a federal system) or state, which is constituted by law and her substantial control of local affairs including the power to impose taxes, or exact labour for, prescribed purposes.
The governing body of such an entity is elected or otherwise locally selected.
The International Encyclopedia of Social Sciences (1976), defines local government as “a political sub-division of national or regional government which performs functions which nearly in all cases receive its legal power from the national or regional government but possess some degree of discretion on the making of decisions and which normally has some taxing powers”.
Local government has also been defined as the level of government below the central government in the case of a unitary state, or below the regional, provincial or state government in the case of a federation, which is obliged to provide a range of services set out by law, to its communities and has legal authority to do this (Orewa 1991; 24).
We can deduce from these definitions that local government is the lower level of government in a modern state, which has the power to make byelaws and regulations binding on the population within its jurisdiction.
It also has the power to raise revenue and undertake assigned responsibilities as stipulated by the constitutions, statutes and laws establishing it.
We can also infer from the foregoing that local government is a multi-dimensional concept.
The dimensions as provided by Adetorise (2011:1-6) are the following: Social Dimension From the social dimension, local government is basically a social institution.
It is an organized social entity based on the feeling of oneness.
Local government provides a 33 platform for people in a locality to express and fulfill their human urge to interact and in the process of interaction, the feeling of convergence bring to the fore the commonality of basic needs of the people in the neighborhood of food, shelter, clothing, water, etc.
It is these facets of their feeling of oneness that are a binding force not only among themselves but also between the local authority and the local people.
Economic Dimension Local Government is basically an economic institution with a foremost role to play in promoting the economic well-being the people of the locality.
The economic dimension of the concept of local government relates to its economic viability.
Thus, revenue generation becomes a primary function of local government.
A local government that is not economically viable cannot do much to improve the economic conditions of the people in the locality.
Geographic Dimension Local government also has a geographic dimension.
From the perspective of a specific and defined territorial jurisdiction over a particular human habitation, the local government may be conceptualised in geographic terms.
The geography of local government, which includes physical, demographic and economic features, has its impact on its policies, administration and law.
The geography of local authority offers an important dimension to the concept of local government.
Its impact on local people and, therefore on local law, politics and administration can be all pervading.
Hence, the decision makers need to have adequate acquaintance with local geo-demographic variants for rendering meaningful services to the local people.
Legal Dimension Local government is a legal institution in the sense that it is established by law of a competent and higher authority.
This makes local government a miniature body-politic and a body corporate.
In its former capacity, it is the agent of the state and, as such, 34 represents public interest.
In that capacity, it exercises a part of the powers of the state legally delegated to it within specified geographical boundaries.
Political Dimension Local government is also a political institution.
Local government is basically a political mechanism for governance at the local level.
Conceptually, local government is an integrant of democracy.
When local government looses its democratic feature, it degenerates into local administration.
When local administration imbibes democratic character, it then becomes local government.
Without democratic norms there can be no self-governing institutions.
Administrative Dimension Local government has an administrative dimension.
It has its local bureaucracy like other higher levels of government.
They are basically of two types.
There is the Unified Service which is region-wide or state-wide and managed by a single Local Government Service Commission.
There the Localize Service which is restricted the individual local governments.
Thus, local government is operationally an administrative organisation with the confluence of politics and technology.
The degree of confluence in the local government is of a unique character.
Sometimes, one cannot make out when the political, organisational and technological processes begin and end and how they intermingle.
3.2 PRIMARY PURPOSE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT The unique needs of local populace which also justify the existence of local government are the following considerations:  To address the basic and unique needs of the people within a particular locality.
 Local governments are supposed to serve as a two-way channel of communication between the local population and the upper tiers of government (state and federal).
35  The existence of local governments permits the officials of state at the centre the time to concentrate on vital and complex national issues, living the local issues with the local officials.
 Local governments are supposed to mobilise the local people and resources for national development.
 Local governments exist to encourage greater public participation in governmental activities.
3.3 FEATURES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT Now, let us consider some of the features of local government.
The essential features of local government according to Olowu (2000) are:  A local body should exist which is constitutionally separate from government and is responsible for a significance range of services;  Should have own treasury, a separate budget and accounts, and its own taxes to produce substantial part of its revenue;  Should have on qualified staff, with power to hire and fire, though there can be some officers seconded from government to fill top positions initially;  Decision-making on policy and procedures in the hands of a council which genuinely represents and is accountable to all parts of the local community;  Central government administrators are to serve as external advisers and inspectors, but have no role either as councilors or officers of the local authority.
3.4 THEORIES OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT Theories of local government attempt to provide the justifications for the establishment of local government as a tier of governance.
There are three basic propositions equivalent to a rationale for local government.
The first is Democratic-Participatory School of Thought; the second is Efficiency-Services School of Thought and the third, the Integrationist School.
3.4.1 DEMOCRATIC PARTICIPATORY SCHOOL OF THOUGHT The Democratic-Participatory School of Thought is of the view that the existence of local governments is basically for the purpose of promoting democracy and participation at the grassroots level, thereby bringing government nearer to the people.
36 This position is premised on the attempts to justify the existence or need for local government on the basis of its being essential to a democratic principle or for practical administrative purposes like responsiveness, accountability and control (Gboyega, 1987).
Local government is perceived as a free institution that provides political education for those who participate in the act of decision-making.
However, whether or not local government will promote sectional interest, political education as well as accountability will depend largely on the nature of the political arrangement within the political system.
3.4.2 EFFICIENCY-SERVICES SCHOOL OF THOUGHT The Efficiency-Services School of Thought locates the rationale for local government in the provision of special services.
This school of thought premised its arguments on the notion that some services such as defence and external affairs are provided by the central government for the purpose of maintaining common nation standards or because they are of immediate or of direct interest to the ordinary citizen.
It is argued that there are certain concerns or interests, which only a section of the community has in common and it is convenient as well as advisable that only those who share this community of interests should administer them.
Some interests are peculiar to some localities; those interests will be best managed if they are under the purview of the people in those localities (Gboyega, 1987).
3.4.3 THE HOLISTIC INTEGRATIONISTS SCHOOL OF THOUGHT The argument of the holistic-integrationist school is that local government, if well nourished is in a far better position than the national government to stimulate initiatives, inculcate the feeling of national consciousness and encourage drive and experimentation in the people.
This is because it can more easily identify available local skills, interests and available capabilities and capitalize on them (Ola, 1988).
The following holistic-integrationist functions to be performed by local government were suggested by Sady in Ola, (1988:65 ): 37 Decongesting government at the centre thereby freeing national leaders from onerous details and unnecessary involvement in local issues.
Increasing peoples’ understanding and enlightening people about economic (community) development.
Making programmes to foster social and economic betterment at the local level more realistic and lasting.
Training people in the art of self-government.
The argument is that local government exists in this holistic-integrationist model, chiefly, for these purposes.
It can help to reduce congestion in the centre by being involved in implementing socio-economic programmes of the central government either as agents or as bodies to which these functions are delegated.
Self Assessment Exercise (SAE) Discuss the main purpose of local government.
Mention the various dimension of the conception of local government 4.0 CONCLUSION As we can see from the discussion, local government means authority to determine and to execute matters within a restricted area inside and smaller than the whole state.
It involves administering of services on a local basis by local bodies.
Local government therefore, is a form of governance at the local level.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that local government is the lower tier of government.
It exists for certain purposes and performs some functions and responsibilities.
You have also gained an insight into the theories of local government.
This unit ends with the summation of Gboyega (1987:3), local government, it is claimed, enables services of local importance only to be locally administered, provides education in citizenship, provides training in political leadership, makes available to the central government information about localities which is essential for adequately meeting their needs efficiently, and minimizes concentration of political power by diffusing it really.
38 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Define Local government 2.
Discuss the main features of Local Government 3.
Examine the relevance of the propositions of the three schools of thought for the understanding of local government.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adetoritse, T.D.
(2011).
Conceptualizing Local Government from a Multi-Dimensional Perspective.
Higher Education of Social Science, 1 (1), 66-71.
Barber, M.P.
(1974) (3rd Edition) Local Government.
London.
Macdonald and Evans Ltd. Gboyega, A.
(1987) Political Values and Local Government.
Lagos.
Malthouse Press.
Ola, R.O.F.
(1988) “Some Thoughts on the Role of Local Government in Developing Countries (Nigeria) in Adamolekun, L. Olowu, D, and Laleye, M. (eds) Local Government in West Africa Since Independence.
Lagos.
University of Lagos Press.
Orewa, G. O.
(1991) Principles of Local Government.
Ascon Local Government Series.
ASCON PUBLICATION.
39 UNIT 2: EVOLUTION OF THE NIGERIAN LOCAL GOVERNMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Local Government Under Colonial Rule 3.2 Reasons for the Adoption of the Policy of Indirect Rule 3.3 Characteristics of the Policy of Indirect Rule 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We need to recall our foundation knowledge of local government.
We learnt in the previous unit about the nature and character of local government generally.
Local government is defined as government at any level lower than the central authority in a given state.
It can be describes as government at the grassroots level.
Local governments are usually created by laws and statutes.
Their assigned functions and responsibilities are written in the constitution or statutes as the case may be.
What we shall be doing in this unit is to begin the discussion on the developments and trends of local government in Nigeria.
This discussion will span through the next three units.
What is important for us is to see how local government in Nigeria evolved and the stages of its growth and examine the dynamism of this development.
In this unit however, student will learn about the policy of indirect rule, reasons for its adoption in the colonial Nigeria in three regions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the feature of the policy of indirect rule; 40 2.
Discuss the basic characteristics of indirect rule; 3.
Examine how indirect rule was applied in the colonial Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNDER COLONIAL RULE The amalgamation of the Northern and Southern Protectorates of Nigeria took place in 1914.
Two years later the Native Authority Ordinance, 1916, was passed to extend the legal basis of the native authorities to cover Southern Nigeria.
Until then the hub of colonial local administration had been the “native court” which also served minor executive purposes.
The ordinance of 1916 amplified the law and order functions of the native authorities which superseded the native courts as the main instruments of local administration.
The native authorities were empowered to make orders regarding the following items: Restricting the manufacture of native intoxicating liquors and the supply of such liquors to young persons; prohibiting or restricting the holding of drinking bouts; prohibiting or restricting the cultivation of poisonous or noxious plants, and the manufacture of noxious drugs or poisons; prohibiting any act or conduct which in the opinion of the Native Authority might cause a riot or a disturbance or a breach of the peace; preventing the pollution of the water in any stream, water course, or water hole, and preventing the obstruction of any stream or water-course; regulating the cutting of timber and prohibiting the wasteful destruction of trees; preventing the evasion of any tax, service or other obligations imposed by or under any Ordinance; requiring natives to report cases of infectious disease whether of human beings or animals and generally for the prevention of the spread of such disease; requiring natives to report the presence within the local limits of his jurisdiction of any property stolen or believed to have been stolen outside such local limits; and for any other purposes approved by the Governor.
Local government was known under colonial rule as the Native Administration System.
The Native Administration System comprised four main interdependent parts: 41 The Resident who provided direction and control; the Native Authority, usually headed by a chief who enjoyed legitimacy under the indigenous political system, often supported by a council of elders; the Native Treasury; and the Native Court composed of representatives of the native administration.
These structures of the Native Administration System were created and sustained on the basis of a body of values and political beliefs which were articulated as the principles of Indirect Rule (Gboyega, 1987).
These principles also regulated the relationships of these structures to one another and constrained their development and adaptation to changing socio-political conditions.
The British adopted the policy of Indirect rule in the governance of the interland of Nigeria.
The policy implied in practice that the pre- colonial institution of governance were left in place but placed under the close supervision of British colonial officials.
The policy was first introduced in the Northern Province and was subsequently extended to the south after the amalgamation.
The system however, attained different levels of success.
3.2 REASONS FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE POLICY OF INDIRECT RULE The adoption of indirect rule was informed by a number of considerations.
Okonjo in Gboyega (1987) identified certain problems that necessitated the adoption of indirect rule.
These include:  The vast scale of the areas and population to be administered - In relation to the vast area and huge population size there were rather few civil European officers to undertake the business of administration.
 At the time, Northern Nigeria was far from being completely pacified.
Consequently, the troops that Lugard commanded had to be deployed every now and then to put down resistance of British colonial rule, and the fact that available Europeans lived under harsh climatic and poor hygienic conditions meant that they were not always available for duty thereby worsening the impact of their scarcity.
42  The communication system at the beginning of the 20th century in Northern Nigeria was exceedingly poor.
Distances were wide and the roads (only means of transportation) were very bad.
The difficulty of maintaining contact between headquarters and the field or districts meant that Residents had wide powers delegated to them.
They in turn needed to delegate their powers to subordinates and since this did not exist, their position had to be filled somehow.
 Indirect rule was said to have helped minimized the cost of administration.
It would have cost a lot of money to employ more British officers even if the men were available.
The traditional rulers became a dependent local class in whose interest British colonial rule was perceived to be successful.
Adoption of indirect rule was meant to be an indication of goodwill to both the traditional rulers and their people that British rule was not to have the implication of a radical dislocation of their social existence.
Given the above reasons, Lugard saw the indirect rule system as expedient in the practical administration of Nigeria.
3.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SYSTEM OF INDIRECT RULE Crowder and Ikime in Gboyega (1987:16-17) provided the summary of the identifying characteristics of what emerged as the system of native administration (indirect rule).
These are: Legitimacy: As far as possible, pre-colonial dynastic lineages were continued.
Territorial jurisdiction: The territorial jurisdiction of the traditional rulers was maintained; that is, the land boundaries of pre-colonial times were respected except where the chiefs or people by their own consent agreed to federate for purposes of greater efficiency, larger revenues, etc.
Native Authorities: 43 Chieftaincies were designated native Authorities, in which the chief might be sole native authority or the Chief in Council constitute the native authority.
A native authority has specific functions:- (i) collection of taxes of which a fixed percentage was rendered up to the colonial administration; (ii) (ii) Control of a budget established to spend the taxes retained by the Native authority, which included initiating local development programmes, building and maintaining native authority schools and dispensaries, building and operating permanent markets, the construction of local feeder roads to join up with central government roads.
Legal system: The chiefs and their traditional legal officers controlled the administration of law, including local police functions and the prisons, according to customary legal principles shorn of abuses and repugnant aspects as determined by the colonial government.
Appointment of Officials to Native Authority: The Native authority controlled appointment and dismissal of its officials; the colonial authorities, however, had to sanction the appointment of the chief himself.
The Role of the Political Officer: Essentially the role of the political officer in the Native Authority system was as an adviser, almost as a lobbyist vis-à-vis the Native Authority in so far as local government affairs were concerned.
The less sophisticated the Native Authority however, the more his role became that of supervisor rather than adviser.
In matters of tran-Native Authority affairs, e.g.
decisions made for the whole colony, the political officer could order rather than suggest action.
Native Authorities as Legislative Bodies: The Native Authorities were Legislative organs.
With regard to legislation concerning traditional matters, the political officers would not interfere unless they were repugnant to ‘human justice’.
With regard to legislation concerning modern administration much 44 of the legislation would originate from the political officers but be promulgated in the name of the Native Authority.
In the Northern Province the system attained a level of success because the Hausa/Fulani emir enjoyed over whelming power in the pre- colonial time.
Besides this, the emirate system had well developed traditional system of tax collection, a relatively efficient administrative system which enhanced the integration and control of the political system.
There was also a highly developed judicial system which applied the Sharia code.
In a basically acephalous society like the Eastern region where there was no centralized political systems which were the foundation of the native authority, the colonial authorities had no choice than to create ‘warrant’ chiefs whose consequent lack of legitimacy and conflict with traditional socio-political structure provoked widespread protest in the eastern region.
In addition, there was no indigenous system of taxation to provide financial support for the native authorities.
Since the native administration could not survive without a native treasury to raise revenue for the native authority, the colonial government introduced direct taxation into the Eastern Region between 1927 and 1929.
This action led to the famous Aba riot of 1929.
Furthermore, the attempt to apply the logic of indirect rule more fully in the Eastern region by substituting warrant chiefs for the British District Officers as presiding officers of the native courts after 1922 added to the outrage felt by the citizens of the Eastern Region.
These factors marred whatever achievements the native administration system could have realized in the Eastern Region.
In the Western Region, there were not as many obstacles to the introduction of indirect rule as witnessed in the Eastern Region.
Prior to the colonial rule the Yoruba who were the largest ethnic group in the western region lived in kingdoms.
The monarchical political organization featured centralized political authority under the leadership of a king aided by a council comprising lineage heads.
The most famous of these kingdoms had a finely balanced distribution of powers between the monarch, the Alaafin, and the 45 council, the Oyo-Mesi.
The Alaafin’s authority has spiritual and political dimensions and in spite of the claims of legend about the scope of that authority it was greatly limited by the necessity to carry along the Oyo-Mesi, the constraints of tradition and the desire to secure public order and welfare.
In addition to the existence of a relatively more centralized political structure, there was also a tradition of royal courts, a practice by which the king’s court was the ultimate court of jurisdiction for all civil and criminal proceedings.
Taxation which was a reason for protest with the introduction of the native administration system into Eastern Province was also difficult to introduce in the Western Province.
Although tributary relations between paramount Kings and minor Kings existed before colonial rule the implications of organizing a treasury such as the systemization of taxation led to riotous protests especially in Abeokuta and Ogbomoso.
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Give reasons for the adoption of Indirect Rule in Nigeria 4.0 CONCLUSION Native administration system was said to be a political administration through the agency of indigenous institutions.
Lugard found indirect rule expedient for the purpose of administration in Nigeria.
The Native Authorities especially in the North were well suited to the purpose of the colonial enterprise.
The system however, lasted only until the early 1950s, in the Eastern and Western regions where the social structures were less hospitable and receptive to the Native Authority structure.
5.0 SUMMARY We learnt in this unit how the policy of indirect rule was introduced and applied in the 3 regions of colonial Nigeria.
We examined the major characteristics of the policy of indirect rule and form of its operation the Eastern, Western and Northern Nigeria.
We 46 observed that the operation of indirect rule met with varying degree of success in the three regions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss the major features of Indirect rule 2.
Critically examine the operation of indirect rule in the three regions of colonial Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Gboyega, A.
(1987) Political Values and Local Government in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Malthouse Press Limited.
Oyediran, O. and Gboyega, A.
(1979) “Local Government and Administration” in Oyediran (ed) Nigerian Government and Politics under Military Rule 1966-79.
London.
Macmillan Publishers.
47 UNIT 3: THE 1950s LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORMS IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Reforms of Local Government (1950s) 3.2 Local Government to Local Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 Reference and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you were introduced to the nature of the native administration in Nigeria starting from 1900.
We observed the different form of administration of the indirect rule in the Northern, Western and Eastern Provinces in Nigeria.
You will recall that indirect rule in the three provinces met with different degree of success.
Consequently, the regions witnessed spate of riots during the period of administration of indirect rule especially with the introduction of certain taxes.
In this unit, you will learn about the reforms that came immediately after the indirect rule operation in the Provinces.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to; 1.
Discuss various reforms that took place after indirect rule at the Regions; 2.
Discuss the nature and form of the emerging local governments in the Regions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 REFORMS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (1950s) Beginning from1947, the British imperial government announced a new policy of local governance in their colonial territories, this was reflected in the dispatch of the secretary of state for the Colonies –Arthur Creech Jones to all British colonial 48 governors informing them of the need to emphasize the introduction of new reforms towards local governance which would emphasize efficiency in democratic governance.
In Nigeria, the introduction of a new constitution in 1951 facilitated the introduction of new models of governance in line with the 1947 dispatch.
Eastern Region The Eastern Region in 1950 replaced the Native Authority Ordinance by a Local government Ordinance.
Under the former Ordinance, a number of Chiefs and elders were appointed by the Government to form the native authority council of the area.
The Local government Ordinance of 1950 enabled the majority (80 percent) of the councilors to be directly elected.
The structure of the local government was three-tier, comprising of county councils, district councils, and local councils.
The county councils corresponded, in most cases, almost exactly in size to the erstwhile divisional native authorities, and performed major services and functions.
The district and local councils covered smaller areas, the former covering a larger area than the latter, but both had powers and functions relative to their size.
In 1955, the minister for local government was empowered by the provisions of new local government law to ensure closer scrutiny and supervision of local government activities.
The Local Government Law 1957 increased the autonomy of local authorities as the local government advisers (formerly district officers) were withdrawn and three provincial local government inspectors were appointed for the entire region thereby making regional government supervision even more remote.
In 1958, the county councils were abolished and the district councils became all-purpose local authorities.
Thus in the urban and municipal areas local government had only a single tier while rural areas had two tiers of authority – district and local authorities.
In 1960, the Eastern Nigeria Local Government Law further altered the structure of local government as the urban and rural district councils were re-designated urban county and county councils respectively (Oyediran and Gboyega, 1979).
49 Western Region In the West, the local government law of 1952 initiated important reforms of the system.
However, the element of the reform had to combine the influence and interest of Oba’s and the chiefs.
In response to the challenge posed by the chiefs, the regional government undertook the programme of political education to explain the new legislation.
The system introduce by the legislation was based on the British-type three- tier structure.
Divisional, district and local councils were set up.
The divisional councils were coterminous with administrative divisions and performed major functions.
The districts council came next in status and performed middle range functions while the local council was for a small town or group of villages too small to have a district council.
The local council performed only minor functions.
The local government systems in the Eastern and Western Regions were very similar in essential features.
Underlying the two systems was a philosophical conception of local government which ascribed to local government higher ultimate political purposes than the mere delivery of social service and implementation of development projects.
The ultimate political purposes served by local government as conceived in the two regions might be said to include political education for local and national leaders, diffusion of political power on an area basis, local self-determination and inculcation of the noble ideals of impartiality, protection of minority rights and integrity, all of which were considered essential to the evolution of a liberal democratic society.
Northern Region There were efforts to reform in the North, but the objective was not on the democratization of the system although the system was modified to accord contemporary trend.
The native authority law of 1954 not only changed little of substance, merely consolidating existing arrangements, but it even retained the term ‘native authority’.
All the seventy native authorities which existed had traditional rulers 50 as their heads.
The law made provisions for five different types of native authorities, namely:  a chief or other person in council;  a chief or other person and council;  any council;  any group or persons; and  any chief or other person.
In most places, it was the chief and council pattern that was in place in which the chief played pre-eminent and predominant role.
However, popular participation was encouraged through subordinate structures – there were village councils.
Here popular participation was allowed though the emphasis in the North was not on democratization as was the case with the South.
In spite of the reforms undertaken, public complaints against local governments’ performance continued - there were allegations of corruption, nepotism, inefficiency etc.
Consequently, the various governments instituted studies within their local government area although there were differences in detail.
The reforms in the North were similar in orientation.
They all sought to reduce power from the hands of aristocrats and to provide a legal framework for popular participation.
The military intervention in the Nigerian politics in 1966 marked the beginning of important changes in the system of local governance in the country.
3.2 LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO LOCAL ADMINISTRATION The South Eastern State and the Mid-Western State replaced the local government system it inherited with a new system called development administration.
The term development administration was chosen as a result of the recommendation of an expert ad hoc committee which examined and advised government on the suitability or otherwise of the system of local government inherited before the war.
The East Central State government adopted a different nomenclature for its system of local 51 administration.
The main objectives of the system of local administration as stated in the words of the Mid-Western State Development Administration Edict are to:  provide a framework for effective co-ordination and execution of Government programmes and services in each division; and  facilitate and encourage the participation of the people of each division in the control and management of their local affairs with the assistance and under the supervision of the government by enabling the people  utilize local community efforts and organizations to raise funds and mobilize resources for the general development of their local area.
Even though the structures varied, they were designed to achieve the same purpose, that is, state government control of the administration and development of local communities.
In the east Central State, a two-tier system of local administration was established.
The upper tier was called divisional council.
The lower tier which was the primary basis of the new system was called community council.
They were constituted at the village group level very much in line with the traditional social and political units.
For the South Eastern State two levels of development administration were established – area development committee and urban or county development council.
Each area development committee was made up of a number of villages and dealt with projects requiring the co-operation of more than one village.
The county or urban development council covered a number of area committees and served as the centre for development administration.
In the Mid-Western State, development councils and development committees were established.
As in all the other states, all members of development committees and councils were appointed by the military governor in the Mid-Western State.
Each development committee had a ceremonial president (a traditional ruler) and a chairman and members.
A chairman, chairmen of all development committees in the division, and between thirty and forty members constituted each development council.
All staff and 52 employees of development councils and committees were designated civil servants.
The same was true of the South Eastern and East Central States.
In the Western State, by the time the military took over the control of government, divisional councils – the first tier of local government – had become most unpopular for some reasons:  many local councils were too small to be viable politically and economically;  local government institutions became the primary institutions for coercing local supports for the ruling political party;  Committees proliferated and unnecessary meetings were frequently held in order to gain sitting allowances and to get more involved in day-to-day administration of councils.
By 1967 when the state was created all local government management committees were dissolved and their powers and functions transferred to divisional administrators designated sole administrators.
In the late 1968 and early 1969, civil disorder broke out in several parts of the state because of the frustration experienced by the councils due to the absence of effective channels of participation and the neglect by the sole administrators.
A commission was set up to investigate the civil disorder.
One of the recommendations of the commission was that ‘government should undertake as a matter of urgency a review of the existing local government council structure with a view to finding out which councils are viable and which are not, and therefore… decide on measures to for ensuring that only councils viable and capable of fulfilling their statutory obligations remain’ In 1973, a new pattern of local governance was introduced – the Council Manager System.
The model sought to maximize viability and efficiency (the council under the old system were too small and too many).
Accordingly, the 114 local government councils of various sizes and stature were merged and consolidated into thirty-nine single-tier local government councils.
Each council was made up of a management 53 committee out of which a standing committee was chosen.
Another important aspect of the structure of the new system was the creation of area committees in each council area with varying populations of between 10 000 and 25 000 and with membership of between ten and thirty.
The process of popular representation in the native administration system in the Northern Region was strongly resisted in the 1950s in the name of efficiency and stability.
But by 1963 government decided that all native authority councils should have at least some elected members, and by the time the military took over in January 1966, all native authority councils had some elected members.
Certain policies of the new military regime quickened the gradual reduction in the power and influence of traditional rulers even before states were created in 1967.
In February 1966, government announced that all native authority police, prisons and native courts would be taken over by the regional government.
The chief justice of Northern Nigeria was asked to prepare plans for a phased takeover of these functions.
By April 1968 all these functions were effectively taken over (Oyediran and Gboyega, 1979: 169 -191).
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Discuss the nature of development administration of the Eastern and Mid-Western state of the 1950s 4.0 CONCLUSION Native administrative system of the three regions experienced a change in terms of reforms.
It has been observed however, that the replacement of local government with local administration was in essence not to stimulate local development but to strengthen military dictatorship.
In spite of all the reforms complaints against local administration performance continued.
5.0 SUMMARY 54 We have learnt in this unit the process of various reforms undertaken in the three regions shortly before and immediately after the military took over.
We learnt how the policies of the new military regime affected the power of the traditional rulers in the scheme of the then local administration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Examine the nature of the reforms in the Western region.
2.
Discuss the nature of the reforms in the Eastern region; in what way(s) was the reform similar to that of the Western region?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Gboyega, A.
(1987) Political Values and Local Government in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Malthouse Press Limited.
Oyediran, O. and Gboyega, A.
(1979) “Local Government and Administration” in Oyediran (ed) Nigerian Government and Politics under Military Rule 1966-79.
London.
Macmillan Publishers.
55 UNIT 4: THE 1976 LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORMS IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The 1976 Local Government Reforms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The reform of 1976 was considered epochal and regarded as a turning point in the evolution of Nigeria local government system because it replaced all the different patterns of local government with a uniform multi-purpose model.
It formally recognized the local government as the third-tier arm of government.
In this unit, student will learn the details of the reform and see how it transformed the nature of local government in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the nature of the 1976 local government reforms; 2.
Discuss the major functions assigned to local government under this reform.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE 1976 LOCAL GOVERNMENT REFORMS The civil war and military dictatorship really hampered the systematic growth and development of local government system in Nigeria.
Nevertheless, the military rulers of Nigeria in their quest for administrative reforms also pre-occupied themselves with the status of local government which had become mere appendages of military governors in 56 the immediate post-war years (Odion-Akhaine and Yunusa, 2009).
These were the antecedents to the 1976 Local Government Reform of Gen. Obasanjo.
The 1976 Local Government Reform was part of the military government transitional programmes inaugurated in 1975.
The new military that came into office in 1975 pledged to return the country to civilian administration within a short period.
It announced a programme for the disengagement of the military from political administration of which the the re-organisation of local administration was a prominent part.
The reorganisation of local administration was an important feature of the programme for three reasons:  Strong, representative local government was considered to be a pre- condition for the democratic system at the national level;  The desire of the new government to decentralize power; and  The desire to reap the benefits believed to be entailed by a decentralized system of administration such as sensitive local administration keenly attuned to local needs and purposes, more effective local control, greater efficiency, and the lessening of the load of administration at the state level (Gboyega, 1987:136-138).
The main reasons for the local government reforms were that a representative local government system was considered essential to a national democratic system of government; that strong local authorities with clearly defined functional responsibility in a power-sharing relationship with the state was an institutional safeguard against tyranny; that the reforms were necessary for greater efficiency and relevance in the provision of local services which would facilitate the integration of the national political system (Gboyega, 1987).
The highlight of the reform can be stated as follows:  The reform provided for a single-tier structure for each local government with a minimum population range of 150,000 to 800,000.
There was no maximum limit.
57  A maximum of 25 percent nominated membership structure, the rest were to be elected chairman and at least two or three councilors, to be designated supervisory councilors were to be engaged full-time.
The number of council members was pegged between 10 and 30 depending on population of the local area.
 The role of traditional rulers was clearly spelt out.
They were to serve in advisory capacity through the traditional councils.
 The provision for a steady financial base through grants.
This comes in forms of federal and state grants.
 Provision for increased internally generated revenue.
The reform assigned specified functions and assured local government of two sources of revenue; the independent sources and fiscal transfer from the state and the federal government.
As regards the functions of local government the reforms identified them as follows:  To make appropriate services and development activities responsible to local wishes, and initiatives, by devolving or delegating them to local representative bodies.
 To facilitates the exercise of democratic self-government close to the local levels of our society and to encourage initiative and leadership potential.
 To mobilize human and material resources through the involvement of members of the public in their local development.
 To provide a two-way channel of communication between local communities and government (both state and federal).
The reforms provided for democratically elected local council, in line with the provision and functions assigned to the local government.
The reforms provided that local government councils be elected either directly or indirectly.
In addition the councils have elected majorities, elect their own chairmen subject to government approval and take decisions by majority vote.
The local government councils are single- tier authorities with primary and sole responsibility for exercising statutory powers of the local governments.
58 The major aspects of the 1976 reforms were written into the 1979 Constitution to ensure that the state governments do not go back on these reforms.
The constitution guarantees a system of democratically elected local government; specifies a list of functions for local authorities and makes it mandatory for the states and federal government to make financial grants to local authorities.
However, in spite of the significance of the 1976 local government reforms, it failed to achieve its objectives particularly during the second Republic.
Specifically, the 1976 reform and the subsequent 1979 constitution left unanswered what should be the definite role of traditional rulers.
Again, the financial instability of the local government councils somehow reduced to mere structural decorations as they were persistently devoid of functional ability in relation to the various functions that they were charged with.
Furthermore, the wards for the election of councilors were exceptionally large to the extent that some communities did not know their councilors (Bello-Imam, 2006).
According to Bello-Imam, it is thus evident that the emergent structure suffered from various problems which tended to undermine the performance of local governments.
thus, during the Second Republic, some of the state governments broke up or adjusted local government boundaries without due regard to the viability in order to carve out more favourable bases for their political survival.
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Examine the major highlights of the 1976 local government reform 4.0 CONCLUSION We have observed in our discussion here that the 1976 local government reform brought significant changes in the world of local government in the country.
It provided for democratically elected local councils, assigned specific functions to be undertaken by local government and recognized local government as the third-tier of government.
In spite of all these, it failed to achieve its objectives particularly during the second Republic.
59 5.0 SUMMARY What we have done in this unit is to discuss in detail the nature of the 1976 local government reform in Nigeria.
We realized that in spite of the major significant of the reform, local governments were still bedeviled with serious problems.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss in detail the major aspects of the 1976 local government reform.
2.
Identify and discuss the functions specified for local governments by the 1976 reforms 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bello-Imam, I.
B.
(2006).
“Structural Evolution of Local Government in Nigeria” in Ekpe, A.N.
(ed) The Substance of Local Government Administration in Nigeria (Theory and Practice).
Lagos.
Asbot.
Gboyega, A.
(1987).
Political Values and Local Government in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Malthouse Press Limited.
60 UNIT 5: LOCAL GOVERNMENT SINCE 1985 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Local Government Since 1985 3.2 Functions of Local Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we were able to identify some of the problems associated with the 1976 local government reforms in Nigeria.
The local government systems were over politcised with most state government opting for the committee system which negated the elective principle in favour of appointment of local government officials.
In this unit, therefore student will further learn about the development in local government system in Nigeria after the failure in the operation of the 1976 local government reform.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to; 1.
Discuss the system of local government starting from 1985; 2.
Analyse the functional responsibilities of local government as enshrined in the 1999 Constitution.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 LOCAL GOVERNMENT SINCE 1985 All the problems discussed previously negated the 1976 local government reforms.
However, with the coming of the Buhari and Idiagbon military regime, all the new local governments created between 1979 and 1983 were dissolved.
General Buhari and 61 Idiagbon set up a 21 man committee headed by Alhaji Ibrahim Dasuki.
The Committee was to;  Evolve the most suitable mode of managing the local governments in the context of the present military administration;  Re-examine existing structures, functions and financial resources available to local governments for the performance of those functions;  Look into the accounting/management (staff) problems of local governments, including the standardization of the various departments of the council;  Evolve proper place of traditional authorities in local governments;  Propose how best to manage intergovernmental relations between local governments and ministry for local governments local service boards/commissions;  Work out manpower development schemes for all cadres of local government relevant for the improvement of local governance administration in the country.
The Babangida administration that came in 1985 adopted the Dasuki report and consequently, a white paper on the report was issued in 1986.
In the white paper, the military government accepted the recommendation that the structure of local government introduced in 1976 should be retained.
It endorsed the pruning of the local councils to the 1976 figure and proposed that a management committee be set up to run the councils (Adeola, 2009).
As part of the Babangida administration’s efforts to return to civil rule by 1992, he set up a 15-member Political Bureau and instructs it to draw up a programme of action which reflected the wishes and aspirations of the people.
During the political debates, there were demands for a re-organisation of the federal structure so as to correct some of its perceived ills.
Part of the Political Bureau report dealt with how to make the local government agents of national development.
From the 304 local governments inherited, Babangida created 149 new ones thereby bringing the total to 453.
The numbers of local government councils have risen to 774 presently.
62 In the 1979 Constitution, the functions and responsibilities of the federal government are listed in the Exclusive Legislative List as contained in Part I of the Second Schedule.
In Part II of the same Schedule was a list showing the functions and responsibilities which are assigned concurrently to the federal and state governments.
Section I of the Fourth Schedule contains the list of functions which are assigned exclusively to local government councils while Section 2 of that Schedule lists functions of the state in whose performance the local government councils can participate.
The implications of these according to the Political Bureau are as follows: The functions and responsibilities of the federal and local governments are listed fully and state governments are assigned residuary functions and responsibilities.
This is to say that the functions and responsibilities of state governments embrace the following:  what accrues to them from the concurrent list of the Second Schedule;  what accrues to them from the concurrent list of the Fourth Schedule and;  whatever is not especially allocated to any level of government.
All these mean that any functions and responsibilities which are specifically allocated to any level of government are expected to be performed or carried out by it without reference to any other level of government.
The operation of local government is guaranteed in section 7 (1) of the Constitution.
The state governments are obliged by this same section to enact laws which provide for the establishment, structure, composition, finance and functions of such councils.
All these provisions taken together according to the Political Bureau suggest the following:  Local governments constitute a third-tier of government in the federal system;  State governments must enact laws to bring local government councils into existence under democratic conditions;  in taking action under item (ii) above, state governments must give to the local governments the functions and responsibilities which are provided for them specifically in the constitution; 63  the responsibilities which the local governments should bear in respect of the functions concurrent to state and local governments will, presumably, be determined by agreement between these two levels of governments (The Report of the Political Bureau, 1987).
The institution of democratically elected local government councils has continued to be entrenched in the Nigerian Constitution.
In the First Schedule, Part II Section 7 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 is enshrined: The system of local government by democratically elected local government councils is under this Constitution guaranteed; and accordingly, the Government of every state shall subject to section 8 of this Constitution, ensure their existence under a Law which provides for the establishment, structure, composition, finance and functions of such councils.
 The person authorized by law to prescribe the area over which a local government council may exercise authority shall:-  define such area as clearly as practicable; and  ensure, to the extent to which it may be reasonably justifiable, that in defining such area regard is paid to:-  the common interest of the community in the area,  traditional association of the community, and  administrative convenience.
It shall be the duty of a local government council within the state to participate in economic planning, development of the area referred to in subsection (2) of this section, and to this end a law enacted by the House of Assembly of the State shall establish an economic planning board.
The government of a State shall ensure that every person who is entitled to vote or be voted for at an election to a House of Assembly shall have the right to vote or be voted for at election to a local government council.
The functions to be conferred by Law upon local government councils shall include those set out in the Fourth Schedule to this Constitution.
64 3.2 FUNCTIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT The main functions of a local government council are as follows as contained in the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (4th Schedule) are as follow:  The consideration and the making of recommendations to a State Commission on Economic Planning or any similar body on: the economic development of the state, particularly in so far as the areas of authority of the council and of the state are affected; and proposals made by the said commission or body; (b) Collection of rates, radio and television licenses; (c) Establishment and maintenance of cemeteries, burial grounds and home for the destitute or infirm; (d) Licensing of bicycles, trucks (other than mechanically propelled trucks), canoes, wheel barrows and carts; (e) Establishment, maintenance and regulation of slaughter houses, slaughter slabs, markets, motor parks and public conveniences; (f) Construction of maintenance of roads, streets, street lighting, drains and other public highways, parks, gardens, open spaces, or such public facilities as may be prescribed from time to time by the House of Assembly of a state; (g) Naming of roads and streets and numbering of houses; (h) Provision of maintenance of public conveniences, sewage and refuse disposal; (i) Registration of all births, deaths and marriages; (j) Assessment of privately owned houses or tenements for the purpose of levying such rates as may be prescribed by the House of Assembly of a States; and (k) Control and regulation of:  out-door advertising and hoarding;  movement and keeping of pets of all description;  shops and kiosks;  restaurants, bakeries and other places for sale of food to the public;  laundries; and licensing, regulation and control of the sale of liquor.
65 2.
The functions of a local government council shall include participation of such council in the government of a state as respects the following matters: (a) The provision and maintenance of primary, adult and vocational education; (b) The development of agriculture and natural resources, other than the exploitation of minerals; (c) The provision and maintenance of health services; and (d) Such other functions as may be conferred on a local government council by the House of Assembly of the state Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Discuss the responsibilities of local government assigned by 1999 constitution.
4.0 CONCLUSION The 1976 Reform was motivated by the desire to promote a culture of democracy in Nigeria; decentralize power and thereby prevent a reoccurrence of tyranny, and promote efficient provision of service at the local level.
But as we observed in the last unit, local governments after 1976 were still confronted with problems.
The Babangida administration that came in 1985 adopted the Dasuki report and accepted the recommendation that the structure of local government introduced in 1976 should be retained.
Subsequently the 1979 and 1999 constitutions clearly delineate the functions of local government in the country.
However re-organisation of local government system in Nigeria still continues.
5.0 SUMMARY We have learnt in this unit; the further process of transformation of the local governments in Nigeria since 1984.
We also know the functional responsibilities of the local governments as enshrined in the 1999 constitution which is still operational till today.
66 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMAs) 1.
Highlight some of the changes experienced by Local governments in Nigeria since 1984.
2.
Analyse the functional responsibilities of local government as provided by the 1979 Nigerian Constitution.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adeola, G.L.
(2009) “From Native Authority to Local Government: Is There a System of Local Government in Nigeria?” In Odion-Akhaine, S. (ed) Local Government Administration in Nigeria – Old and New Vision.
Abuja.
Panaf Press.
pp.
2-21.
Odion – Akhaine, S. and Yunusa, M. (2009) “Local Government and the Doctrine of Separation of Powers” In Odion-Akhaine, S. (ed) Local Government Administration in Nigeria – Old and New Vision.
Abuja.
Panaf Press.
pp.
78-92.
67 MODULE 3: THE ECOLOGY OF THE NIGERIAN PUBLIC SERVICE Unit 1: Evolution of Public Administration in Nigeria Unit 2: The Nigerian Civil Service Unit 3: Public Service Reforms in Nigeria Unit 4: Planning and Budgeting in the Nigerian Civil Service UNIT 1: EVOLUTION OF PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Administration in Traditional Society 3.2 Development of Modern Nigerian Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMA) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, student will come to know about how public administration in Nigeria evolved and how it has developed overtime.
Recall some of those basics of public administration you came across in previous units, some of the concepts will be applied in your understanding of the development of public administration in Nigeria.
What we shall be doing in this unit therefore is an examination of public administration in traditional society in Nigeria.
You will also learn about the history and development of modern civil service in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the evolution of public administration in Nigeria; 2.
Examine the development of modern Nigerian Civil Service 68 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Administration in Traditional Society Public administration existed in traditional society in Nigeria although in a limited scope.
Goals were identified, human and material resources were allocated, and policy objectives were pursued.
The function of administration then were simple, e.g.
the declaration of wars (especially inter-tribal wars); the taking and implementing of decisions on the migration and resettlement of tribesmen; the coordination of hunting and pastoral activities; the construction of shrines, palaces and communal wells; the exaction and collection of tributes; the construction of fortresses and embankments; the maintenance of public order; and the settlement of family and other disputes (Balogun, 1983).
According to Balogun (1983) except in societies wholly governed by Islamic religious and political doctrine, in no other society in Nigeria did emerge a coherent philosophy of government and public administration.
There were forces that shape traditional public administration and give it a distinctive character of its own.
Balogun identified at least five such forces.
Let us examine them one after the other.
The Ritualistic Feature In a society where the rationalist or empiricist tradition in science governs behavior, decisions, even in a situation of uncertainty, will tend to be based on formal, deductive reasoning or on observed facts.
Where religion and rituals colour a people’s view of the world, decisions are likely to be left in the hands of supernatural agents.
This was the case in many traditional societies of Nigeria.
Thus a decision concerning guilt or innocence, at a time when the facts are not clear, is left to an oracle, a powerful spirit.
At another time, a decision may be left in abeyance in the hope that some ancestral or other spirits will exact the necessary retribution.
69 The role of ceremonies and rituals in traditional systems of cooperative action is reflected in matters pertaining to the investiture and coronation of important traditional rulers.
When a ruler departs to join his ancestors, this event is marked by sacrifices of various kinds and by incantations aimed at propitiating the departed soul and the ancestral spirits.
The same process of offering sacrifices and reciting incantations is repeated when a new ruler is about to ascend the throne, the idea being to ensure a joyous and trouble free reign.
If on assumption of office, a disaster looms on the horizon, the ruler and his subjects have an obligation to carry out necessary ceremonies and offer the priests prescribe whatever sacrifices.
If, in spite of all these, a calamity actually befalls the society, the ritualistic process is either repeated or speeded up or the ‘good fortune’ of the ruler is called into question.
More often than not, what tend to come up for review in the event of a persistent wave of disaster is the adequacy of the offerings and/or the comprehensiveness of the ritual.
The ritualistic orientation may not be appropriate to the needs and challenges of a technological age, but it certainly served the purposes of traditional societies.
Thus by ‘canonizing’ certain social customs, mores and beliefs, and by making these collective values part of the traditional man’s personality, the rituals sustained traditional authority and held together what would have been anarchic societies (Balogun, 1983:60).
The Existential-Terrestrial Pull The traditional society is the one in which both terrestrial and extra-terrestial forces collide.
The point made above under the ritualistic feature that if inanimate objects were worshipped it is because they had material impact on the lives of the people concerned.
This means that structures and institutions exist in traditional societies to perform particular functions and fulfill certain obligations.
Such obligations and functions might be simple, and might not involve bringing about radical social change.
70 All the same, the obligations had to be fulfilled and the functions performed, otherwise the legitimacy of traditional governmental institutions would be challenged.
The Moralistic 0rientation Behavior in the traditional society is scarcely classified as ‘rational’ or ‘irrational’.
These two terms are alien to the moralistic spirit of the traditional society.
The guide to behavior in the society is frequently laid down by religious injunctions and superstitious beliefs.
Any behavior that conforms to the socially accepted norms is ‘pious’ and ‘godly’ while deviant behavior is not simply heretical but ‘sinful’ in view of the fact that ‘sinful’ behavior makes the gods ‘angry’, society is not likely to compromise with the sinners, but is in fact prone to prescribe the stiffest punishment.
The Consanguinity Factor In traditional society, kinship (or relationship based on descent, filiations and marriage) plays a vital role in structuring patterns of interpersonal behavior.
It serves as an important agent of social control and provides a basis for leadership.
Consequently, instead of secondary organizations based on the criteria of ‘achievement’ ‘universalism’ and ‘collectivity orientation’, the traditional society tackles the problems confronting it with the aid of primary organizations based on ‘ascriptive’ particularistic’ and ‘sectional’ criteria.
While there are few ‘craft associations’ which specialize in certain occupational areas (e.g.
age-grades, secret societies, herbalist associations), the organization of economic activities in the traditional society is most frequently based on the principle of division of labour according to sex, and according to kinship and blood ties.
The autocratic tendencies The definition of areas of authority and responsibility impose checks and balances within organizations, and therefore helps in structuring the behavior of members.
Where the sphere of influence is not clearly defined, only the position-holder’s good 71 sense and the occasional challenge to his authority will prevent him from taking autocratic and arbitrary decisions.
Balogun concludes that, the authoritarian tendencies in traditional public administration have a direct bearing on the organization and functioning of the public service in Nigeria today.
3.2 Development of Modern Nigerian Civil Service The Nigerian Civil Service has its remote origin in the amalgamation of the Colony and Protectorate of Northern and Southern Nigeria to form the Colony and Protectorate of Nigeria in 1914.
But before the amalgamation of the Northern and Southern protectorates in 1914 some of administration existed.
According to Maduabum (2006), the roots of the early Nigerian Civil Service could be traced to 1847 when Mr. J. Beecroft was appointed Consul for the Bight of Benin and Biafra with headquarters in Fernando Po.
The responsibilities of the Consul then, were essentially to prosecute legitimate commercial activities and observing commercial treaties.
However, by 1863, the consular jurisdiction of Beecroft and Campbell was exercised over the British subjects through the use of protection of the crown.
Below are the highlights of the evolution of administrative machinery of the Nigerian Civil Service:  From 1866 to 1874, the central administration for Lagos, Gold Coast, the Gambia and Sierra Leone was transferred to Freetown, Sierra Leone.
 From 1874 to 1886, Lagos and Colony was administered from Gold Coast.
 In 1886, Moloney was appointed Governor of Lagos.
 In 1889, the Niger Coast Protectorate was merged with the territories of the Royal Niger Company.
 On January 1, 1900, the Protectorate of Southern and Northern Nigeria were created.
 In 1906, Lagos Colony was merged with Southern Nigeria.
 In 1914, Lagos Colony and the Southern Protectorate were merged with the Northern Protectorate to form an amalgamated territory called Nigeria.
A Governor-General, Sir Frederick Lugard, was thereafter 72 appointed for the amalgamated territory.
He was to be assisted by all European Executive Council that had been in existence since 1862 (Maduabum, 2008: 151-152).
A single civil service was not immediately established for the entire country, rather, the Northern and Southern segments for the new state continued to be administered separately as before.
The administration of Northern and Southern Nigeria were still placed under two Lieutenant-Governors, each with a secretariat and departmental organization of its own.
The only unifying force was that all the officers were colonial civil servants.
It was not until the 1920s that a Nigerian Civil Service emerged.
Before 1954, there was only a single Civil Service in Nigeria as the country was operating a unitary system of government at that time.
However, with the introduction of Federal Constitution in 1954, greater autonomy was conferred on the regions.
On the 1st of October, 1954, three regional civil services for the Northern, eastern and Western Regions were created in addition to the Federal Civil Service.
When the Mid-Western Region was carved out of the Western Region on the 9th of August, 1963, a new civil service was also established for the newly created region (Ayeni, 2007:32).
The creation of twelve states in May, 1967 by the Gowon Administration led to the emergence of thirteen civil services in Nigeria.
In 1976, more states were created by the Murtala/Obasanjo Government bringing the states to nineteen states and consequently twenty civil services.
Twenty-one states and thirty states were created respectively in 1987 and 1991 by Babangida Regime and thus leading to the emergence of twenty-two and thirty-one civil services respectively.
In 1996, the Abacha regime further divided the states into thirty-six and consequently thirty-seven civil services emerged.
This has lasted till date.
Self- Assessment Exercise (SAE) Discuss the evolution of the Nigerian Civil Service.
73 4.0 CONCLUSION From our discussion, we can see that the Nigerian Civil Service is not a creation of modern times but has its roots in the British colonial administration.
From the era of colonial tutelage up to the present time, the Nigerian Civil Service has continued to evolve especially with states creation by different administrations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the evolution of the Nigerian Civil Service.
We examined the forms of administration in traditional society and their influences.
We then observed the development of the Nigerian Civil Service and reached the conclusion that Nigerian Civil Service is not the creation of modern influences but has its roots in the British colonial administration.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Examine the development of the Nigerian Civil service 2.
Discuss the moralistic orientation and the ritualistic feature of the traditional public administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adebayo, A.
(1997).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan.
Spectrum Books Limited.
Ayeni, J.
(2007) Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil service Reforms.
Abuja.
SSC Publishers.
Balogun, M.J. (1983) Public Administration in Nigeria- a Developmental Approach.
London.
Macmillan Press Ltd. Maduabum, C. (2008) The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications.
74 UNIT 2: THE NIGERIAN CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Civil Service 3.2 Characteristics of Career Civil Service 3.3 Composition of the Nigerian Civil service 3.4 Functional Responsibilities of the Civil Servants 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, student will gain general knowledge about the nature of the civil service.
The unit also discusses the Nigerian Civil service, its composition and the role the career civil servant is expected to perform.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the nature of the civil service; 2.
Examine the main characteristics of the civil service; 3.
Examine the composition of the Nigerian civil service; 4.
Discuss the functional responsibilities of the civil servants.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Civil Service The Civil Service as distinct from the public service is the agglomeration of the ministries, extra-ministerial departments, agencies of federal state government.
The Civil Service is “a complex organization with a body of permanent officials appointed 75 in a Civil capacity to assist the political executives in the formulation, execution and implementation of government policies in ministries, Departments and agencies within which specific government works are carried out… This excludes the Judiciary, Police, Armed forces, Local Government Services, research institutions and Universities.
The officials whose remunerations are paid wholly out of monies voted and approved by the National assembly are called Civil Servants.
The Civil Service which possesses a status of neutrality among other public service organizations within the broad canopy of the public service has as its objectives specifically to ensure: a) The attainment of government objectives, aims and policy; b) The promotion of a better execution of the laws and programmes of the government; c) An efficient and expeditious administration of government business; d) The reduction of expenditure and improvement of economy to the fullest extent consistent with efficiency in the operation of government; and e) Increased efficiency in the implementation of government policies and programmes to the fullest extent practicable through the encouragement of specialization of personnel and through other measures.
With the evolution of modern state and the adoption of the concept of separation of powers, the Civil Service emerged as an organ of the executive responsible for advising the executive on policy directions and implementation of decisions (Ayeni, 2008: 2-3).
3.2 Characteristics of Career Civil Service The main characteristics of the concept of career civil service are: a) Permanence of tenure and stability of service, b) Equal opportunity of competing for government service, c) Merit to be the sole criteria of recruitment and due recognition to ability and personal efficiency in a sound promotion system d) The extent of territorial jurisdiction of public employees is fairly large.
This not only enlarges their scope of activity but also improves their avenues of promotion; and 76 e) Adequate steps are taken to provide in-service training to the civil servants to keep them in touch with the latest trends and developments in administrative theory and practice (Basu, 1994).
3.3 Composition of the Nigerian Civil Service The Nigerian Civil Service comprises the civil service at the centre, that is, the Federal Civil Service and a civil service in each of the thirty-six states of the federation.
Each of these comprises ministries and extra-ministerial departments or offices.
The composition as compiled by the Ayida panel in its report of 1994 is as follows: a) General Services and Administration (Office of the Vice-President).
b) State and Local Government Affairs Office (office of the Vice-President) c) In the Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation are the following: i.
Cabinet Secretariat ii.
Political affairs Office iii.
General services Office iv.
Special services Office v. Economic Services Office vi.
Special Duties vii.
Ecological Funds Office viii.
Police affairs Office ix.
National Assembly d) In the Office of Head of Service of the Federation are the following: i.
Establishment and Management Services ii.
Public Service Office iii.
Service Welfare Office iv.
Manpower Development Office e) Federal Ministries i.
Ministry of Agriculture ii.
Ministry of Aviation iii.
Ministry of Commerce and tourism iv.
Ministry of Communication 77 v. Ministry of Defence vi.
Ministry of Education vii.
Ministry of Federal Capital Territory viii.
Ministry of Finance ix.
Ministry of Health x.
Ministry of Industry xi.
Ministry of Information and Culture xii.
Ministry of Internal Affairs xiii.
Ministry of Justice xiv.
Ministry of Labour and Productivity xv.
National Planning Commission xvi.
Ministry of Petroleum Resources xvii.
Ministry of Power and Steel xviii.
Ministry of Science and Technology xix.
Ministry of Solid Minerals Development xx.
Ministry of Transport xxi.
Ministry of Water Resources and Rural Development xxii.
Ministry of Women Affairs and Social development xxiii.
Ministry of Works and Housing xxiv.
Ministry of Youth and Sports xxv.
Federal Civil Service Commission (Maduabum, 2008).
All the offices and ministries have permanent secretaries as accounting officers.
Each of them bears the overall responsibility for policy, programme and project implementation in its sector.
3.4 Functional Responsibilities of the Civil Servants These functions include: i.
Render professional and technical advice based on the totality of knowledge, experience available within the various ministries and departments.
ii.
Contribute to the effective and realistic implementation of the declared objectives, policies and programmes of government through careful analysis of the issues, identification of constraints and suggestion of the most appropriate strategies for project implementation, having regard to the available resources.
78 iii.
Contribute to the formulation of policy and carry out approved programme faithfully.
iv.
Give honest and impartial advice on matters of public interest without fear of being regarded as disloyal to the cause of the administration.
v. Sustain the oath for public officers which requires them in essence: a.
To be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Federal Republic of Nigeria at all times; b.
Not to discriminate on the basis of religion, tribe, cult, or status etc.
c. To place service to the public above selfish interest; and d. To perform their official duties diligently and efficiently.
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Explain the functional responsibilities of the civil servants 4.0 CONCLUSION As we can see, the Civil Service is an organ of the executive.
It is responsible for advising the executive on policy directions and implementation of policy decisions.
The civil service exists to implement governmental policy for the fulfillment or the achievement of governmental goals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the nature of the civil service including its characteristics.
The composition and the functional responsibilities of the Nigerian civil servants were also examined.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Mention the objectives of the civil service 2.
Discuss the main characteristics of the civil service.
3.
Highlight the ministries listed under the federal ministry.
79 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ayeni, J.
(2007) Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reforms.
Abuja.
SSC Publishers.
Maduabum, C. (2008) The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications.
80 UNIT 3: PUBLIC SERVICE REFORMS IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1The Public Service Reform 3.2 Salient Features Public Service Reforms in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we are focusing on the reform of the public service in Nigeria.
The search for a more responsive public service has led to the setting up of various commissions and review panels at various times in the history of the Nigerian public service to suggest ways for the improvement of the service.
This unit therefore presents various administrative reforms since 1945 and the focus of their objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Examine the various reforms that has taken place in Nigeria since 1945 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Public Service Reform Essentially, reform connotes a deliberate and planned change.
Any intervention which fails to produce fundamental change in the way the public Service operates and conducts its business is not a reform.
Examples of such an intervention are administrative actions.
Public service is a systematic intervention aimed at improving the structure, operations, systems and procedures of the Public Service to enable its transformation as a multi-faceted agent of change, and as in our cases in Nigeria, as a 81 veritable instrument of national cohesion and socio-economic development.
Reform is neither a quick fix nor a random injection of solutions.
Reform is a sustained process that is people- focused based on the realization that while its target is the people; its tool for achieving the desired change is also the people.
Reforms involve changes in bureaucratic structures, techniques, practices, procedures and behaviors.
But the changes are in relation specifically to certain goals.
The key goal is often administrative improvement.
The goals may relate to four areas enumerated below: i.
Reform may be undertaken to improve administrative effectiveness in response to functions and pathologies of the bureaucracy or public criticisms; ii.
Reform could also be undertaken to accommodate new ideas, values, principles, techniques and modes of behaviours; iii.
Reform may be institutionalized at any point in time purposely to re0orient the bureaucracy towards national goals and aspirations or in relation to changes in the political and economic environment as perceived by the government of the day.
iv.
Reform may also be constituted to improve personnel management principles and techniques (Ayeni, 2007).
The principles underlying the on-going reform of the public service are that: a) The Nigerian public Service is crucial but deficient; b) The public service faces enormous problem and challenges on the 21st century; c) A reformed service is key to meeting the development challenges of the 21st century; d) Nigeria’s dream of a better future can only be realized by modernizing the machinery of government- the Public service; and e) Reform provides the platform for applying a combination of strategies and approaches to resolve the crisis of governance and underdevelopment.
3.2 Salient Features of Public Service Reforms in Nigeria from 1945 to 1995 Administrative Review/ Reforms Focus Tudor Davis Commission, 1945 -Reviewed wages and general conditions of service Harragin Salary Review Commission, -Reviewed wages and general conditions of service; 1946 and -Divided the civil service into “senior service and junior service’ (2 distinct compartments) 82  Gorsuch Commission, 1951 -Reviewed remuneration and structure of the service, noted absence of viable middle category and created 5 main grades.
Hewn Committee, 1959 -Proposed integration of ministries and departments.
-Defined the roles and functions of permanent secretaries.
Mbanefo Salaries and Wages -Reviewed salaries wages Commission, 1959 Morgan Commission, 1963 -Reviewed salaries/ wages of junior staff of federal governments and private establishments Elwood Grading Team 1966 -Examined anomalies in the grading of posts to proposed uniform salaries for officers performing identical duties.
Adebo salaries/wages Commission, -Proposed establishments of a public service review 1971 commission to examine: the role of the public service commission; structure of the civil service; conditions of service; and training arrangements.
Udoji Commission, 1972 -Focus on the issue of increasing efficiency and effectiveness with the context of meeting the challenges of a development oriented society.
-Introduced a new conception of management which is results oriented, concentrating attention and resources on identified priorities for action.
-Introduced open reporting system for performance evaluation; -Established a unified grading and salary structure covering all post service; and -Created a unified senior management group for administrative and professional cadres for central management of career.
-Recommended and officers possessing the requisite skills and knowledge who can apply the acquired skills and knowledge in establishing goals and achieving targets.
-Underscore the need for every public manager to be trained in projects managements, management by objectives and programme budgeting.
-Recommended the adoption of project management as a tool for inter-ministerial task execution for broadening of skills and competencies and ensuring better integration of government services.
Recommended more delegation of human resource management functions to ministries, departments and agencies.
-Recommended decentralization of machinery for staff consultation and negotiation.
-Recommended speedy treatment of disciplinary cases arising in the face of complicated disciplinary procedures and canvassed for the recognition civil 83 services rules as part of contract of service.
-Recommended the institution of an ombudsman at federal and state levels for reviewing administrative decisions which are considered unjust.
Dotun Phillips, 1988 -Came into effect through the civil service reorganization decree No.43 of 1988; -Recommended the abolition of the office of the head of civil service and a new administrative dispensation whereby ministers rather than permanent secretaries would serve as chief executives and accounting officers of ministries; -Recommended the abolition of the post of permanent secretary.
In its place, a new political post of director general was created which was to be held at the pleasure of the president and be vacated after the expiration of the tenure of the appointing administration unless such officers were reappointed by the new government.
-The civil service was professionalized in order to stimulate specialization and expertise.
In this regard, an officer was expected to make a career in a particular ministry or department.
-Each ministry was restructured along departmental lines to reflect the basic functions and areas of concern of the ministry; -Each department was subdivided into divisions, each division was subdivided into branches, and branches were subdivided into sections; -Each ministry was empowered to undertake the appointment, promotion and discipline of its staff under the general and uniform guidelines provided by the federal civil service commission; -Each ministry or extra-ministerial department was allowed to have three common services departments, viz: finance and supplies and departments of planning, research and statistics, and not more than five operations departments.
Ayida Review Panel -Recommended abrogation of the civil service reorganization decree No.43 of 1888 and a return to the status quo.
Adapted from Ayeni (2008) Reforming Public Service in Nigeria: A Collective Responsibility Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Examine the salient features of Udoji Commission of 1972.
84 4.0 CONCLUSION Public Service Reform is expected to re-engineer and streamline government machinery, so that a significant in the quantity, quality and cost effectiveness of Public Service can be achieved.
The efforts of various reforms although their focus might differ were geared towards enhancing efficiency of the public service.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has examined various reforms commission set up to review the working of the public service in Nigeria since 1945.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss the salient features of Dotun Phillips Commission of 1988.
2.
Define reform and highlight the underlying principles of reform.
7.0 REFERENCES/FUTHER READING Ayeni, J.
(2008) Reforming Public Service in Nigeria: A Collective Responsibility.
Abuja.
SSC Publishers.
85 UNIT 4: PLANNING AND BUDGETING IN THE NIGERIAN CIVIL SERVICE TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Planning and Budgeting –Definitions and Meaning 3.2 Steps in Systematic Planning 3.3 General Purpose of Planning and Budgeting 3.4 Fundamental Principles Governing the Operations of a Government Planning and Budget 3.5 Planning and Budgeting in the Nigerian Civil Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, student will be introduced to the concepts of planning and budgeting (two functions that are essential in administration).
The unit will discuss the steps in systematic planning, the general purposes of planning and budgeting and the principles governing the operation of a governmental planning and budget.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you are through with this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Have an idea of what planning and budgeting connotes; 2.
Discuss the steps in systematic planning; 3.
Identify the general process of planning and budgeting; and 4.
Discuss the principles governing the operations of a government planning 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Planning and Budgeting – Meaning and Definitions What is planning?
86 Planning is simply deciding in advance what is to be done.
It comprises the selection of objectives, policies, procedures and programmes from among alternatives.
Planning is a conscious effort on the part of the government to mobilize and direct the utilization of the resources in the economy for the production of goods and services in a prescribed form, purposely in accordance with set priorities (Ayeni, 2007).
Budgeting A budget is a financial plan summarizing the financial experience of the past stating a current plan and projecting it over a specified period of time in future – Dimock.
Budget is a financial plan of government for a definite period – Taylor.
Budgeting which is a financial plan is also a conscious and deliberate effort aimed at packaging a “budget” which is a financial plan embodying an estimate of proposed expenditures for a given period and the proposed means of financing them.
According to Dimock, the important budget principles are: publicity, clarity, comprehensiveness, unity, periodicity, accuracy, and integrity.
The following are the elements of budget:  It is a statement of expected revenue and proposed expenditure;  It requires some authority to sanction it;  It is for a limited period, generally it is annual;  It also sets forth the procedure and manner in which the collection of revenue and the administration of expenditures is to be executed (Bhagwan and Bhushan, 2006).
3.2 Steps in Systematic Planning 1.
A careful definition and limitation of the problem as far as possible; 2.
The exploration of all available information pertaining to the problems; 3.
The posing of possible alternative solutions or mthods of solving the problems; 4.
The experimenting of one or more tentative solutions through actual operations; 5.
The evaluations of results in the light of new developments, research and experience; and 6.
Reconsideration of the problems and the results, and redecision, if justified.
87 3.3 General Purpose of Planning and Budgeting The general purpose of planning and budgeting are described as follows: i.
Planning and budgeting as s short-term calculation; ii.
Political, economic and social document couched in figures; iii.
Management tool used for control, monitoring and coordination; iv.
Agent that enables government to anticipate change and adapt to it accordingly; v. Device for ensuring a continuous monitoring procedure, and reviewing and evaluating performance with a reference to previously established standards.
vi.
Overall method for improving operations.
3.4 Fundamental Principles Governing the Operations of a Government Planning and Budget Through the Ministry of Finance, Economics, Planning and Central Bank of Nigeria include the following: Public revenue levied is based on Financial Act, and no monies can be spent without authority of the national Assembly or the Legislature; Expenditure on government activities are always made only for the purposes authorized by the National Assembly, and as provided for in the Constitution; There is Consolidated Fund into which all revenues of the government collected under the authority of the National Assembly are paid and from which all funds for expenditure purposes are usually paid as provided fro in the Constitution and in other relevant Audit Act and Financial Statues of the government; All monies spent out of the Consolidated Fund of the government are usually accounted for, audited by the Auditor-General, whose report must be presented to the National Assembly quarterly, annually or periodically (Ayeni, 2007:148-149).
3.5 Planning and Budgeting in the Nigerian Civil Service The process of planning and budgeting in the Nigerian civil service involves certain actors, and this includes the executive arm of government as the head of government, ministers, advisers, permanent secretaries etc.
in the civil service.
These people work together through the instrumentality of the civil service to ensure effective and efficient 88 planning and budgeting considered critical to the success of economic and socio- political objectives of the government.
The execution of government’s plan and budget is carried out within an established legal framework for the management of public finances as enshrined in the constitution and further elaborated in other statutes.
The legislative framework contained in the statues is usually put in place in order to ensure that the government has access at all times to financial resources to defray approved public expenditures.
The legislative framework also ensures that the government’s access to financial resources other than tax revenues is not utilized beyond certain set limits which, if exceeded would compromise the government’s ability to finance its operation in the years ahead and could cause inflation, thereby causing fiscal imbalances and dislocation in the economy.
The statute usually vests in the Honourable Minister of Finance and his officials the power of control and supervision of the finances of the government in order to ensure that full account is made to the National assembly.
According to the statute, every person responsible for the collection, receipt, custody, issue or payment of public monies shall obey all such instructions that may from time to time be issued by the Ministry in respect of custody, handling and accounting for such public monies (2007:144).
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Define planning.
Discuss the general purpose of planning and budgeting 4.0 CONCLUSION Planning and budgeting as we can see are essential to the functioning of the government.
For effective administration and efficient service delivery on the part of government, there is the need for adequate planning and committing resources to plan objectives for effective implementation and consequently desirable outcomes.
Without adequate planning and budgeting procedure, this task may not be achievable.
89 5.0 SUMMARY What we have done in this unit is to examine the planning and budgeting process in the Nigerian civil service.
The unit started by discussing the concepts of planning and budgeting.
Steps in systematic planning, purpose of planning and budgeting are also considered.
We also discussed the fundamental principles governing the operations of a government planning and budget.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss the process of planning and budgeting in the Nigerian civil service 2.
Explain the basic steps in systematic planning 3.
Examine the general purpose of planning and budgeting 7.0 REFERENCE AND FURTHER READING Bhagwan, V. and Bhushan, V. (2006) Public Administration.
New Delhi.
S. Chand &Company Ltd. Ayeni, J.
(2007) Perspectives and Reflections on Nigerian Civil Service Reforms.
Abuja.
SSC Publishers.
Maduabum, C. (2008) The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications.
90 MODULE 4: PUBLIC CORPORATIONS AND PRIVATIZATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1: Public Corporations in Nigeria Unit 2: Privatization and Commercialization Unit 3: Problems of Privatization and Commercialization in Nigeria Unit 4: Public-Private Partnership UNIT 1: PUBLIC CORPORATIONS IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 About Public Corporations 3.2 Reasons for establishing Public Corporations 3.3 Important Characteristics of Public Corporations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, student will be introduced to the term ‘Public Corporations’.
The emergence of the public corporation is a phenomenon of importance in to modern administrative organization.
Public corporations are owned and operated by a government, and established for the administration of certain public programs.
The focus of this unit is on knowing about public corporations, their features, and important characteristics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Examine Public Corporations; 2.
Discuss the reasons why Public Corporations are established; and 3.
Discuss the major characteristics of Public Corporations.
91 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1About Public Corporations Public corporations are owned by government, owned and managed by the state to run certain public enterprises of a specialized nature requiring business-like administration.
Public Corporations are established by acts of parliament which define their powers, functions, structure and relationship with other government institutions.
They have legal personality, can sue and can be sued and can enter into negotiations, sign contracts and acquire property on their own or on behalf of government (Eneanya, 2009).
3.2 Reasons for establishing Public Corporations There are reasons for establishing Public Corporations.
Let us consider some of them.
Flexibility and Operational Autonomy: Public corporations are established to enable them adopt business-like approach to decision-making.
Foreign Competition: To check foreign businesses and encourage indigenous talents, government decides to establish corporations which have the skilled manpower, finance and management, to compete effectively with the giant foreign monopolies (companies).
Heavy Capital Requirement: The provision of certain essential services like water, electricity, telecommunications facilities, housing, ports and harbours, railways, etc., require heavy initial capital investment, so that both local and foreign investors are discouraged from providing them.
Public corporations are set up by government.
Public Interest: Public corporations may be set up for reasons of public interests, especially for welfare services, e.g water, electricity, radio, television, etc.
National Security: Services concerned with national security and economic survival e.g., coal, iron and steel, central bank etc., are best provided through public ownership.
National security may be in jeopardy and a nation may be blackmailed if such strategic services are left to private initiative.
Stabilization of Producers’ Incomes and Development: Marketing boards were established in West Africa during the colonial era for the purpose of stabilizing the supply and prices of agricultural products.
Such stabilization policy helps to remove 92 price fluctuations and ensure a steady income for farmers.
It is generally believed that the more direct control government has on the economy, the easier it is to influence socio-economic development (Eneanya, 2009:112-113).
3.3 Important Characteristics of Public Corporations  It is a separate legal entity and is distinct from the government, which created it.
It has a corporate character or franchise, which confers powers upon it.
It can do only what the charter authorizes.
 It is a corporation in the sense that it has the flexibility and initiative of a private enterprise, has freedom of administration and finance, of accounting and purchasing and has power to recruit its own personnel and to sue and be sued in its corporate name.
 It is a legal person entering into contracts, acquiring and owning property in its own name.
 It is incorporated under a special statute of the parliament which lays down the public purpose, its power, and duties and immunities.
 Though the primary objective of corporations is not profit but public service, it is run on business lines and not in accordance with bureaucratic procedures and practices.
 It holds funds in its own name which is sanctioned by the parliament periodically and which accrues to it through its own earnings.
It enjoys complete autonomy in the management of the funds.
 It has to operate within the broad outline of government policy.
The day-to-day administration is the exclusive responsibility of the managing directors of the corporation.
 The personnel of public corporations are recruited independently in the pattern of business executives under terms and conditions determined by the corporation itself (Basu, 1994:246).
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Discuss the reasons for establishing Public Corporations 4.0 CONCLUSION We can see even from the defining characteristics of Public Corporations that they are publicly owned enterprises that operate within the broad outline of government policy.
This type of organization has the flexibility and initiative of a private enterprise 93 combined with minimum public regulation of its major policies.
However, we are going to come across how government enterprises can partner with private enterprises for efficient service delivery in Unit 4 of this Module.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the term ‘Public Corporation’, examine the reasons why they are established and discussed their major characteristics.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMAs) 1.
Examine the major characteristics of Public Corporations.
2.
What would you are the reasons for establishing Public Corporations?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Basu, R, (1994) Public Administration: Concepts and Theories.
New Delhi, Sterling Publishers Private Limited.
Eneanya, A. N. (2009) Public Administration in Nigeria- Principles, Techniques and Applications.
Lagos.
Concept Publications.
94 UNIT 2: PRIVATIZATION AND COMMERCIALIZATION TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Privatization and Commercialization 3.2 Objectives of Privatization and Commercialization in Nigeria 3.3 Privatization and Commercialization in Nigeria–The Implementing Organs 3.3.1 The Technical Committee on Privatization and Commercialization (TCPC).
3.3.2 The Bureau of Public Enterprises 3.3.3 The Public Enterprises Arbitration Panel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMAs) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, student will be introduced to the twin concepts of ‘privatization’ and ‘commercialization’.
Privatization and commercialization is a major plan of the Nigerian Federal Government’s agenda to reform and structure the economy towards greater productivity and efficiency.
What we shall be doing in this unit therefore is to develop our understanding of the two concepts.
We shall examine some of the objectives of privatization and commercialization.
The unit will also discuss the main organs set up to implement the programmes of privatization and commercialization in the country.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss privatization and commercialization; 2.
Examine the objectives of privatization and commercialization in Nigeria; 95 3.
Examine the major organs set up to implement privatization and commercialization programmes in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Privatization and Commercialization The term ‘Privatization’ is the process of changing the ownership of government companies (or public enterprises) to private ownership through the sale of the shares of such companies to individuals who will manage the companies efficiently and profitably.
It means the transfer of government-owned shareholding in designated enterprises to private shareholders, comprising individuals and corporate bodies.
Commercialization, on the other hand, is to change the way government companies operate to ensure that they are run under the principles of trade and commerce, make them market-oriented, and with a view to maximizing profit (Maduabum, 2008).
The effect of successful privatization is that the public sector will be effectively restructured.
Privatization is based on four core beliefs:  Government is into more things than it should be.
It is intruding into private enterprise and lives;  Government is unable to provide services effectively or efficiently;  Public officials and public agencies are not adequately responsive to the public;  Government consumes too many resources and thereby threatens economic growth (Adeyemo and Salami, 2008).
3.2 Main Objectives of Privatization and Commercialization in Nigeria The privatization and commercialization programmes in Nigeria were aimed at achieving the following objectives:  To restructure and rationalize the public sector in order to lessen the dominance of unproductive investments in that sector;  To re-orientated the enterprise for privatization and commercialization towards a new horizon of performance improvement, viability and overall efficiency; 96  To ensure positive returns in public sector investment in commercialization enterprises;  To check the present absolute reliance of commercially oriented parastatals on the Treasury for funding and to encourage their approach to the Nigerian capital market;  To initiate the process of gradual cession to the private sector of such public enterprises those by the nature of their operations and other social economic factors are best performed by the private sector;  Creating a favorable investment climate for both local and foreign investors;  Reduce in the level of internal and external debts; and  To provide institutional arrangements and operational guidelines that would ensure that the gains of privatization and commercialization are sustained in the future Decree No.
25 of 1988) (Adeyemo and Salami, 2008).
3.3 Privatization and Commercialization in Nigeria – The Implementing Organs For effective implementation of government policies or programmes, there are various agencies or organs that are usually established.
Let us examine some of the implementing organs of privatization and commercialization in Nigeria.
3.3.1 The Technical Committee on Privatization and Commercialization (TCPC).
The Technical Committee on Privatization and Commercialization (TCPC), as the implementation agency was established by the Decree No.
25 in 1988.this was later revamped with the promulgation of Decree No.
28 of 1999, which established the National Council on Privatization (NCP) as the principal policy and decision-making body on all aspects of the programme.
Functions and Powers of the National Council on Privatization  To determine the political, economic and social objectives of public enterprises;  To approve policies on privatization and commercialization;  To approve guidelines and establish criteria for valuation of the enterprises;  To approve the enterprises to be privatized and commercialized; 97  To determine whether the shares of the enterprises should be by public or private issues;  To approve the prices of shares of the enterprises which should be by public or private issue;  To review from time to time the socio-economic effect of the programme and deciding on appropriate remedies;  To supervise the activities of BPE;  To submit yearly reports to the president; and  To receive regularly, periodic reports from BPE on the programme implementation and giving appropriate direction.
3.3.2 Bureau of Public Enterprises (BPE) The Bureau of Public Enterprises (BPE) was established by the Decree No.
28 of 1999 as the Secretariat of the National Council on Privatization (NCP) in administering the day-to-day aspects of the programme as well as the interfacing with relevant government bodies, international organizations, consultants, and public enterprises.
Functions of Bureau of Public Enterprises  To implement the council’s policy on privatization;  To prepare public enterprises approved for privatization;  To advise council on other public enterprises that may be privatized;  To advise council on capital investment needs of the public enterprises to be privatized;  To carry out all activities required for successful issues of shares and sales assets of the public enterprises;  To make recommendations to council on the appointments of consultants, advisers and other professionals required for the privatization exercise;  To advise government on allotment pattern for the sales of shares of the enterprises; and  To oversee the actual sales of shares by issuing houses.
3.3.3 The Public Enterprises Arbitration Panel The Public Enterprises Arbitration Panel shall be responsible for prompt settlement of any dispute arising between an enterprise and the council (NCP) or the bureau (BPE).
98 All disputes relating to performance agreement shall be referred to it (Maduabum, 2008: 375-383).
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Explain the main functions of the National Council on Privatization Discuss the four core beliefs on which privatization of enterprises in Nigeria is based.
4.0 CONCLUSION The beliefs that government was doing many things which private enterprises could handle efficiently and produce maxima gains led to the decisions by the Federal Government of Nigeria to privatize and commercialize some of its enterprises.
The main thrust of the programme of privatization is the transfer of ownership in public enterprises from the government to the private sector with the assumption that effective management of these enterprises by the private sector will lead to growth in the economy.
5.0 SUMMARY What we have done in this unit is to examine the concepts of ‘privatization’ and ‘commercialization’.
The unit discusses the objectives of both concepts.
We also examine some organs of government established to implement the programme on privatization and commercialization, and at the same time examine some distinct functions these organs are set up to perform.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Explain the term ‘privatization’ 2.
Discuss the main objectives of privatization and commercialization programmes of government.
3.
Assess the functions of the Bureau of Public Enterprises 99 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Adeyemo, D. O. and Salami, A.
(2008) A Review of Privatization and Public Enterprises Reform in Nigeria.
Contemporary Management Research.
Pp 401-418.
Vol.
4, No.
4.
Maduabum, C. (2008) The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications.
100 UNIT 3: PROBLEMS OF PRIVATIZATION AND COMMERCIALIZATION IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of Privatization and Commercialization 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION If you recall, our discussion on privatization and commercialization in the previous unit, we observed that, privation and commercialization is embarked upon by the government with the aim of achieving efficiency in the management of public enterprises.
The goal of efficiency therefore is what drives the motivation for privatizing government’s enterprises.
But there are problems associated with achieving this lofty goal.
This unit will therefore, look at the problems of privatization and commercialization.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you are through with this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss the problems privatization and commercialization programmes are confronted with.
2.
Discuss some possible solutions to the problems of privatization and commercialization programmes.
101 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problems of Privatization and Commercialization Maduabum (2008) examines some major problems that have bedeviled the privatization and commercialization programmes operation in the country.
The problems are discussed below: Political Will and Degree of Commitment: The initial problem, which confronted the programme of privatization and commercialization, was weak political will on the part of government to see the exercise through.
As a result of this, its level of commitment to its implementation was low.
This was the reason why fewer public enterprises were privatized or commercialized between 1988 and 1992.
Inadequate Planning: The pace of the exercise of this programme has been affected by unforeseen problems which adequate planning ought to have envisaged.
This has necessitated changing the law governing the policy and the modus operandi of the exercise again and again.
Burdens on Public Enterprises: As a result of mismanagement, some parastatals were carrying heavy debt burdens of unpaid salaries, disappearing pensions, and suppliers etc.
A lot of difficulties arose in a bid to privatize such enterprises as investors had not shown much interest in them.
At the same time, government had been reluctant in assuming the debt burdens of these organizations.
This has resulted in stalemate.
Opposition to the Policy: Certain persons who benefitted immensely from the inefficient management of some public enterprises have expressed their opposition to privatization and commercialization in Nigeria.
Their arguments against the policy has been that it would lead to loss of jobs, loss of control, increase in prices, private monopoly, foreign 102 domination of our economy, etc.
such opposition has caused the implementation of the policy to slacken as it erodes the necessary political base.
Sales of Shares to the Rich Only: This problem has to do with the policy’s credibility in relation to fairness, equity, and justice.
It has been alleged that the poor were left out in the exercise as they could not afford to subscribe to the shares without government empowering them.
Some also argued that privatization will only succeed in transferring the ownership of privatized enterprises from government to the very rich.
Inadequate Publicity: Privatization and commercialization are expected to be national and the effects felt in every nook and cranny of the country.
However, publicity on the exercise has been limited to the cities.
All these are some of the problems that have confronted the programme of privatization and commercialization since inception (Maduabum, 2008: 391-392).
Some Identified Solutions to the Problems of Privatization and Commercialization Programme in Nigeria.
It has been suggested that in order to ensure a successful and speedy completion of privatization and commercialization, it is necessary for government to adopt the following:  Implementation of commercialization and privatization has gone midstream and it will therefore be unwise to stop or slacken it.
Government should display a high level of commitment in its implementation.
 Government must also be prepared to buy off the debts of those enterprises burdened by heavy debts.
As the debts were incurred by those employed by government, the government should regard itself vicariously liable for the debts.
 Poor Nigerians may be empowered, through financial institutions, to purchase shares in privatized enterprises.
By providing soft loans to such people, more Nigerians will be assisted to taking part and benefiting from the exercise.
Shares purchased may be held by the financial institutions as collateral.
103  Adequate publicity also needs to be undertaken to make the average Nigerian understand the policy of privatization and commercialization (Maduabum, 2008:393).
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) In what way(s) do you think the degree of commitment to a programme by the government can affect the implementation of such programme?
4.0 CONCLUSION Well intentioned policies and programmes of government often run into problems.
Sometimes unintended consequences of policy will surface.
Privatization and commercialization programme of government had ots own share of some problems which we have examined in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined the problems confronting and inhibiting effective implementation of privatization and commercialization programmes in Nigeria.
We also discussed the suggested solutions to the identified problems.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
What are the major problems confronting privatization and commercialization programmes in Nigeria?
2.
What solutions are suggested to address the problems of privatization and commercialization programmes in Nigera?
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Maduabum, C. (2008) The Mechanics of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Lagos.
Concept Publications.
104 UNIT 4: PUBLIC- PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPs TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Public-Private Partnership – Meaning 3.2 Forms of Public-Private Partnerships 3.3 Advantages of Public-Private Partnerships 3.4 Disadvantages of Public-Private Partnerships 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Recall in our discussions in the last two units that we said government can divest its business by transferring its enterprises to private sectors to manage for effectiveness and efficiency in service delivery.
In another situation, government can also partner with private sector to provide services to the citizens.
This is what is referred to as Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs).
This may take many forms though.
Learning about PPP, the variety of forms it can take, the advantages and disadvantages is what this unit is all about.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs); 2.
Examine various forms of PPP; 3.
Discuss the advantages of Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs); 4.
Discuss the disadvantages of PPPs.
105 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Public-Private Partnerships – Meaning A public- private partnership is a legally-binding contract between government and business for the provision of assets and the delivery of services that allocates responsibilities and business risks among the various partners.
Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) combine the resources of government with those of private agents in order to deliver services to the citizens.
Public-Private Partnerships may take variety of forms, with varying degrees of public and private sector involvement – and varying levels of public and private sector risk.
The main goal is to combine the best capabilities of the public and private sectors for mutual benefit.
3.2 Forms of Public-Private Partnership There are various forms which PPP can take.
Let us consider some of them.
Public Leverage Public leverage occurs where governments use their legal and financial resources to create conditions that they believe will be conducive to economic activity and business growth.
Contracting-Out Contracting-out involves separating the purchaser of a service from the provider.
Government concentrates on the former, defining what services are to be available and to what standard, and then contracts out the provision to a business or not-for-profit organization.
Franchising Franchising involves government awarding a license to a business or not-for-profit to deliver a public service in which the provider’s income is in the form of user fees.
The license may require the private agent to develop infrastructure, in which case it would normally transfer to public ownership at term.
106 Joint Ventures Joint ventures occur where two or more parties wish to engage on a collaborative project in a way that retains their independence.
Joint ventures enable the co-ordination of important decisions by independent actors in respect of a project that is close-ended in terms of its scope and the commitment of partners’ resources (Skelcher, 2005).
3.3 Advantages of Public-Private Partnership Cost Savings Cost savings materialize in several different forms but are mainly due to the private sector’s role as a mutual partner in the project.
The private partner’s fundamental drive for economic gain yields it an incentive to continually improve its performance, thereby cutting overall project costs.
Whole of Life Cycle Public-private partnerships combine two or more of the project’s phases in a single bundle for the private consortium to deliver over the long-term.
This creates economies of scale by motivating the private sector to organize its activities in a way that drives efficiencies and maximizes returns on investments.
Output-Based Contracts Public-private partnership projects typically adopt an output-focused contract which links payments to performance.
This specifies project results in terms of the quality delivered, rather than how assets or services are provided.
Emphasis on outputs also encourages innovation to take place by motivating the private partner to develop new methods and for project delivery that meets requirements at lower costs.
Risk sharing 107 Public-private partnerships are designed so that risk is transferred between the public and private sectors, allocating particular project risk to the partner best able to manage that risk cost-effectively.
Public-Private Partnerships Deliver On-Time With financing risk routinely transferred to the private consortium, any delays in meeting the agreed upon timelines can lead to additional costs for the private partner as it alone carries the debt for a longer period of time.
Therefore, the private sector has a direct financial interest in ensuring that projects and services are delivered on-time, if not sooner.
Enhancing Public Management By inviting the private partner in, the public authority can transfer risks and responsibilities over the day-to-day operations of two or more phases of the urban infrastructure project to the private consortium.
This frees the public sector to focus on other important policy issues such as regulating, performance monitoring and urban service planning.
Improved Levels of Service By bringing together the strengths from the public and private sectors, PPPs have the unique ability to share a diverse range of resources, technologies, ideas and skills in a cooperative manner that can work to improve how urban infrastructure assets and services are delivered to the people.
Increased Availability of Infrastructure Funds Public-private partnerships free up funding for other urban infrastructure projects in two ways: first, through the potential cost savings inherent in the PPP approach, and second, through access to private financing which commits the government to spread payments for services rendered over a longer period of time.
Seeing that it is the private partner who typically absorbs the financing risk, the public authority is not obliged to record 108 the investment upfront as part of its bottom line surplus or deficit for that fiscal year.
This allows the transaction to remain ‘off balance sheet’, meaning the government can borrow money for other important projects without affecting calculations of the measure of its indebtedness (UN Habitat, 2011).
Tan, Allen and Overy (2012) also enumerated some benefits of Public-Private Partnerships.
These are listed below: Investment decisions under PPP contracts tend to be based on a long term view rather than short-term concerns.
Risk and work are transferred to the party which is best able to manage it at the least cost, achieving best value.
Projects go through a competitive pricing process, meaning that the cost of public services is benchmarked against market standards.
The timings and costing tend to be more certain and therefore deliver better value for money.
Where PPPs are not completed to budget, the private sector usually bears the costs.
The cross-transfer of public and private sector skills, knowledge and expertise can create innovation and efficiency.
The private sector often brings with it greater construction capacity, labour capacity and resources than would be available to the public sector.
Payments to the private sector in PPP projects are usually linked to how they perform, creating incentives and efficiency.
PPP projects are not subject to political interference and deferred payments for the government.
3.4 Disadvantages of Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) Public-Private Partnerships do have some disadvantages.
Let us examine the major disadvantages of PPPs.
Public-private partnerships represent good opportunities to lower overall project costs.
However, when compared with traditional procurement, the complete PPP process invites additional costs that, if not managed properly, can erode some of the potential economic benefits of this model.
One of these potential cost drivers is identified in the tender process - a competitive approach to choosing a project partner unique to the PPP procurement model.
Parties bidding for a project expend 109 considerable skills and resources in designing and evaluating the project prior to implementation.
Depending on the number of project bidders, costs can add up as all participating bids tend to be factored into the overall cost of the project.
Secondly, the long-term and inclusive nature of a PPP contract requires that each partner spend considerable time and resources on outside experts to help anticipate and oversee all possible future contingencies.
This can be very costly, particularly for a public agency inexperienced with the private sector and requiring additional help to protect the public interest.
And finally, while the private financing element of the partnership is one of the most important incentive drivers for the private partner, the price of financing can result in higher capital costs ranging between 1 and 3 percent.
Unless cost savings generated by the private consortium outweigh the added cost of private loan financing, a PPP project may not deliver cost savings.
Reduced Control of Public Assets In view of the fact that the private sector absorbs a significant portion of the project risk, important decisions over outcomes are inadvertently shared with that partner.
Accordingly, this can result in the loss of public control over important decisions concerning a range of public issues, from how basic public goods such as housing and clean water should be delivered and priced, through to on-site labour issues around job pay and security.
Mitigating Risk The more complex the urban project and the more people involved the higher and more varied the risk becomes.
Although a carefully structured PPP manages risk through a well-defined contractual agreement, some risk is unforeseen and therefore difficult to mitigate.
In the case of such unexpected risk (or project failure), oftentimes it is the public authority that is left to not only pay for the failure of the risk, but also the emerging costs.
110 Rigidities in Long-Term Contract A key concern with the long-term committal nature of PPP procurement is that it limits the public sector’s ability to make changes to the contract if unexpected economic or situational challenges arise.
In the event that a change is required to either the use of an infrastructure asset, or to the type of urban service offered, PPPs have proven to be inflexible - both in terms of the time and administrative burden associated with altering the contract (UNHabitat, 2011).
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Explain what Public-Private Partnership means Discuss the various forms Public-Private Partnership can take 4.0 CONCLUSION Government can cooperate with the private sector in many ways to provide service to the citizenry.
Governments all over are making use of the private sectors to design, manage and deliver public goods.
While Public-Private Partnership has its benefits, it also has some major disadvantages.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have examined what Public-Private Partnership connotes.
We also identified some forms of Public-Private Partnership arrangements.
The unit also discussed the major advantages and disadvantages of Public-Private Partnership.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss the major advantages of Public-Private Partnerships.
2.
In what way(s) will you say that Public-Private Partnership can be a risky venture?
111 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Skelcher, C. (2005) Public-Private Partnerships and Hybridity in Ferlie, E., Lynn, L and Pollitt, C. (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Public Management.
Oxford University Press.
Tan, V. Allen and Overy (2012) Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Advocates for International Development.
UN Habitat, 2011.Public-Private Partnerships in Housing and Urban Development.
The Global Urban Economic Dialogue Series.
112 MODULE 5: URBAN ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1: Urbanization – Definitions and the Process Unit 2: Challenges of Urbanization in Nigeria Unit 3: Urban Governance and Service Delivery in Nigeria UNIT 1: URBANIZATION – DEFINITIONS AND THE PROCESS TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Urbanization?
3.2 Processes of Urbanization 3.3 Factors responsible for Urbanization in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, student will be introduced to the notion of urbanization.
For a better understanding of the term ‘urbanization’, the unit will examine some definitions of the term, discuss the process of urbanization.
Factors responsible for urbanization in Nigeria will also be examined.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you are through with this unit, you should be able to: Discuss effectively what urbanization is about; Examine the process of urbanization; and Discuss the factors that are responsible for urbanization in Nigeria.
113 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Urbanization?
Urbanization is the process whereby large numbers of people congregate and reside in big cities or in urban areas, gradually increases.
Urbanization, is the shift from a rural to an urban society, and involves an increase in the number of people in urban areas during a particular year.
Urbanization is the outcome of social, economic and political developments that lead to urban concentration and growth of large cities, changes in land use and transformation from rural to metropolitan pattern of organization and governance (Nsiah-Gyaabah n.d).
Urbanization can also be defined as the phenomenon describing the process of change in the growth of population due to changing conditions in the society.
It is a process of demographic, social, economic and physical change, which requires complex governmental action (Ugwu, 2001).
Criteria used to define urban can include population size, space, density and economic organizations.
3.2 Processes of Urbanization The process of urbanization has gone on throughout history of most nations.
The urbanization processes are largely driven by market forces and government policies that lead to simultaneous processes of change in livelihoods, land use, health and natural resources management including water, soil and forests and often reactive changes in local governance.
This can and often impacts on the life style of the people living in the urban areas.
Government development policies and budget allocations, which often favour urban residents over rural areas, tend to pull people into the urban areas.
In the cities, public investment, which often misses the urban poor, with expenditures biased towards the 114 higher-income classes and poverty among vulnerable groups such as new migrants force them into slums and squatter settlements.
The market forces result in a series of changes in employment, urban agriculture and peri-urban production systems.
Ready market leads to an increase in production of horticultural crops and perishables such as vegetables given the high demand and proximity to urban consumers.
These factors therefore, act as a great centripetal force in favour of urbanization and hence, people are attracted to the urban centres (Nsiah- Gyaabah, n.d.).
Causes of Urbanization Rural to urban migration often occur on a massive scale due to population pressure and lack of resources and social amenities in rural areas.
People living in rural areas are “Pulled” to the city.
Often they believe that the standard of living in urban areas will be much better in urban areas.
Natural increase caused by a decrease in death rates while birth rates remain high as a result of development policies in most urban areas.
3.3 Factors responsible for Urbanization in Nigeria The existence of traditional, commercial, religious and administrative centres in the pre- colonial societies in Nigeria led to the emergence of some urban cities in the country.
For example, the existence of sophisticated Yoruba system of towns in the West, which included the old Oyo, Badagri, Ile-Ife.
There were also the trading entrepreneur towns of central Hausa land in the North such as Bornu, Zaria, Bida, Kaduna.
Also, there was the Igbo grassland and sophisticated as those of the Western and Northern parts of the country.
These urban cities grew as a result of trading activities, religious movements, military conquests and administrative activities.
With colonialism, the pre-colonial urban centres became transformed and new forces introduced in the urbanization process.
A number of structural elements in the colonial political economy were said to be responsible for the changed pattern of urbanization in Nigeria at this period.
These included: 115 The development of transport network such as the railways which radically transformed the transportation system to meet the change in the economy.
The railways were built between 1896 -1930 for the transportation of raw materials for export.
This development created depots and job openings and trading activities in places like Enugu, Port-Harcourt, Zaria, Kafanchan, Ebute-Metta, Otta.
Again, the new colonial administrative structures which performed colonial functions created new towns and altered the relationship between existing ones.
Central and regional administrations were based in Lagos and at different towns at Zungeru, Kaduna, Ibadan, Enugu.
In these towns, government and related employment were in high demand.
Pre-colonial capitals were converted to provincial headquarters.
The growth of government technical departments at this period facilitated urban growth although they were mainly based at the regional capitals such as Ibadan, Kano, and Enugu.
The mineral exploitation was another colonial element which influenced urban development.
The two main deposits of coal and tin in Enugu and Jos respectively attracted thousands of labourers from the rural areas to Enugu and Jos.
Agricultural sector was another area which stimulated urban growth during the colonial era.
The high demand by Britain of agricultural products such as cocoa, palm oil, palm kernel, groundnuts and other vegetable products for her industries and procurement of revenue promoted urban growth by creating complex collection and distribution mechanisms for these commodities.
Towns in the export-crop ares prospered and favourably placed on the network to facilitate movement.
Such towns include: Abeokuta, Ibadan, Ife, Ijebu-Ode, Ondo in the West, Aba, Onitsha, and Umuahia in the East while Kano, Nguru, Zaria were located in the North.
Movement of people from rural areas to the new urban centres in search of job openings contributed immensely to the urban development in Nigeria.
People migrate in order to to improve their economic position and satisfaction.
116 Over concentration of essential social amenities in the urban centres also contributed greatly to the rapid growth of cities.
Social amenities such as pipe-borne water, communication facilities, transport network etc.
led to the massive movement to the urban areas to enjoy these social amenities.
Diversification of the economy also accelerated the rate of urbanization, by creating more opportunities for employment, commercial activities and also stimulated the growth of cash crops.
The creation of states in 1967, 1976, 1987, 1991 and 1996 also aided the growth of urbanization.
as states are created, new capitals are developed and urbanized through the subsequent provision of social amenities, which resulted in the emigration of people to the new capital territories in anticipation of improving their standards of living (Ugwu, 2001:182-186).
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Discuss the main processes of urbanization.
4.0 CONCLUSION Urbanization is said to connote social change since it involves the process of change occurring in the society.
It is a process of demographic, social, economic and physical change.
As much as it can bring positive development, urbanization can also be constrained by some factors.
5.0 SUMMARY We have examined the notion of urbanization in this unit.
We also discussed the processes and forms in which it can take.
We examined various factors that have enhanced urbanization in Nigeria from the pre-colonial period.
As we mentioned urbanization can also be slowed down or impeded by certain factors.
This we shall discuss in the next unit.
117 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
What is urbanization?
2.
Examine the factors that are responsible for urbanization in Nigeria 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nsiah-Gyaabah, K. (n.d) Urbanization Processes – Environmental and Health Effects in Africa.
Panel Contribution to the PERN Cyber Seminar on Urban Spatial Expansion.
Ghana.
Ugwu, S.C. (2001) Issues in Local Government and Urban Administration in Nigeria.
Port-Harcourt.
Echrisi &Company.
UNIT 2: CHALLENGES OF URBANIZATION IN NIGERIA TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Challenges of Urbanization in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we started our discussion on urbanization.
We now know what it connotes; the process it can take and factors that can enhance its growth.
What we shall be doing mainly in this unit is to discuss the challenges of urbanization in Nigeria.
Some of these challenges include; housing, unemployment, transportation, population explosion etc.
the unit examines all these in detail.
118 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you are through with this unit, you should be able to: Discuss the challenges of urbanization in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Challenges of Urbanization in Nigeria Urbanization can have negative consequences.
Nigeria is one of the most urbanized countries amongst the developing ones.
According to Omar (2013:10), “the scale and rapidity of urbanization in Nigeria, both in spatial and demographic terms, has fuelled the high demand within the cities for land, housing and social services.
Most urban residents are denied decent means of livelihood.
A majority of Nigerians in the cities live in slum settlements, with income levels below subsistence and a dominant mode of livelihood located in non-formal sectors.
Most urban residents have no access to basic services such as primary health care and basic security.
Most cities lack adequate supply of pipe borne water, huge mountains of garbage occupy large areas in the cities due to a lack or near absence of an efficient waste disposal system, proper health care facilities are inexistent, affordable housing is still a dream for workers, and the public primary and secondary school systems are in a state of near collapse.
Service delivery has therefore become one of the most serious problems of urban governance in the country”.
Let us examine these major challenges one after the other.
Population Explosion The uncontrolled increase in population diversities as people migrate to the cities in search of employment has brought about a great stress on the natural resource base and the environment.
Rapid population growth has its own disadvantages.
Over- population places severe pressure on the existing infrastructural services in the country, especially in the cities where the population is concentrated.
Under conditions of resource constraints attendant upon the underdevelopment of these societies, the population 119 situation and dynamics make the provision of the people with a decent level of living impossible (Ugwu, 2001).
Unemployment Unemployment is very high in all urban centres in Nigeria, and the main reason is because of the high population of migrants from the rural areas in Nigeria and few other national migrants from other African countries that come to seek for jobs that are not that available in the urban centres (Oyeleye, 2013).
The urban centres with the concentration of administrative, commercial/industrial and educational establishment as well as a great variety of social services, provide an enormous and plentiful job opportunities and other perquisites of ‘good life’.
Be that as it may, the employment openings in these cities do not meet the surging need for jobs by the army of unemployed people in cities.
Environmental challenge Environmental problems constitute one of the major challenges of urbanization in Nigerian Urban centres.
The problems have been classified as ecological, poaching and habitat loss, increasing desertification and soil erosion.
These are further subdivided into pollution, deforestation, global warming and slum development, etc.
Environmental problems in the urban centres have resulted in many health problems in Nigeria, and they also have a negative effect on the overall economy of the country.
Apart from general health implications of environmental problems, there are tendencies of the problems affecting the psyche of the people.
For instance, residents of urban slums are known to show deviance attitudes, apathy to government programmes and anti-social values like, prostitution, crimes, and juvenile delinquency.
Traffic congestion which increases the generation of the cars‟ exhaust due to the traffic delay is another major environmental problem in Nigerian urban centres.
Slums developments in urban centres also deplete the physical environment, increases crimes and violence.
The environmental problems in urban centres outweigh the experience in the 120 countryside, as the environmental problems are seen as the results of human activities which are higher in the urban centres (Oyeleye, 2013).
Housing Housing also constitutes one of the major problems of development particularly in the urban cities.
An adequate stock of decent housing and the provision of related community facilities such as schools, community centres, administrative and manufacturing premises are among the fundamental essentials of human life.
But what we find today in many urban cities in Nigeria is appalling; many urban dwellers live under the Bridges, uncompleted and abandoned buildings.
Some find homes in construction company containers, while some live in packed vehicles along the roads or in mechanic villages.
This is the situation in most urban cities today (Ugwu, 2001).
Transportation Another problem confronting urban centres is chaotic traffic jam.
An increasing traffic jam is frequently the direct and immediate consequence of high population density and deep concentration of commercial establishments in urban areas.
Narrow and traffic jam roads are common in urban centres and in most cases make it impossible for people to travel on them and get to their destination on time.
Food Insecurity The high rate of rural-urban migration in developing countries threatens food security in both urban centres and rural areas.
High number of people involved in agricultural activities in rural areas, have abandoned agricultural activities as they migrate to the urban centres to seek jobs in manufacturing and processing industries and some into informal activities.
Lesser number of people are into agriculture in Nigeria, as more agricultural land in the suburbs have given way for suburban developments and large expanse of land in rural areas are left uncultivated, as rural areas are more dominated with the aged people who have no strength for agricultural activities (Oyeleye, 2013).
121 Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) In what way(s) can environmental issue constitute a challenge to urbanization?
4.0 CONCLUSION We can see from our discussion that urbanization is not without its own challenges which can come in different forms.
Urbanizing cities throughout the world have been confronted with some or all of the challenges we have examined in this unit.
That is not to say that urbanization does not produce positive gains.
What is important however, is the ability of government to address those challenges so that the gains of urbanization can be feasible in the lives of the people.
5.0 SUMMARY We have discussed certain challenges that urban cities are usually confronted with.
These challenges are experienced in all most of the aspects of urban centres.
Governments in the urban centres are day-in-day making efforts to confront some of these challenges.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss the main challenges of urbanization 2.
What are the major environmental factors constituting challenges to urbanization?
3.
Unemployment can arise as a result of urbanization, Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Omar, M. (2013) Governing Nigerian Urban Centres.
Public Policy and Administration and Research.
Vol.3.
No.1.
Oyeleye, O.I (2013) Challenges of Urbanization and Urban Growth in Nigeria.
American Journal of Sustainable Cities and Socieites.
Issue 2, Vol.
1.
Jan-Dec. Ugwu, S.C. (2001) Issues in Local Government and Urban Administration in Nigeria.
Port-Harcourt.
Echrisi &Company.
122 UNIT 3: URBAN PLANNING TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Urban Planning 3.2 Fundamental Objectives of Urban Planning 3.3 Problems of Urban Planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Recall in the last unit, we examined some of the challenges of urbanization in cities and the effects on city dwellers.
This in essence means that special attention is required to tackle those challenges.
The issue we are going to deal with in this unit will therefore focus on urban planning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Discuss urban planning; 2.
Discuss the fundamental objectives of urban planning; and 3.
Examine problems that are associated with urban planning 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Urban Planning Poor service delivery in Nigerian cities has been attributed to poor planning but in most cases, good urban planning policies become ineffective due to poor implementation.
Addressing the problems of urban centres will necessarily require adequate planning on the part of government.
Planning is very vital instrument in all human endeavour.
It is a 123 systematic effort undertaken by the government to achieve specific economic and social goals.
Urban planning can be seen as the application of scientific methods of policy making with a view of increasing the validity of policies concerned with the present and anticipated future of an urban area.
It involves management with a framework of macroeconomic resource allocation and political decision making.
Urban planning aims at fulfilling social and economic objectives that go beyond the physical form and arrangements of buildings, streets, parks, utilities and other parts of the urban environment.
Urban planning takes effect largely through the operation of government and requires the application of specialized techniques of survey, analysis for casting and design.
Comprehensive planning has some critical elements which include: a) A concern for comprehensiveness.
b) A long range focus usually 10 to 25 years.
c) Preparation of a plan focusing on physical environment.
d) An emphasis in relating physical and socio economic policies.
e) Capital improvement programmes.
f) Regulatory and administrative measures, which aid in implementation.
g) Promotion of an effective balance between the satisfaction of immediate or developing problems and those likely to occur in the medium on somewhat terms.
h) It is flexible and capable of reacting to changes.
3.2 Fundamental Objectives of Urban Planning The fundamental objectives of urban planning include: a) Orderly arrangements of parts of the city (residential, business, individual), so that each part could confirm its function with minimum cost and conflict.
b) To ensure an efficient system of circulation within the city and to the outside world, using to the maximum advantages of all modes of transportation.
c) The developments of such part of the city optimum standards, in terms of size, sunlight and green space in residential areas.
124 d) Provision of safe, sanitary and comfortable housing in a variety of dwelling types to meet the needs of all families.
e) Provision of recreational facilities, schools and other community services of a high standard of size, location and quality.
f) Provision of adequate and economical water supply sewage utilities and public services (Ugwu, 2001).
3.3 Problems of Urban Planning There are certain constraints to urban planning.
Some of these problems include: a) The paucity of data: There is no availability of reliable data upon which to plan.
b) The issue of lack actual forward planning.
Forward planning and plan design are hindered by the absence of theoretical basis for work that is appropriate to Nigerian circumstances.
c) Governments of Nigeria have given little or no attention to urban or regional plans.
d) The planning authorities in Nigeria are poorly funded and thus it is difficult to live up to its responsibilities.
e) Lack of skilled professionals who have adequate knowledge for sit selection and effective site analysis and planning.
f) There is no functional and systematic research to provide a factual basis for policy formulation.
g) Corruption is another obstacle to urban planning on the part of the parties involved in urban administration and planning (Ugwu, 2001).
Self-Assessment Exercise (SAE) Define urban planning Analyse the critical elements of planning.
4.0 CONCLUSION We observed in our discussion that government can only meet the rising demands of urban growth through adequate planning.
Effective urban management requires that government come up with strategies of dealing with identified urban challenges.
This can be done by involving people and groups to be part of urban governance.
125 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the issues relating to urban planning.
We examined the objectives of urban planning as well as problems that urban planning entails.
We also discussed some critical elements of planning.
For planning to be effective these elements must be observed.
In all we know that urbanization has its attendance problems but these challenges can be addressed through effective planning and implementation of urban development programmes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMAs) 1.
Discuss the critical fundamental objectives of urban planning 2.
What are the constraints to urban planning?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Omar, M. (2013) Governing Nigerian Urban Centres.
Public Policy and Administration and Research.
Vol.3.
No.1.
Ugwu, S.C. (2001) Issues in Local Government and Urban Administration in Nigeria.
Port-Harcourt.
Echrisi & Company.
126
