 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: COP212 COURSE TITLE: COOPERATIVE EXTENSION COP212 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Course Team Dr. D. I. Mai-Lafia (Writer) - NOUN Goshit G. G. (Co-writers) - UNIJOS Dr.
I. Ogboru (Editor) - UNIMAID Mrs. O. Inua (Coordinator) - NOUN Dr. D.I.
Mai-Lafia (Programme Leader) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii COP212 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-167-7 All Rights Reserved iii COP212 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction………………………………………….………................ 1 Course Aims…………………………………………………………… 1 Course Objectives …………………………………………………… 2 Working through This Course……………………………………….… 2 Course Materials…………………………………………………….… 3 Study Units…………………………………………….......................... 3 Textbooks and References…………………………………………….
4 Assignment File……………………………………………………….
4 Tutor-Marked Assignments…………………………………………… 4 Final Examination and Grading………………………………..……... 4 Presentation Schedule…………………………………….……….….. 4 How to Get the Most from This Course……………………………… 6 Summary……………………………………………………………… 6 iv Introduction This course is a semester course for students pursuing a first degree in Cooperative Management.
This course will also be available to students who want to do a post graduate study in Cooperative Management.
It is assumed that these students do not have background knowledge of Cooperative Management.
This course guide gives you an idea of the nature of the course, the materials you are going to use and how you are going to use the materials for meaningful benefits.
It is expected that at least two hours should be devoted to the study of every course unit.
For each unit, there are exercises.
You are encouraged to attempt these exercises.
They obviously serve as points of reflection, which are necessary for proper understanding of the facts contained in the course.
At the end of each unit, there is a Tutor–Marked Assignment (TMA), which you are expected to answer.
It serves as revision and continuous assessment.
Tutorial lectures will be provided, which is an opportunity for you to have a face-to-face contact with your facilitators.
Any area you do not understand will be explained during the tutorial classes at your study center.
Course Aims This course aims at developing your ability to identify cooperative field problems and to equip you with adequate knowledge towards proffering solutions to these problems.
The aims of the course will be achieved as follows:  Introducing you to the definition of extension service as well as general foundations of cooperative extension service.
 Identifying the legal base, scope and functions of extension service as well as the objectives of extension service.
 Explaining the general survey of channels of communication in rural development with particular reference to channels that are suitable for grassroots mobilisation such as personal contact, meetings, reports, posters, planned graph, leaflets (bulletins and circulars), radio, television, exhibits, fairs, filmstrip/slides and tours.
 Highlighting the essential ingredients of cooperative extension services- definition, methods and attributes of cooperative extension service.
 Identifying problems of cooperative extension service.
 Recognising opinion leaders and their roles in cooperative extension service as well as causes of attitude change.
COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION  Defining and recognising planning as an essential tool for a well co-ordinated cooperative extension programme.
 Identifying various types of planning with relation to extension programme.
 Identifying diffusion and adoption process-definition of innovation, opinion leadership, diffusion and adoption as well as mentioning attributes of an innovation and identifying stages in rates and adopted categories.
Course Objectives There are objectives to be achieved in each study unit of the course.
You should read them before studying each unit.
By the end of this course, you should be able to:  define extension service as well as state the general foundations of cooperative extension service.
 explain the importance of extension service in Nigeria.
 identify the legal base, scope and functions of extension service as well as state the objectives of extension service.
 identify the essential ingredients of cooperative extension services-definition, methods and attributes of cooperative extension service.
 identify problems of cooperative extension service.
 define planning as an essential tool for a well co-ordinated cooperative extension programme.
Working through This Course To complete this course, you are required to read the study units and the recommended textbooks and explore more current materials on the internet.
In this course, each unit consists of self-assessment exercises to test your understanding, from time to time.
At a point in your course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, a final examination will be written.
Below, you will find a list of all the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.
ii COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Course Materials This course is made up of the following: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Textbooks 4.
Assignment File 5.
Tutorials Study Units There are fifteen study units divided into two modules.
The first module has 8 study units while the second module has 7 study units.
The units are as follows.
Module 1 Unit 1 The General Foundations of Cooperative Extension Service Unit 2 The Importance of Extension Service in Nigeria Unit 3 The Legal Base, Objectives, Scope and Functions of Extension Service Unit 4 The General Survey of Channels of Communication in Rural Development Unit 5 The Yardstick that can Enhance Effective Selection of Communication Channels for Cooperative Grassroots Mobilisation Unit 6 The Essential Ingredients of Cooperative Extension Services Unit 7 Identification of Problems of Cooperative Extension Service Unit 8 Opinion Leaders and their Roles in Cooperative Extension Service, and Causes of Attitude Change Module 2 Unit 1 Planning as an Essential Tool for a Well Co-Ordinated Cooperative Extension Programme Unit 2 Various Types of Planning in Relation to Extension Programme Unit 3 Case Studies in Cooperative Extension Service Unit 4 Analysis of Case Studies and the Advantages of Case Studies in Cooperative Extension Service Unit 5 Innovation, Identification of diffusion and Adoption Process iii COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Unit 6 The Role of Extension Agents in the Diffusion, Adoption Process and Training and Visit in Extension System Unit 7 Implications of the Diffusion, Adoption Process for the Development of Cooperative in Nigeria All the study units are important for proper understanding of cooperative extension.
For each study unit, on which you are to spend at least 2 hours, there are specific objectives.
At the end of each unit, measure what you have learnt against the objectives.
If there is any deviation, go back to the contents of that unit.
Textbooks and References There is no compulsory text book for this course.
However, as you go through the course, you will observe that some text books are recommended more often.
This shows that it is crucial to a number of units.
Please try and consult these books.
Moreover, each unit has its own assigned texts.
You should also lay your hands on these texts for further understanding of the course.
Assignment File There are many assignments on this course and you are expected to do all of them by following the schedule prescribed for them in terms of when to attempt them and submit same for grading by your facilitator.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are two of them in each unit of this course, but you are to attempt only 5 out of a total of 30 as grouped under assignment file.
Each of them carries 10%.
As soon as you complete your assignment, send it immediately, to the tutor.
Final Examination Grading There will be a three-hour examination covering the whole course.
You are expected to answer 5 questions on the whole.
Presentation Schedule This is about dates for tutorials and submission of assignments, which will be sent to you in due course.
iv COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Unit Title of work Weeks Assignment of activity unit Course Guide Module 1 1 The General Foundations of Cooperative Extension Service 1 2 The Importance of Extension Service 1 in Nigeria 3 The Legal Base, Objective Scope and 1 1st Assignment Functions of Extension Service 4 The General Survey of Channels of 1 Communication in Rural Development 5 The Yardstick that can Enhance 1 Effective Selection of Communication 2nd Assignment Channels for Cooperative Grassroots Mobilisation 6 The Essential Ingredients of 1 Cooperative Extension Services 7 Identification of Problems of 1 Cooperative Extension Service 8 Opinion Leaders and their Roles in 1 3rd Assignment Cooperative Extension Service Module 2 1 Planning as an Essential Tool for a 1 Well Co-ordinated Cooperative Extension Programme 2 Various Types of Planning in Relation 1 4th Assignment to Extension Programme 3 Case Studies in Cooperative Extension 1 Service 4 Analysis and Advantages of Case 1 Studies in Cooperative Extension Service 5 Innovation, Identification of Diffusion 1 and Adoption Process 6 The Role of Extension Agents in the 1 5th Assignment Diffusion-Adoption Process and Training and Visit in Extension System 7 Implications of the Diffusion, 1 Adoption Process for The Development of Cooperative in Nigeria Total 5 Assignments v COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION How to Get the Most of This Course As a diligent student, you are expected to devote, at least, 2 hours to go through each unit.
You are going to play a dual role, that is, as a lecturer and a student.
This means that some confidence has been reposed in you.
Read the course carefully just as you will listen carefully to a lecturer.
As you read each paragraph, try to interpret and evaluate so as to bring out the sense contained therein.
After going through the introduction, read the objective.
As you read the main content, ask yourself whether or not what you are reading tallies with the objective.
Make sure you take time to work through the self-assessment exercises.
You may discuss these with other students running the same programme.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor whenever you encounter any problem in the course of the study.
Always send your tutor–marked assignments on time.
Also, note the tutor’s comments against future assignments.
Above all, never involve in examination malpractices.
Summary This course offers you the basic knowledge of Cooperative Management.
Having completed the course, you would have known what cooperative extension is.
You would have also known how to practise as an extension worker.
Also, if the need arises, you will also know how to plan cooperative extension service, as well as identify various channels of communication for effective grassroots mobilisation.
You will also be able to identify the essential ingredients of cooperative extension service.
Have a nice time.
vi COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Course Code COP212 Course Title Cooperative Extension Course Team Dr. D. I. Mai-Lafia (Writer) - NOUN Goshit G. G. (Co-writers) - UNIJOS Dr.
I. Ogboru (Editor) - UNIMAID Mrs. O. Inua (Coordinator) - NOUN Dr. D.I.
Mai-Lafia (Programme Leader) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA vii COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2012 ISBN: 978-058-167-7 All Rights Reserved viii COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 …………………………………………….…………… 1 Unit 1 The General Foundations of Cooperative Extension Service……………………………………………….... 1 Unit 2 The Importance of Extension Service in Nigeria…..… 9 Unit 3 The Legal Base, Objectives, Scope and Functions of Extension Service…………………………………….. 15 Unit 4 The General Survey of Channels of Communication in Rural Development ………………………………... 22 Unit 5 The Yardstick that can Enhance Effective Selection of Communication Channels for Cooperative Grassroots Mobilisation ……………………………... 31 Unit 6 The Essential Ingredients of Cooperative Extension Services…………………………………………….… 40 Unit 7 Identification of Problems of Cooperative Extension Service……………………………………………….. 47 Unit 8 Opinion Leaders and their Roles in Cooperative Extension Service, and Causes of Attitude Change….. 53 Module 2 …………………………………………………..…… 58 Unit 1 Planning as an Essential Tool for a Well Co-Ordinated Cooperative Extension Programme…… 58 Unit 2 Various Types of Planning in Relation to Extension Programme…………………………………………….
64 Unit 3 Case Studies in Cooperative Extension Service…….. 70 Unit 4 Analysis of Case Studies and the Advantages of Case Studies in Cooperative Extension Service……… 76 Unit 5 Innovation, Identification of Diffusion and Adoption Process……………………………………………..….
84 Unit 6 The Role of Extension Agents in the Diffusion, Adoption Process and Training and Visit in Extension System………………………………………………… 91 Unit 7 Implications of the Diffusion, Adoption Process for the Development of Cooperative in Nigeria………... 100 ix NoneCOP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION MODULE 1 Unit 1 The General Foundations of Cooperative Extension Service Unit 2 The Importance of Extension Service in Nigeria Unit 3 The Legal Base, Objectives, Scope and Functions of Extension Service Unit 4 The General Survey of Channels of Communication in Rural Development Unit 5 The Yardsticks that can Enhance Effective Selection of Communication Channels for Cooperative Grassroots Mobilisation Unit 6 The Essential Ingredients of Cooperative Extension Services Unit 7 Identification of Problems of Cooperative Extension Service Unit 8 Opinion Leaders and their Roles in Cooperative Extension Service UNIT 1 THE GENERAL FOUNDATIONS OF COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Extension Service 3.2 The Foundations of Cooperative Extension Service in Nigeria 3.3 The Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 3.3.1 The Department of Cooperative 3.4 The Agricultural Development Programme (ADP) 3.5 Agricultural Extension Research Efforts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION When you hear the words “extension service”, what easily comes to your mind is agricultural extension service; but as will be demonstrated in this unit, extension service is not restricted to agriculture alone.
It 1 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION permeates and applies to all areas of human endeavours, where knowledge is generated and used for the welfare of humanity (e.g.
health, education, engineering, etc).
In other words, extension services’ overall objective is to plan, execute, and evaluate learning experience that will help people acquire the knowledge and skills essential for solving farm, home and community problems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define extension service  discuss the foundations of cooperative extension service in Nigeria  illustrate the activities of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (FMA&NR)  state the functions of the department of cooperative in the (FMA&NR)  explain agricultural extension research efforts in Nigeria and the activities of Agricultural Development Project (ADP).
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Extension Service To start with, take a look at the statements below: - Extension is a process or a service way of getting knowledge developed from one environment to the other.
- Extension services are services employed in the diffusion of new innovations to people who live in the remote areas of a community.
They have limited access to their information needs in the areas of agriculture, building, trade, healthcare, domestic work and other areas of human activities (Ugwu, 2008).
- As a method of teaching rural people on the method of production and marketing system - A system or service which provides rural people an opportunity to have access to improved teaching which under normal circumstances they would not have been able to avail themselves of.
Omokare (1983) defines extension as informal educational system that is directed to adult, carried out thoughtfully and systematically by applying teaching and learning principles under the atmosphere of mutual trust and respect.
2 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Agricultural extension is for rural people, so farming is for rural people.
It has no closing time or opening time.
So, it is informal in nature; and it brings about a desirable change in rural people.
Rural Research Extension people system system farmer Figure 1.1: How Extension Functions Extension is an out of school education that anywhere can serve as a classroom, i.e.
the farmers’ farm, the village square/hall, market center, kitchen, sitting room.
We should remember that education is a process of bringing about desirable change in human behaviour.
These desirable changes can be in any of the forms listed below: 1) Desirable change in skills, e.g.
how to spray herbicide (sprayers) 2) Desirable change in knowledge, e.g.
fertilizer, herbicides and animal breed 3) Desirable change in attitude, e.g.
dressing, crop storage.
3.2 The Foundations of Cooperative Extension Service in Nigeria The history of agricultural extension started from 1893.
That was when the first research institute started in Nigeria.
There was a botanical garden then in the south.
Later, there was British Cotton Association which acquired a land of about 4 square kilometers at Moore Plantation in Ibadan.
Their goal was to feed textile industries in 1905.
In 1910, there was a department of agriculture for the Southern Protectorate.
The department was to carry out research mostly on soil and the type of crops suitable for a particular soil.
In 1912, there was another department of agriculture for Northern Protectorate, which was mostly concerned with the development of major crops that are good in Northern part of the country.
These crops were cotton, groundnuts etc.
; the department also determined which soil was good for agricultural purpose.
3 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION In 1921, there was central department of agriculture for the whole country.
There was something that led to the formation of a Central Department of Agriculture.
The reason was that in 1914, Northern and Southern Nigeria were amalgamated to become one.
Objectives of Central Department of Agriculture 1) Experimental production of export crops e.g.
cotton, groundnut, rubber, palm oil, kola nuts, cocoa and coffee.
2) Improvement and maintenance of soil fertility 3) Efficiency in marketing of agricultural produce especially exports crops.
To achieve this goal, marketing boards were set up for each export crop.
The boards also regulate the prices of these crops paid to local farmers 4) Introduction of agriculture education for training of sub- professional staff, that is, extension workers.
This led to the establishment of school of agriculture at Moore Plantation in Ibadan, in 1921 and another, in Samaru in 1928.
5) The establishment of rudimentary extension service/advisory service.
We should note that agricultural development is directly proportional to the country’s development.
Between 1921 and 1952, there were provinces and agricultural development at professional levels was significant.
In fact, the biggest boss then was called provincial agriculture officer.
From 1952 to 1953, there was a change in constitution and there was regional system of government in which each region had a Ministry of Agriculture.
Ministry of Agriculture in Eastern region’s headquarters was in Enugu; while the western regional headquarters of the Ministry of Agriculture was in Ibadan.
That of the northern region was in Kaduna.
Each region had functional ministry of agriculture and natural resource, divided into various departments.
MANR Fishery Agric Forestry Livestock Agric and extension Engineering wildlife Figure 1.2: Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources 4 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION The head was Chief Agric Officer (CAO).
This set-up continued up to 1960 when Nigeria got her independence.
In 1963, mid–west region was created while Federal Ministry of Agriculture was established in 1964.
Note that the establishment of regional ministries of agriculture was the beginning of recognisable agricultural extension practice in Nigeria.
Each regional ministry of agriculture had a research station, a school of agriculture, and a field service division.
The extension personnel trained by the school, working under the field service division, were deployed to teach farmers innovative farming techniques.
The regionalisation of agriculture and the consequent separation of research and extension reduced the focus on extension and laid the basis for the enduring weak linkages between research and extension.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is Extension?
3.3 The Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources Again, it is worthy of note that the federal ministry of agriculture and natural resources set up in the mid sixties had its structure reflected in the state ministries that came on board with the creation of states in the late sixties by the Gowon’s regime.
Agricultural extension under the ministry was a relatively small unit compared to other sections in the ministry.
Consequently, the roles of transferring and disseminating agricultural technologies in the ministry were, therefore, bugged with so many problems.
These problems were lack of staff, weak linkages with agricultural research, poor staff mobility, inadequate qualified staff, and weak financial support (Maduekwe and Ozor, 2004).
Suffice it to say that extension was a very small unit in the administrator machinery of the ministry of agriculture until the establishment of the Agricultural Development Programmes (ADPs).
3.3.1 The Department of Cooperative (in the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (FMA&NR)) Note that the foundations of cooperative extension service were laid in the historical development of agricultural extension service discussed in section 2.2 of this unit.
At this juncture, it is pertinent to state the functions of the Cooperative department in the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
These are listed below.
i. Co-ordination of inter – governmental cooperative activities.
5 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION ii.
Formulation of broad natural economic policy for cooperative development and financing and integration of cooperative policies into national development plans.
iii.
Cooperative education and training at the national level and relations with appropriate Nigerian and foreign educational institutions.
iv.
Inter–African and other international cooperative matters including relations with international cooperative organisations and specialised agencies of the United Nations.
v. Relations with global central labour organisation and similar bodies, especially in matters relating to jointly sponsored welfare schemes.
vi.
Coordination of research into cooperative problems.
vii.
Co-ordination of inter–state cooperative activities.
viii.
Regulate the activities of national cooperative bodies and societies ix.
Compilation of information on all matters relating to cooperatives and preparation of reports on cooperative development in Nigeria.
3.4 The Agricultural Development Programmes (ADPs) The pre–ADP extension services were presumed to be ineffective and could only provide limited services to majority of farmers in the basic farming enterprises.
This formed the basic fact underlying the removal of the extension service from the civil service system and the introduction of Agricultural Development Project (ADP) (Ekpere, 1991).
According to Saliu and Age (2009), enclave agricultural development projects were first established on trial basis with World Banks’ funding in Funtua, Gusau, Gombe, Anyigba, Lafia, Bida, Ilorin, Ekiti, Akoko, and Oyo – North between 1974 and 1982.
The outcome of the trials was good as the ADP was adopted in all of the states of the federation, including Abuja.
The World Bank –ADP approach has been used in Nigeria to recognise the management of the agricultural extension system for effective performance.
The main features are the Training and Visit (T&V) extension system.
This system will be explained in full in due course.
3.5 Agricultural Extension Research Efforts We need to note that the research interest in agricultural extension is a major driver of agricultural extension practice and policy, which laid the foundation for cooperative extension service.
We should remember that there were very few capable hands within and outside the ministry of 6 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION agriculture to carry out research in agricultural extension.
Most research in extension focused on issues such as adoption of crops or livestock, emphasising farmers’ acceptance of a small aspect of what constitutes the complete technology needed to make progress.
The findings of those studies blamed the farmer for failure to adopt the innovations, referring to the farmers with such terms as “illiterate”, “conservative” and “peasant”.
The broader and indeed more relevant issues such as institutions, policy, markets and consumer food preferences were rarely addressed.
An earlier work on the institution framework for transfer of agricultural technology to resource poor farmers in Nigeria reported that agricultural extension institutions are uncoordinated and improperly aligned with the tenets of agricultural development (Obibuaku and Madukwe, 1992).
The agricultural research system comprises 17 commodities – based institutes and a special national extension institute, over 45 faculties of agriculture in conventional federal, state, and private universities, three universities of agriculture, several colleges of agriculture/polytechnics.
It also includes three international agricultural research centers, namely- International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) a sub – station of International Crop Research Institute for Semi–Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), and a sub–station of International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) (Okwu and Ejembi, 2001).
All of these institutions, according to Saliu and Age (2009), serve as the fountain of agricultural innovations for both public and private agricultural extension service providers.
In Nigeria, agricultural extension services have been mainly public.
Currently the major provider of public sector agricultural extension services is Agricultural Development Programme (ADP) in each of the 36 States of Nigeria (Saliu and Age, 2009).
4.0 CONCLUSION This is our first unit in cooperative extension course.
While reading the unit, you were made to understand the meaning of extension service and the general foundations of cooperative extension service which were laid in the historical development of agricultural extension service in Nigeria.
It was pointed out that the most successful extension system was the Agricultural Development Programme extension service.
7 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 5.0 SUMMARY You have now learnt about the definition of extension service and the general foundations of cooperative extension service.
This provides the basis for further issues that will be raised in the course of this study.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define extension service according to Omokare (1983).
2.
Which organisations serve as a fountain of agricultural innovations for both public and private agricultural extension providers in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Obibuaku, L. O.
& Madukwe, M. C. (1992).
“Institutional Framework for Transfer of Agricultural Technology to Resource, Poor Farmers in Nigeria”.
Journal of Extension Systems, Volume 8 (1&2), pp.
103 – 113.
Saliu, O. J.
& Age, A.I.
(2009).
“Private of Agricultural Extension Services in Nigeria- Proposed Guidelines for Implementation”.
Journal of Sustainable Development in Africa.
Volume 11, No 2.
Ugwu, F. N. (2008).
Need for Public Library’s Extension to Rural Communities in Nigeria.
Special Collections Division, Nnamdi Azikiwe Library, University of Nigeria, Nsukka (UNN).
8 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 2 THE IMPORTANCE OF EXTENSION SERVICE IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Contribution of Extension Service 3.2 The Role of Extension and its Policy Implications 3.3 The Performance of Extension Services in Nigeria 3.4 Current Private Extension Services in Nigeria 3.5 Sustainable Agricultural and Rural Development (SARD) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt about the meaning of extension service and the general foundations of cooperative extension service.
The present unit is going to be an extension of the first one.
This is because we are still going to closely look at the importance of extension service in Nigeria.
There is no doubt that extension service has contributed to the rural development of the country.
Saliu, O. J.
& Age, A. I.
(2009) state that, “Nigeria probably has the most elaborate extension system in Sub-Saharan Africa, with a population of over 140 million and 71 million hectares of arable land”.
They further state that, the agricultural research system comprises 17 commodity-based research institutes and a special national extension institute, over 45 faculties of agriculture in conventional federal, state, and private universities, three universities of agriculture, and several colleges of agriculture/polytechnics.
It also includes three international agricultural research centers, namely- International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (ITTA), a sub-station of International Crop Research Institute for Semi-And Tropics (ICRISAT), and a sub-station of International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) (Okwu and Ejenibi, 2001).
All these institutions collectively or individually serve as the fountain of agricultural innovations for both public and private agricultural extension service providers.
In Nigeria, agricultural extension services have been mainly public.
Currently, the major provider of public sector 9 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION agricultural extension services is Agricultural Development Programme (ADP) in each of the 36 states of Nigeria (Saliu and Age, 2009).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the importance of extension service in Nigeria  describe the roles of extension service and policy implications  explain current private extension services in Nigeria  explain sustainable agricultural and rural development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Contribution of Extension Service Let us look at a few as outlined below: (a) It contributes to economic growth -this is seen through improved efficiency in production and better use of resources.
For instance, through improved agricultural yield, it helps in getting more export earnings.
We remember the contributions of such cash crops like cocoa, groundnut, cotton, palm kennel, rubber etc., to Nigeria’s economic development before the discovery of crude oil.
(b) The importance of extension is also seen in the area of educational services it gives to the people - this contribution has a very far-reaching effect on the well-being of the rural people.
(c) Extension Service helps to bring about rural development.
The change brought about through extension influences the rural dweller (like the farmer and his family) in no small way.
(d) Leadership training is acquired by the rural people through extension education and training.
(e) Some youth activities are started and encouraged through extension services, as argued by Anyanwu et al., (2001).. (f) Extension training and education enhance the transfer of knowledge from government research centres, stations, universities and other areas to the rural people.
10 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION The importance of extension policy was recognised by the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO’s) global consultation on agricultural extension when it recommended that (Swanson, 1990): “all national governments should develop and periodically review their agricultural extension policy.
This policy should include the goals of agricultural extension, the responsible agencies and personnel, the clientele to be served, the broad programmatic areas to be addressed, and other relevant guidelines”.
The consultation further recommended that: “the FAO, in conjunction with the donor community, should engage in policy dialogue with national governments to stress the importance of agricultural extension in national agricultural development and the need to share an explicit, formally enacted, agricultural extension policy” (Swanson, 1990 P.11).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What do you understand by the term donor community?
3.2 The Role of Extension and its Policy Implications The rural people, especially farmers, correctly view extension as a form of assistance to help improve their know-how, efficiency, productivity, profitability, and contribution to the good of their family, community, and society.
At the same time, politicians, planners and policy makers in many developing countries view extension as a policy instrument to increase agricultural production, to achieve national foods security, and at the same time, help alleviate rural poverty.
In addition, some economists view extension as a policy instrument that will contribute to human capital development and economic growth; therefore resources allocated to extension are viewed as an economic investment which must produce competitive economic returns.
To the practitioner, agricultural extension enhances and accelerates the spread of useful know-how and technologies to rural people.
These activities are expected to lead to increased and sustained productivity, increased income and wellbeing of farm people; and these should also lead to the promotion of national food security and economic growth.
These objectives are to be achieved through non- formal education and training programmes and two-way technology 11 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION transfer and feedback systems where extension has an important contribution to make to agriculture and rural development.
At the same time, agricultural and rural development is no longer a matter of just increasing food and agriculture production; other factors must be addressed by policy makers and support service agencies in formulating and implementing agricultural and rural development policy.
These issues include population and environmental concerns, and they have very strong implications for how key support services such as research and extension should be organised and financed.
3.3 The Performance of Extension Service in Nigeria The introduction of the extension services since the removal of the extension service from the civil service system and the performance of Agricultural Development Project have been encouraging (Ekpre 1991).
The result is increased in extension contacts with the rural people, dissemination of several technologies and adoption by farmers (Oyebanji, 1994).
For instance, eminent scholars-according to Idachaba (2005) assert that Anyigba ADP greatly transformed the lives of the Igala people through the revolution in extension services delivery.
However, Mijindadi (1992) observes that some prevailing problems existed and limited the effectiveness of the extension system.
These problems include- insufficient funding at state level, inadequate availability of inputs, poor logistics and inadequate staffing (Saliu and Age 2009).
3.4 Current Private Extension Services in Nigeria Saliu and Age (2009) argue that, apart from the general government extension programs in Nigeria, there also exist some extension programmes to promote the practice of agriculture.
They further posit that: “The foremost participants in private extension services are United Africa Company (UAC), John Holt, Nigerian Tobacco Company (NTC), and Diocesan Agricultural Development Programme of the Catholic Diocese of Ijebu – Ode, among several others who became involved in agricultural production, processing, and marketing some decades ago” (Adedoyin, 1995).
12 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.5 Sustainable Agricultural and Rural Development (SARD) The integration of the food, population, and environmental nexus has led to a new platform of development, referred to by FAO as Sustainable Agricultural and Rural Development (SARD).
This new concept of SARD has been defined by FAO as: …the management and conservation of the natural resource base, and the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of human needs for present and future generations.
Such sustainable development (in agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors) conserves land, water, plant and animal genetic resources; is environmentally non-degrading; technically appropriate; economically viable and socially acceptable.
(FAO, Bosch Declaration, 1991, p. 2) We should note that the role of the rural people is well recognised in SARD, particularly in the management and conservation of soil, water, and biological resources; maintaining an ecological balance and applying environment friendly technologies such as integrated pest management (IPM).
Farmers, for instance, are the single largest group of users and managers of land, water, and other biological resources throughout the world.
In 1970, for instance, about 790 million people were economically active in agriculture, and this number will increase to around 1.13 billion by the year 2000 and to 1.19 billion by 2010 (Alexandrators, 1995, p. 340).
The majority of these men, women, and young farmers will need useful information, appropriate technology, and sound technical advice not only to increase their agricultural productivity and income, but also to make farming and rural life richer and more sustainable.
Herein lies the important role of extension service.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to the importance of extension service in Nigeria.
There is the need for more concerted efforts by all stakeholders (the government, extension workers, research institutions, donor agencies and the target rural people) towards effective extension service delivery in Nigeria.
13 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied the importance, role and performance of extension service in Nigeria.
You equally learnt about the current private extension service in the economy, as well as sustainable agricultural and rural development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain the contributions of extension service to rural development.
2a) What does the acronym SARD stands for?
b) In what area is the role of rural people recognised in SARD?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyanwu, A. C.; Anyanwu, B. O.
& Anyanwu, V. A.
(2001).
Agricultural Science for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: Africana – FEP Publisher Limited.
Idachaba, F. S. (2005).
“Agricultural and Rural Development in Nigeria- The Policy Perspective”.
A Text of Convocation Lecture Delivered at K. S. U. Anyigba on 11th March, 2005, pps.
2-4.
Mijindadi, N. B.
(1992).
“Agricultural Extension Service Approaches in Africa: Emerging Issues and Lessons from Nigeria’s Experiences”.
Paper Presented at the Conference of African Farm Management Association, held in Harare, Zimbabwe.
Saliu, O. J.
& Age, A. I.
(2009).
“Privatisation of Agricultural Extension Services in Nigeria – Proposed Guidelines for Implementation”.
Journal of Sustainable Development in Africa, Volume 11, 2.
14 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 3 THE LEGAL BASE, OBJECTIVES, SCOPE AND FUNCTIONS OF EXTENSION SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Legal Base, Objectives, Scope and Functions of Extension Service 3.1 The Legal Base of Extension Service 3.2 The Scope of Extension Service 3.3 The Functions of Extension Service 3.4 The Objectives of Extension Service 3.5 The Management of Extension Service in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you are going to learn about the legal base, scope, and functions and the objectives of extension service.
In the preceding unit, you were taken through the importance of extension service in Nigeria.
In the course of explaining the importance of extension service in Nigeria, you were made to be aware of the roles and performance of extension service in Nigeria as well as the current private extension services in Nigeria and the Sustainable Agricultural and Rural Development (SARD) project.
The above discussion now gives us a foundation on which we can study the legal base, scope and functions of extension service and the objectives of extension service.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the legal base and scope of extension service  state the objectives of extension service  describe the functions and management of extension service in Nigeria.
15 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Legal Base of Extension Service You should note that extension policies are, presently, not given attention by the country’s highest law-making authority (the national assembly).
Consequently in Nigeria, agricultural extension is largely decentralised and there is little influence of the federal government on extension services, except the activities of Project Coordinating Unit (PCU).
In the United States of America, for instance, extension policies, initiated by the country’s law–making authority, (e. g. congress or parliament) are more common.
Countries that have enacted extension policy through legislative action tend to have well-organised, financially stable extension systems- with a measure of effectiveness and a considerable impact.
Examples of legislated extension policies which have worked well include the following: 1.
The legislation that established cooperative extension service in the United States is known as the Smith – Lever Act of May 8, 1914.
Important to policy makers from developing countries is that this policy stimulated the growth and efficiency of American agriculture from the 1920s to the present.
Rogers (1995) summarise the worth of the cooperative extension system as follows.
“The U.
S agricultural extension model is one of the most widely recognised systems for the diffusion of innovations in the world today.
Probably no other government or private agency can claim to be more successful in transferring technology.” 2.
The Japanese Agricultural Promotion Law of 1948 created and provided funding for Japan’s cooperative agricultural extension service.
The same extension policy has guided the Japanese extension system from 1948 to the present (Shinji Imai in APO 1994, p. 122).
Under this law, the national government is responsible for two-thirds of the salary of extension workers, two-thirds of all operational expenditures for extension programmes and one-half of all expenditures for training extension workers and for rural youth work.
The rest of the extension budget is the responsibility of the prefectural government (Agricultural Extension Service in Japan, 1978, p. 83) 16 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.
Agricultural extension policy in South Korea today is embodied in the 1957 Agricultural Extension Law of 1962.
It is important to note that, because of “unhelpful interference from the administrative system” the 1962 Rural Development Law put together the research bureau, the extension bureau, and the community development bureau under the new rural development administration, freeing these two functions from the Ministry of Agriculture’s administration bureaucracy (Yong-Bok Chung abd Youl-Mo Dong, 1984 p. 4, 5).
4.
Thailand’s agricultural extension policy was codified in the 1956 law that created the Department of Agricultural Extension as one of nine departments of the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives.
It outlines the functions, scope, organisation, and mode of financial support for extension, in Thailand.
5.
Zimbabwe’s Department of Agricultural Technical Extension Services was established by law in 1981 and, although a relatively young institution, it is gradually building up its extension staff and its government funding.
6.
Nigeria has the most elaborate extension system in Sub-Saharan Africa, with a population of over 140 million and 70 million acres of arable land.
Unfortunately, the country has not enacted any law on agricultural extension.
However, Nigeria agricultural research system comprises commodity based research institutes, a special extension institute, faculties of agriculture in conventional universities, three universities of agriculture, several colleges of agriculture and polytechnics.
It also includes international agricultural research centres.
All of these institutions collectively or individually serve as the fountain of agricultural innovations for both public and private agricultural extension service providers.
In Nigeria, agricultural extension services have been mainly public, currently, the major provider of public sector agricultural extension services is Agricultural Development Programme (ADP) in each of the 36 states of Nigeria (Saliu and Age, 2009).
3.2 The Scope of Extension Service Agricultural extension policy is a part of national development policy in general and of agricultural and rural development policy in particular.
Hence, agricultural extension is one of the policy instruments which governments can use to stimulate agricultural development (Van Den 17 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Van in Jones, 1986, p. 91).
We should remember that extension is very much part of what Roling refers to as the agricultural development mix.
The eminent scholar notes that extension is a weak instrument when it stands alone, but that it becomes powerful when combined with price incentives, input supply, credit, seed multiplication, and so forth (Roling in Jones, 1986 p. 110).
The global consultation on agricultural extension concluded that agricultural extension policy should be consistent with and supportive of national agricultural development policy and goals (Swanson, 1990, p. 111).
It is imperative for each country to have a comprehensive agricultural extension policy which provides for co-ordination with research, education, input supply, and credit and marketing systems, as well as some flexibility to reflect the dynamic nature of the agricultural sector.
Consequently, the scopes of extension service are as listed below: 1) Crop farming – process of telling the farmers how to till the soil and planting 2) Home making-food technology – preparation of food, how to take care of home.
3) Cooperative – better way of getting loan from the federal government 4) Leadership and youth farmer – young farmer club.
They help them to go and tell the youth to go to farm.
They also help in disseminating message to the rural population or they serve as supplement to extension workers.
3.3 The Functions of Extension Service We must remember that national extension systems can pursue one of several different extension approaches in implementing extension policy.
Most extension systems in developing countries like Nigeria give primary attention to technology transfer, given national agricultural policies that emphasise increasing food production and achieving national food security.
An example of a technology transfer approach will be the Training and Visit (TV) extension system that has been promoted by the World Bank through its lending programme in Agricultural Development Projects (ADPs) in the country.
An example of an ADP which adopted T&V was the Anyigba Agricultural Development Project.
The extension system has been particularly effective in technology transfer, increasing the skills and knowledge of rural farm families, who have become very effective consumers of agricultural technology.
Consequently, the extension approach pursued by a country should reflect the mission of 18 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION extension, and it will define the functions, programmes, and tasks that will be carried out by the extension service.
We should note that although extension has a generic and universal meaning, its mission and goals may need to be adjusted according to national objectives and the context and stage of agricultural and rural development in a given country.
For instance, should the mission of extension be to promote agricultural development through technology transfer?
Should it, in the alternative, give higher priority to human resource development in rural areas, or should it provide sustainable agricultural and rural development?
There is the need to reflect the extension mission in the name of the organisation, and the preamble for extension policy should be included in the law governing the country’s extension system.
This mission then should be reflected in a statement of goals and objectives that are agreed upon and assigned to extension in a supporting policy document.
This document should be periodically reviewed by policy makers and representatives from stakeholder groups.
The tasks (functions) of extension service in Nigeria are to raise the income of the rural dwellers in the following ways: (a) Teaching improved practices to farmer both in cultivation and processing of crops.
(b) Marketing and distributing improved plant materials (seeds) and strain of livestock.
(c) Teaching improved method of livestock husbandry.
(d) Collecting and collating basic information relating to rural economy, farming system and non-farming system.
(e) Planning, organising and executing rural development schemes.
(f) Organising young farmers club.
(g) Operating demonstration farm and conducting extension experiment in collaboration with research institutes (h) Assessing the ability to use credit facility (i) Organising home economic programme for rural women (j) Teaching crop production method and preservation of crop.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is the scope of agricultural extension in Nigeria?
3.4 The Objectives of Extension Service You should note that although extension has a generic and universal meaning, its mission and goals may need to be adjusted according to 19 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION national objectives and the context and stage of agricultural and rural development in a given country.
As pointed out above, for instance, should the mission of extension be to promote agricultural development through technology transfer?
Should it, in the alternative, give higher priority to human resource development in rural areas, or should it provide sustainable agricultural and rural development?
There is the need to reflect the extension mission in the name of the organisation, and the preamble for extension policy should be included in the law governing the country’s extension system.
This mission then should be reflected in a statement of goals and objectives that are agreed upon and assigned to extension in a supporting policy document.
This document should be periodically reviewed by policy makers and representatives from stakeholder groups.
The objectives are, therefore, summarised as follows: 1) Extension education – the dissemination element and useful information on agriculture and home economics to farmers 2) The practical application of knowledge 3) Assisting the farmers to use the technical knowledge to solve their problems 4) Dissemination of research findings 5) Rural cooperative service 6) Provision of information 7) Helping the farmers to help themselves (developing the farms) 3.5 The Management of Extension Service in Nigeria The nature of agricultural extension in Nigeria and in many developing countries today resembles, to a large degree, the form handed down to the Ministry of Agriculture by the colonial masters (Anyanwu et al., 2001).
Historically, Britain established in the provinces, agricultural officers charged with the responsibility of giving advice to the farmers who were engaged in the production of cash crops for export.
You should note that, the agricultural extension forms part of the several sections of the Ministry of Agriculture.
The ministry was then divided into agriculture, veterinary science, forestry, produce inspection and fisheries.
The agricultural division was further subdivided into planning, project and extension.
(Anyanwu et al., 2001) Anyanwu and others argue that, “Like many other organisational set-ups, the structure shows the line of authority, division of labour, and channels of communication among all involved in the set-up.
Because of the nature of the farmers, mostly directed by traditional norms and involved in subsistence agriculture, the forms of structure adopted often are the organic 20 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION approach form of organisation.
In this, there are unique tasks, unstructured roles and definitions, and horizontal communication.
There are also consultation rather than direct authority and generally professional extension of personnel”.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Why is the organic approach form of organisation adopted as a form of structure for extension service?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the legal base, scope and functions of extension service as well as the objectives of extension service.
The legal base of extension service has been exhaustively examined, drawing from both local and international examples.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: - the legal base of extension service - the scope and objectives of extension service - the functions of extension service; and - the management of extension service in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain the legal bases for extension service in USA, Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Zimbabwe and Nigeria.
2.
Why is it imperative for each country to have a comprehensive agricultural extension policy?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyanwu, A. C.; Anyanwu, B. O.
& Anyanwu, V. A.
(2001).
Agricultural Science for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: Africana – FEP Publisher Limited.
Saliu, O. J.
& Age, A. I.
(2009).
“Privatisation of Agricultural Extension Services in Nigeria – Proposed Guidelines for Implementation”.
Journal of Sustainable Development in Africa, Volume 11, No.
2.
Swanson, B.
(Ed.).
(1990).
Global Consultation on Agricultural Extension: a Report.
Rome: FAO.
21 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 4 GENERAL SURVEY OF CHANNELS OF COMMUNICATION IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personal Contact and Meetings 3.2 Reports, Posters, Planned Graph, Leaflets (Bulletins & Circulars) 3.3 Radio and Television (TV) 3.4 Exhibits, Fairs, Filmstrip/Slides 3.5 Tours and Field Days 3.5.1 Drawbacks in Communication 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Communication as a human activity dates as far back as the beginning of human interaction itself.
The world is rapidly undergoing tremendous scientific and technological development.
Man has been able to ease communication problems by inventing more sophisticated means of communication.
This unit focuses on channels of communication in rural development with particular reference to channels that are suitable for grassroots mobilisation.
These are personal contact, meetings, reports, posters, planned graph, leaflets (bulletins and circulars), radio, TV, exhibits, fairs, filmstrip/slides, tours/field days.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the term communication and its components  discuss the importance of communication in rural development.
22 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT You should note that cooperative can be the ideal mechanism for rural development.
Realising that rural cooperatives are very familiar with the community- coupled with their self-help local initiatives, cooperatives are better positioned to be the vehicle for rural development.
To achieve these roles, there is the need for cooperative extension in order to communicate new ideas and innovations to the rural people.
Therefore, in this unit, you are going to be exposed to channels of communication for rural development with particular reference to channels that are suitable for grassroots mobilisation.
3.1 Personal Contact and Meetings Here, let us start by looking at these, one after the other.
(a) Personal contact Individual contact methods are necessary for conviction and action because the extension agent relates with the rural people personally.
The extension worker is the agent of change; much depends on him.
He is an adviser, a technician and a middleman.
He is also a manager.
Face-to- face contact or personal contact by the extension agents is known to be a very effective way of selling innovations to rural dwellers such as farmers.
The rural people desire the extension agent to talk to them, to demonstrate to them and to exchange views with them.
Adoption of innovation depends more on contact.
Personal contact reinforces the adoption process.
Farm and home visits provide the means of personal communication between the farming family and the extension worker.
This fosters an atmosphere where they can discuss matter of common interest in privacy and without the distraction and interruption commonly experienced in group extension activities.
(b) Meetings These are part of the oldest and most important methods of extension teaching.
Many meetings are planned by the extension worker to pass across a particular idea or practice.
The success of the meetings as a teaching device depends largely upon how they are viewed by the audience.
If their meetings are oriented to the current thinking and recognised needs of the people, it will be successful.
There are 5 types of meetings, namely:  organisational meeting  planning meeting 23 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION  teaching meeting  special interest meeting  community meetings Factors to consider when planning a meeting are as listed below: 1.
Size of the audience 2.
Character of the audience 3.
Facilities available 4.
Comfort of the audience 5.
Do not allow unrelated announcement and unscheduled speaker to prolong the programme and distract the audience.
Group contact methods are usually well suited to bring specific information about practices, thus helping every individual through conviction in taking a decision.
These methods use channels such as meetings in the villages, demonstrations, field trips, etc.
3.2 Reports, Posters, Planned Graph, Leaflets (Bulletin & Circulars) Let us also look at these one by one.
(a) Reports A report on research findings could be made available to the rural people.
Extension services should be backed up by a report.
This is to ensure that what is offered to the locality is appropriate.
(b) Posters Posters are likened to visual aids.
A poster is a sheet of poster or cardboard with an illustration with usually a few simple words.
It is designed to catch the attention of passersby, impress on him a fact or an idea and stimulate him to support an idea, get more information or take some kind of action.
Posters should supplement and not replace other communication methods.
They are often used to spearhead or introduce a campaign.
Extension agent can use illustrative posters to disseminate new ideas to people in the rural areas, such as farmers, craftsmen and fishermen.
24 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION (c) Planned graph A graphic presentation of new ideas and innovations can be made to the rural people; but the problem of illiteracy among the rural dwellers is a challenge here.
(d) Leaflets (bulletins and circulars) Sample leaflets and pamphlets can be used in many ways in extension programmes.
They may be used simply for example to explain advantage of testing an innovation.
They may also be used in series of broad subjects like raising animals, planting high – yielding crops, or what chemical to use to control different insects or weeds.
They may also be used in common with other visual aids in large range campaigns because of their low costs.
They can be given away at meetings, fairs or offered on radio programmes The relationship between research and extension should be a close one.
Consequently, research findings, new discoveries, new ideas and practices could be communicated to the locality through bulletins and circulars.
However, the problem of illiteracy among the rural dwellers makes this channel of communication less effective.
3.3 Radio/Television (TV) In extension service, mass media methods can be used to attract attention and stimulate the interest and desire for further information.
We should remember that mass media include radio, television and newspapers.
These create a lot of awareness in the farmers.
Obviously, their influence is on the increase in Nigeria.
a) Radio Radio, also known as audio aid is one of the fastest, most powerful and in many countries the only way of communicating with the masses of rural people.
It teaches people of all cultural level who understand the language of transmission.
Research has shown that people believe what they hear.
Radio is most effective where people are just becoming aware of the idea.
An advantage of radio programmes is that they can be recorded anywhere through the use of a tape – recorder.
Recording the programmes at home or on the farm gives them greater authenticity.
It is important in reporting spot news such as announcement of meetings; it is also suitable for warnings about insect out-break and especially as part of campaigns.
You should start the radio programme with a statement 25 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION that arouses the interest and attention of the audience.
You should then follow through with a well-organised, smooth-flowing presentation, repeating the key point again at the end.
The radio is a very useful device within the rural set-up.
The radio can easily be operated with batteries.
This is very important because in several rural communities in Nigeria, there is no electricity.
The radio has the advantage of portability.
Useful extension services can be conducted through radio broadcasts.
b) Television (TV) Television, also known as audiovisual aid, adds a second dimension to radio broadcasting, thus increasing the scope of methods available to the extension worker.
He can demonstrate as well as talk.
The home economist can demonstrate how to make a dress, for instance, while the agricultural agent can present useful method showing a whole series of practical demonstration.
All types of visual aids such as chart, graphs, objects, chalkboards, can also be used to increase teaching effectiveness.
Television programmes require meticulous preparation.
Every piece of equipment must be in place and the dialogue must be well thought out.
Television is at a disadvantage in the rural areas because of the relative high cost- as not many villagers can afford it.
Nevertheless, television occupies an increasingly important role in developing countries.
The television has the ability to communicate, simultaneously, through sound and pictures.
It shows immediately the realities of what is happening at the time and it sustains the interest of the household members generally.
Television can simply refine, direct and hasten the extension process if effectively used.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Visit either the Ministry of Agriculture in your state or the state Agricultural Development Project (ADP) and find out the best method the extension officers use to communicate with farmers.
3.4 Exhibitions, Fairs, Filmstrip/Slides These are equally very crucial channels of communication as you are going to see shortly.
a) Exhibitions Exhibitions and displays have some of the characteristics of posters discussed above.
The main differences are that exhibitions and displays, usually, are larger and more detailed and may have three dimensions; 26 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION and most importantly, they impact more detailed information than is possible with a poster.
Demonstration method involves, for instance, setting a piece of plot in the farm to show farmers the innovations needed in agricultural practices.
This gives the farmers an opportunity to see for themselves the new idea or object put into practice.
It also enables the farmers to observe and make comparisons.
Exhibition of new ideas can be extended to other areas of cooperative activities in the locality.
Empirical studies show that exhibition is an effective method of diffusion.
b) Fairs We are all familiar with trade fairs.
Similarly, extension services can make and demonstrate innovations to the rural people.
c) Filmstrip/slide These are also known as projected visuals.
Motion picture slides/strips and other forms have much appeal and are among the most effective of the visual teaching aids.
Advantages 1) Films have the potential to create powerful emotion.
They can stimulate the interest of the audience in the subject you are teaching.
2) They are excellent for showing the steps necessary in doing a task.
3) They can reproduce events long since past.
They can record a demonstration that can be given over and over again in many different places.
Disadvantages 1) Special equipment is required to produce and show the visuals and could be scarce.
2) This equipment tends to be relatively expensive.
3) Some sort of power is required to operate the projectors.
4) Transportation and storage of equipment and materials require special considerations.
Like the television, filmstrip/slide can stimulate the interest of rural dwellers in accepting new ideas and research findings.
Extension 27 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION services can be conducted through the use of films which demonstrate the new practices in both pictorial and audio formats.
3.5 Tours and Field days These are methods of extension teaching which appeal to many who desire to go places and see things.
The things to be seen may range from results on small demonstration or test plots to extension application of new methods on actual farms.
This extension tour offers farmers the opportunity to see- for themselves, concrete evidence of the value of improved practices.
(a) Steps of tours or field trip 1) Decide exactly what you wish to accomplish.
2) Work out a detailed plan for the tour in advance 3) Go through a rehearsal of the tour programme in advance 4) On the day of the tour, keep the points together and read them briefly from point to point.
Nothing kills interest faster than strugglers.
The extension officers should tour the village with the village level extension agent and convey information to the rural people.
Such officers are expected to have good experience in dealing with local people and handling new ideas.
The extension worker should spend more time in the field and have regular and scheduled visits (tours) to rural areas.
3.5.1 Drawbacks in Communication You should remember that communication in extension is an educational system, so you have to know a better way of communication.
There are certain drawbacks to effective communication; these are listed below.
(a) The source may lack credibility You should note that before communication can be credible the source must be reliable.
(b) The message may not be relevant to the need of the recipient For effective communication of ideas or practices, the message must be relevant to the need of the farmer.
28 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION { What ought to Need What is?
(c) Appropriate channel is needed for desirable result If the channel is inappropriate, you will not get a desirable result.
(d) Inadequate knowledge of the receive We must have total knowledge of the receiver.
Lack of such knowledge is a drawback.
(e) Receiver must be able to translate content analysis of the message; otherwise, there will be a drawback.
(f) If the three basic methods of communication (individual, group and mass) are not considered in choosing communication delivery method, it will be ineffective.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Look for an agricultural extension agent near you; ask him or her how often he or she conducts tours/field days.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have seen the different channels of communication in rural development.
What makes an extension agent an effective communicator can be a combination of several factors.
He/she may decide which of these channels of communication is most effective.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed you to the various channels of communication in rural development; you are now going to be taken through the yardstick that can enhance effective selection of communication channels for cooperative grassroots mobilisation in the next unit.
6.0 TUTOR–MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the channels of communication in rural development that are suitable for grassroots mobilisation.
2.
Personal contact is also known as what?
Why is it considered the most effective channel of communication for grassroots mobilisation?
29 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyanwu, A. C.; Anyanwu, B. O.
& Anyanwu, V. A.
(2001).
Agricultural Science for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: Africana-FEB Publishers Limited.
Daramola, A. M., Igbokwe, E. M., Mosuro, G.A.
& Abdullahi, J.
A.
(1999).
Agricultural Science for SSCE and JME.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
NCE/DLS Course Book on Social Studies (Cycle 4).
Kaduna: National Teachers Institute.
30 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 5 THE YARDSTICKS THAT CAN ENHANCE EFFECTIVE SELECTION OF COMMUNICATION CHANNELS FOR COOPERATIVE GRASSROOTS MOBILISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Performance 3.2 Content 3.3 Appeal 3.4 Speed and Coverage 3.5 Factors Affecting the Selection of Communication Method 3.5.1 Categories of Extension Workers 3.5.2 Factors that Farmers will Consider before Using a Practice 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you learnt about the general survey of channels of communication in rural development- with particular reference to channels that are suitable for grassroots mobilisation.
This unit will continue the discussion on channels of communication.
You will be learning about the yardsticks that can enhance effective selection of communication channels for cooperative grassroots mobilisation.
This discussion will take us through the study of performance, content, appeal, speed, coverage, aggression/violence as yardsticks for effective selection of channels of communication for cooperative grassroots mobilisation.
As stated earlier on, the duty of extension service is to encourage the rural people- in this case, cooperatives constituted by farmers (for instance) to adopt innovations.
Innovations to the farmers may be regarded as new ideas, methods, practices or techniques which give the means of achieving sustained increases in farm productivity and income.
It is the duty of the extension worker to disseminate these innovations to the locality.
31 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the yardsticks that can aid effective selection of communication channels for cooperative grassroots mobilisation  state which of these channels of communication is more effective.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Performance By performance, we mean the ability to achieve result or attain a predetermined goal.
In selecting a channel of communication for cooperative grassroots mobilisation, the communicators (extension workers) must decide which channel will achieve the aims and objectives of the innovations.
The extension worker must also be guided as to whether such a channel of communication is cost-efficient and cost-effective relative to other channels of communication.
If for instance, a communicator decides to use a radio (wireless) medium instead of the television, we can assume that he is guided by the cost consideration of the two media.
He is also probably guided by the probability of reaching the targeted audience more conveniently, through radio than television, since the number of those who own radio in rural areas is more than those who own TV.
3.2 Content The content of innovations or new ideas, methods, practice or techniques will determine the channel of communication to use.
If for instance, it is a new farm technique, an exhibition or demonstration farm should be selected.
3.3 Appeal If getting the interest of the individual can only be done after awareness (since a person cannot decide to accept any practice until he has become aware of it), an appropriate channel of communication is imperative in order to arouse the interest of the individual.
The message conveying the new ideas, new practices, and new methods must be made appealing and in line with what the individuals need.
32 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION It is the consideration of whether or not a particular channel of communication will be more appealing at the grassroots level that will determine its selection or otherwise.
A medium of communication which can arouse the interest, the desire of the audience would be selected by the communicator, that is, the extension worker.
Daramola and others (1999) argue that in Nigeria today, agricultural extension is conducted through various agricultural institutions in the country, such as ADP, RBRDA and the Ministries of Agriculture.
They further argue that the most popular method employed in ADP is the training and visit method.
This method obviously appeals to both the communicator and the audience; hence, it is effective for grassroots mobilisation.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why do you think extension agent select the Training and Visit (T&V) method of communicating innovations to the rural people?
3.4 Speed and Coverage In selecting a channel of communication for cooperative grassroots mobilisation, the extension officer is guided by the need to disseminate information to the target audience on time.
He is also guided by the need to cover either a small area of a wider area.
The consideration of these factors will determine the type of channel of communication to be employed.
If, for instance, speed is of crucial importance, the best medium can be the electronic medium such as radio or TV.
Similarly, if the objective is to cover a wider area, a radio can be more effective since empirical studies show that more people in the rural areas own radio than television.
Since the communicator or the extension worker is an agent of change, much depends on him.
He must be trustworthy, credible, humble and useful.
You should remember that the audience for the innovation is made up of different people with individual ideas, values and interests.
The people for whom the messages are meant are influenced by their beliefs, environments-social, religious, political and economical.
The audience responds differently to these messages, depending on the degrees of influences of the above features.
These make them adopt the innovations readily or otherwise.
You must also remember that some people are not receptive to change.
Most people prefer the status quo.
It is not unheard of that new ideas or innovations have been rejected by the audience they are meant for.
It is not uncommon that such rejection may even be with aggression or violence.
Consequently, the extension agent must select the type of channel for communicating new ideas to the grassroots people with minimum resistance.
In other words, the communicator must select the 33 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION channel of disseminating innovations to the rural people that will be acceptable to them.
3.5 Factors Affecting the Selection of Communication Method Some scholars have listed the factors below as being more common.
1) The method available 2) The nature of the message, i.e.
type of message- either complex or not 3) The people or target audience 4) Extension resources available- like capital, electricity, good road, inputs, e.g.
fertilizers, tools, etc.
; skills to be able to manipulate or use to demonstrate 5) Environment- both physical and social 6) Agencies e.g.
ADP, MANR, IAR, etc.
The extension functions are carried by these agencies as follows (a) Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MANR) MANR Admin Extension service (Med chief Agric officer) Forestry Agric Engineering Livestock/Vet.
Dept.
Poultry dept.
Figure 5.1 34 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Extension Service Chief Agric Officer (CAO) Principal Agric PAO PAO Officer (PAO) Senior Agric Officer (SAO) Superintendent Agric Officer Agric Officer Agric Officer (AO) (AO) Agric Superintendent (AS) AS Agric Assistant A.
A F. O Field Overseer Figure 5.2 35 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION (b) Agricultural Development Project (ADP) ADP Zonal Extension Zone (each Zone is Zon Zon Zon Zon Officers (ZEO) divided into zone e e e e department) Area (in each Area Area Area area we have Area Extension Officer (AEO) Block (each block 1 2 3 4 Bloc has Block k Extension Supervisor (BES) Cell 1 2 3 Cell (Village Extension Agent (VEA) is in charge of a cell 36 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.5.1 Categories of Extension Workers Let us look at these categories one by one.
1) Extension administrators They are managers involved in policy making.
They control and decide what to do; what goals to set, what goals to evaluate and see that the goals are achieved.
They have many years of experience with requisite qualification (B.Sc.
or HND) and have knowledge of agriculture.
2) Subject Matter Specialist (SMS) That person is an authority in one field with qualification of B. Sc.
and HND.
He is expected to visit a field and assist those that operate audiovisual equipment.
3) Extension supervisors They help to supervise the extension worker at the village level.
4) Village level extension workers They are closer to farmers.
It is their duty to educate farmers and provide them with inputs.
They are expected to attend training meetings- mostly their training involves practical agricultural sessions.
3.5.2 Factors that Farmers will Consider before Using a Practice Here, you are to note the following factors: 1) Compatibility Here, the issue is whether it can fit into the social or economic system or into his farming system.
2) Divisibility If it is something that can be divided into small unit, he will accept it.
For instance, if a farmer cannot afford to buy one bag of fertilizer, he can buy in small quantities.
37 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3) Complexity Is the operation simple or complex?
If it is complex, it will be very difficult for the farmer to adopt; but if it is simple, it will be easy.
4) Acceptability Is it acceptable culturally or is it accepted by the people?
5) Observability Can it be demonstrated?
Can people see it and demonstrate it?
For instance, here, you can have issues like spacing of crop, application of fertilizer for people to see etc.
6) Farmers’ perception of the extension Do they have positive perception of a particular practice?
7) Relative advantages and disadvantages: (a) profitability (b) capital requirement (c) risk involved (d) work load involved – the amount of effort to get the work done 8) The outside (external) assistance needed to use it- e.g.
input.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How does speed influence selection of communication channels for cooperative grassroots mobilisation?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taught the yardsticks that can enhance effective selection of communication channels for cooperative grassroots mobilisation.
You have been exposed to such yardsticks as performance, content, appeal, speed, coverage, and aggression/violence.
You are now aware that the type of channel of communication to be selected depends on these features.
38 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the yardsticks that can enhance effective selection of communication channels in cooperative grassroots mobilisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List 5 yardsticks that can enhance the selection of effective communication channels for cooperative grassroots mobilisation.
2.
Why is appeal the most important factor to consider in the selection of channels of communication for cooperative grassroots mobilisation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyanwu, A. C.; Anyanwu, B. O.
& Anyanwu, V. A.
(2001).
Agricultural Science for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: Africana-FEB Publishers Limited.
Daramola, A. M.; Igbokwe, E. M.; Mosuro, G.A.
& Abdullahi, J.
A.
(1999).
Agricultural Science for SSCE and JME.
Ibadan: University Press Plc.
Enikanselu, S. A.; Akanji, S. O.
& Faseyiku, O. I.
(2005).
Principles and Economics of Cooperative.
Lagos: Dartrade Limited.
39 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 6 THE ESSENTIAL INGREDIENTS OF COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SERVICES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Cooperative Extension Service 3.1.1 Cooperative Type of Extension Organisation and Funding 3.2 Methods of Cooperative Extension Service 3.3 Attributes of Cooperative Extension Service 3.4 Stages of Cooperative Extension Service 3.5 Approaches to Cooperative Extension Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will focus on essential ingredients of cooperative extension service.
In the preceding unit, you learnt about the yardsticks that can enhance effective selection of communication channels for cooperative grassroots mobilisation.
Now some scholars state the components of agricultural extension as follows: 1.
Extension teaching methods 2.
Communication 3.
Programme planning, evaluation and extension survey 4.
Extension administration and operation 5.
Categories of staff such as i.
Extension administrators, i. e. Director, Chief Agric Officer ii.
Subject matter specialists, e. g. Veterinary Doctor iii.
Extension Supervisors iv.
The village level extension workers v. The cell level extension workers 6.
Cooperative extension system In the course of this study, you will be taken through the definition, methods, attributes, stages and approaches to cooperative extension service.
40 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define cooperative extension service  explain the methods and attributes of cooperative extension service  state the stages of cooperative extension service  discuss the approaches to cooperative service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Cooperative Extension Service Cooperative extension service can be defined as an informal out of school education for rural people.
It is a non-formal educational programme designed to help people use research-based knowledge to improve their lives.
The research and system services are provided in Nigeria by 17 commodity-based research institutes and a special national extension institute, over 45 faculties of agriculture in conventional federal, state, and private universities, three universities of agriculture, several colleges of agriculture/polytechnics.
It also includes three international agricultural research centers, namely International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), a sub-station of International Crop Research Institute for semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), and a sub- station of International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) (Okwu and Ejembi, 2001).
All of these institutions, collectively or individually, serve as the foundation of agricultural innovations for both public and private agricultural extension providers.
In Nigeria, agricultural extension services have been mainly public.
Currently, the major provider of public sector agricultural extension services is Agricultural Development Programme (ADP) in each of the 36 states of Nigeria (Saliu and Age, 2009).
The pre-ADP extension services were presumed to be ineffective and could only provide limited services to majority of farmers in the basic farming enterprises.
This formed the basic fact underlying the removal of the extension service from the civil service system and the introduction of Agricultural Development Project (Ekpere, 1991).
We can, therefore, define cooperative extension services as services employed in the diffusion of new innovations to people who live in the remote areas of a community (Ugwu, 2008).
These people have limited 41 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION access to their information needs in the areas of agriculture, building, trade, healthcare, domestic work and other areas of human activities.
3.1.1 Cooperative type of Extension Organisation and Funding The distinguishing feature of this form of extension organisation in the USA is the cooperative or partnership between the national, states, provincial and local governments in funding, programming and managing the activities and resources of extension.
In the United States, extension is a joint undertaking of the U. S. Department of Agriculture (Federal Extension Services) and other bodies.
In Japan, extension is a joint undertaking of the national government and the prefectural government.
In China, agricultural extension is a cooperative undertaking of the central, provincial, prefecture, and country governments.
Cooperative programming, management, and support are demonstrated at the Country Agro-Technical Extension Centre (CATEC); where, normally, 20 percent of funding comes from the central government, 30 percent of funding comes from the provincial government, and 50 percent from the country government.
As pointed out earlier on, provision of research and extension services in Nigeria is a collaborated efforts by the various research institutes, faculties of agriculture in conventional universities, some specialised agricultural universities and colleges/polytechnics as well as ADPs and the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MANR).
3.2 Methods of Cooperative Extension Service Cooperative extension service methods adhere to certain rules.
(1) State where the people are: (a) understand the perceived need of the rural people; (b) identify the objectives of the farmer, traders, or artisan in the cooperative by asking them; (c) you must determine the real need of the rural people- for instance, a farmer.
The real need of the farmer is best considered by the extension worker (joint efforts of the extension worker and the farmer).
(2) Involvement of every member of the family.
You must create a project that involves every member of the family.
(3) Never give the farmer something for nothing.
Always give something for something.
This is to avoid dependency syndrome.
42 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION (4) Always utilise local leaders.
This is because they are part and parcel of the society, the people understand them easily.
So, utilise local leader so that you can get the message across to the rural people easily.
(5) Use the language that they understand and you have to come to their level, e.g.
fertilizers that look like soil not potassium permanganate SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the methods of cooperative extension service?
3.3 Attributes of Cooperative Extension Service Modern cooperative extension services have a few common attributes as listed below: 1.
Knowledge to disseminate 2.
People to be served or the audience 3.
There must be extension organisation or agency 4.
There must be the contact man or the extension worker 5.
Informal education is geared towards solving a particular problem in a locality and not on a laid down curriculum.
6.
Teaching and learning are conducted through discussions, practical demonstration and group participation 7.
Extension agents are professionally trained in such areas as practice, extension organisation, rural sociology, farm management, agricultural policy and marketing as well as cooperative education training.
3.4 Stages of Cooperative Extension Service The stages involved are listed below:  Awareness – provide knowledge so that he(the farmer) notices something  Interest – you motivate him to learn  Evaluate – you should evaluate whether the innovation is conducive for him to use it  Trial – the audience should practice the innovation  Adoption – he finally adopts the innovation or the new practice.
These stages of cooperative extension service are also similar to steps in adult learning, diagrammatically depicted below: 43 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Adoption Trial Evaluate Interest Awareness Figure 6.1: Schema for Stages of Cooperative Extension Service Thus, we have in this set up, what is outlined below: Awareness - notice something Interest - want something Evaluate - feel something Trial - do something Adoption - get something 3.5 Approaches to Cooperative Extension Service Here, let us consider a number of variables.
(a) Provisional extension policies This is the most common form of extension policy in most developing countries like Nigeria.
In the absence of more formalised extension policies, or at the time when the formally enacted policy has been suspended, a provisional or ad hoc policy comes into play.
For example, Mozambique, in the early 1980s, did not have a national policy for agricultural extension.
When the agricultural development policy shifted from a reliance on state farms to the involvement of small family farms, a provisional extension policy was formulated to provide farmers and the cooperative sector with improved training and technology.
To develop and test this provisional policy, a UNDP/FAO – supported project assisted the government in defining a national agricultural extension policy and developing a programme of implementation.
44 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION (b) Decrees and proclamations Decrees and proclamations are policy issues by the head of state or by the executive officer of government.
Generally, this approach does not go through the process of consultation and debate involving various stakeholders and beneficiaries.
An example of this form of policy was the Brazilian government decree abolishing the national agricultural extension authority and transferring some of its functions and staff to the national agricultural research authority.
Also, it empowered the state-level rural extension authorities to continue their respective programmes.
In Nigeria, for instance, the removal of the extension service from the civil service system and the introduction of the ADP was the policy decision of the executive arm of the government.
(c) Legislated extension policies Extension policies embodied by the country’s highest law–making authority (e.g.
parliament) are common in many developing countries.
Countries that have enacted extension policy through legislative action tend to have well-organised, financially stable extension systems that have sustained effectiveness and cumulative impact.
Examples of legislated extension policies like the one that established the cooperative extension service in the USA has been treated in some sections of this course.
We need not repeat them here.
You can still go over those examples once more.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit addresses the essential ingredients of cooperative extension service.
There is need to map out sound management concepts, principles, techniques (methods) for effective cooperative extension service in Nigeria.
Cooperative is not just a business organisation, but an association of individuals of modest means.
Their meager resources must be managed properly towards the attainment of the aims and objectives of the society.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the essential ingredients of cooperative extension service have been explained; and the relevant definition, methods, attributes, stages and approaches of cooperative extension services have been discussed.
45 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1(a) Define cooperative extension service.
(b) Cooperative extension service adheres to certain rules.
List five of them.
2(a) With the aid of a well illustrated diagram, state the steps in adult learning.
(b) Complete the following, with the aid of the first example given to you.
 Awareness - notice something  Interest -  Evaluate -  Trial -  Adoption - 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekpere, J.
A.
(1991).
Agricultural Extension Searchlight of the Nigerian Small Farming.
(1990 University Lectures).
Ibadan: University of Ibadan Press, p.3.
Okwu, O. J.
& Ejembi, E. P. (2001).
“The Historical Development of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria”.
Journal of Sustainable Tropical Agricultural Research, Vol.
2, No 3,pp.
93-99.
Saliu, O. J.
& Age, A. I.
(2009).
“Privatisation of Agricultural Extension Service in Nigeria – Proposed Guidelines for Implementation”.
Journal of Sustainable Development in Africa, Vol.
11, No.
2.
Ugwu, F. N. (2000).
The Need for Public Liberalness Extension to Rural Communities in Nigeria.
Nsukka: University of Nigeria (UNN).
46 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 7 IDENTIFICATION OF PROBLEMS OF COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Economics of Extension 3.1.1 Inadequate Funding of Extension 3.1.2 Inadequate Basic Facilities 3.1.3 Nigeria as a Dumping Ground 3.2 Organisational Issues 3.3 Structural Problems 3.4 The Population Factor 3.5 Unstable Policy Frame-work or Lack of a Realistic Policy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn about the problems of cooperative extension service.
Even though extension programme is desirable, there are many impediments to its successful implementation, especially in a developing country like Nigeria.
In many countries, the problems of establishing or maintaining an effective extension service can be traced back to the lack of a realistic policy or an unstable policy framework for charting the mission of the extension system.
Lack of agreement on the functions of extension, the clientele to be served, how extension will be financed, frequent changes in organisational structure and programme priorities are some of the common problems bedeviling extension policy.
Others are rapid turnover of the extension staff, and the proliferation and lack of co-ordination between different organisations that undertake extension work.
In addition, extension must be responsive to changes in the agricultural, industrial and rural development activities, the drive towards market reforms, and shrinking government budgets.
So, in looking at the process of identifying the problems of cooperative extension service, we shall identify and discuss the economics of extension, organisational issues, structural problems, population factor and lack of a realistic policy or an unstable policy/framework.
47 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  state the economic, organisational and structural problems of cooperative extension service  discuss the population factor affecting cooperative extension service  explain the lack of a realistic policy or an unstable policy/framework for cooperative extension service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Economics of Extension Since the 1980s, funding of research and extension has become an increasingly important policy issue; however, there has continued to be a progressive decline in financial support for extension.
There is also the problem of inadequate basic facilities for extension work.
Third world countries like Nigeria have become dumping grounds for all sorts of imported goods, thus retarding incentive for local production of such goods, which in turn leads to lack of interest in implementing innovations.
3.1.1 Inadequate Funding of Extension The decline in extension funding is occurring in a situation where funding of extension has been chronically inadequate (Swanson, 1990).
Many economists and development planners believe that public funding of extension should be stepped up (Wilson, in Rivera and Gustafson: 1991, p.13).
The reduction in public support for extension may be explained, in part, by several factors, including the introduction of structural adjustment programmes, in many developing countries.
3.1.2 Inadequate Basic Facilities There are inadequate basic facilities for extension workers.
These are inadequate transport facilities, essential equipment and tools needed to communicate the new ideas to the rural people.
For effective extension service, there is the need to provide the extension workers with these items at the right time.
The extension agents should be helped to reach their audience through the appropriate channels of communication.
48 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.1.3 Nigeria as a Dumping Ground The Nigerian economy is not competitive and thus not strong enough to withstand the aggressions from the developed countries; and as such the influx of goods into Nigeria may continue to be on the increase (Saliu, O. J. and Age, A.I., 2009).
These eminent scholars further argue that if the influx of goods continues and the protection of the local industries are not guaranteed, Nigeria will remain a dumping ground for items that local industries can immediately provide.
The implication of this scenario is that farm produce, for instance, that are supposed to serve as raw materials for local industries will not be economically viable to invest in.
This means that farmers may not be sufficiently motivated to receive the message on agricultural innovations that concern the affected crops and livestock.
3.2 Organisational Issues The organisational problems affecting cooperative extension service are as listed below.
(a) Poor quality of staff Studies show that the quantity and quality of staff for extension need improvement.
The number of extension workers in relation to the rural people is very small.
The quality of staff is also not encouraging.
Only few of them are specialists and the field officers do not have good basic education higher than the school certificate to enable them to cope with the amount of work encountered in the field.
(b) Poor remuneration Extension workers in Nigeria are not well remunerated, and this is a major drawback to the system.
3.2.2 Lack of Good Relationship between Research and Extension Extension is a weak instrument when it stands alone, but it becomes powerful when combined with research.
The lack of good relationship between research and extension is one of the major setbacks in meeting the required productivity and getting the expected progress in agriculture and rural development in the country.
Research and extension stand to gain from each other.
There has to be constant efforts to exchange knowledge and viewpoints.
The lack of co- 49 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION ordination (ensuring that there is a link) of the activities of the research centers (particularly in the universities) and the extension agents is unfortunate (Anyanwu et al., 2001).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Look around you for an extension worker and find out the problems he encounters in the discharge of his duties.
3.3 Structural Problems Some structural problems militating against extension service are as listed below.
(a) Less emphasis on evaluation A major constraint to effective extension service delivery is that less emphasis is placed on evaluation of extension programmes.
Findings show that most extension systems lack the evaluation of the progress of extension.
It is imperative that programmes should be evaluated at different stages with a view to discovering mistakes early, so that corrections can be made.
(b) Lack of Identity Anyanwu A. C. et al.
(2001) point out the need for extension service to have its own identity based on its educational function and other related functions.
The scholars argue that extension should not see itself or be seen by all as an instrument merely to impart research results to farmers.
3.4 The Population Factor An important concern in extension service is the rapid population growth in many developing countries.
This factor obviously has a direct impact on the demand for goods and services.
Population explosion also results in increased pressure on the land and other natural resources.
In many countries, the population has more than doubled during the last three decades.
In Nigeria, for instance, we are over 160 million people.
During the last decade of the twentieth century, it is projected that more than 850 million people will be added to the world’s population.
Furthermore, world population growth is expected to increase by 57 percent from 5.3 billion in 1990 to 8.3 billion by the year 2025 (UN – World Population Prospects: The 1994 Revision, p. 24, Table A4).
50 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION You should remember that, because the bulk of these major population increases are occurring in developing countries, particularly in Africa and Asia, this implies not only an increase in the demand for food, but also more pressure on fragile and marginal lands, increased land fragmentation, and larger numbers of landless people in rural areas.
These problems point to the need for more education and technical support to households, both to increase productivity and to preserve natural resources.
3.5 Unstable Policy Framework or Lack of a Realistic Policy The first principle to recognise is that extension is one of the most strategically important policy instruments for achieving rural development.
Unfortunately, we have not been lucky with a realistic policy in extension service delivery in Nigeria.
What obtains in the country is, therefore, an unstable policy framework.
Each country should have a comprehensive extension policy which provides for co-ordination with research, education, input supply, and credit and marketing systems, as well as some flexibility to reflect the dynamic nature of the rural economy.
The extension policy should include the mission and goals for the extension, the responsible agencies and personnel, the clientele to be served, the areas to be addressed, and other relevant guidelines.
In developing national cooperative extension policies, representatives of all major groups of the rural people should be directly involved and other relevant cooperative organisations should be consulted.
By “pursuing a comprehensive policy”, the Global Consultation noted the following.
“Countries can expect the extension system to contribute to increasing agricultural productivity and farm income, and to improving the quality of life of most rural farm households in pursuit of the general goal growth with equity.
In addition, such a policy should help maintain and conserve the natural resource base security” (Swanson, 1990, p.11) SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State the forms of extension policy you can find in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to the problems of cooperative extension service, particularly in developing countries like Nigeria.
51 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION There is need for a well defined and co-ordinated extension policy in Nigeria in order to have an effective extension system.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the problems of cooperative extension service in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the 5 major problems of cooperative extension service.
2.
Nigeria is a dumping ground for imported goods- why is this one of the economic problems of cooperative extension service?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyanwu, A. C.; Anyanwu, B. O.
& Anyanwu, V. A.
(2001).
.Agricultural Science for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: Africana – FEP Publishers Ltd. Saliu, O. J.
& Age, A. I.
(2009).”Privatisation of Agricultural Extension Service in Nigeria – Proposed Guidelines for Implementation”.
Journal of Sustainable Development in Africa, volume 11, No 2.
Swanson, B.
(Ed.).
(1990).Global Consultation on Agricultural Extension: A Report.
Rome: FAO.
Riveria, W. & Gustafson, D. (1991).
Agricultural Extension and Forces for Change.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
52 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 8 OPINION LEADERS AND THEIR ROLES IN COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Who are Opinion Leaders?
3.2 What is Cooperative Extension Service?
3.3 What are the Roles of Opinion Leaders in Cooperative Extension Service?
3.4 From Directive to Participatory Extension 3.5 Causes of Attitude Change 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Whenever important information is to be passed to the rural people, the communicator cannot just walk into the village and start calling people to come and listen to him or her.
The communicator must first seek and locate influential people in the locality, who will in turn mobilise their peers to meet the communicator.
These influential people are known as opinion leaders.
For a cooperative extension service to be effective, the various stakeholders must be honest, painstaking in their deliberations and hardworking.
The extension worker, for instance, must select contact people like opinion leaders to help in the diffusion of knowledge to the rural people.
All these will be discussed in this unit, which incidentally is the last unit of module one.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the meaning of opinion leaders  discuss the roles of opinion leaders in cooperative extension  describe the route from directive to participatory extension service  state the causes of attitude change.
53 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Who are Opinion Leaders?
In answering this question, you should reflect on the explanation above- which emphasises the need for a communicator to contact influential people before communicating his new ideas to the local people.
Opinion leaders are individuals whose ideas and behaviours serve as a model to others.
The opinion leaders live among the people.
Their words, practices and general dispositions impact the people they live with; consequently, diffusion of new knowledge is better accomplished if opinion leaders are used as channel to communicate the new ideas to their people.
A wise extension worker must, therefore, utilise the services of opinion leaders in the dissemination of innovations to the rural dwellers.
3.2 What is Cooperative Extension Service?
Cooperative extension service is a publicly supported, informal adult education and development initiative.
Its overall objective is to plan, execute, and evaluate learning experience that will help people acquire the understanding and skills essential for solving farm, home, and community problem.
This objective is met through educational programmes that use research findings emanating from the Federal Department of Agriculture, higher institutions (Universities and Colleges of Agriculture, Research Institutes and Agricultural Development Programmes (ADPs) You should note that cooperative extension service is a type of education which is functional rather than formal.
It is better provided by an extension worker, whose main task is to convey information in a meaningful form to farmers.
One of the ways they do this is by training a group of model farmers with the hope that such farmers come in contact with other farmers.
These trained farmers are called contact farmers.
As pointed out by Ugwu, F. N. (2008), extension services are services employed in the diffusion of new innovations to people who live in the remote areas of a community.
They have limited access to their information needs in the areas of agriculture, building, trade, healthcare, domestic work and other areas of human activities.
You should remember that cooperative activities cover almost every aspect of rural economy and not restricted to agriculture alone.
It is pertinent at this juncture to clarify a term which may be confusing to you (and learners generally) - that is, “cooperative type of extension organisation and funding”.
The distinguishing features of this form of 54 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION extension organisation is the cooperative or partnership between the national, state and local governments in funding, programme, and managing the activities and resources of extension.
3.3 What are the Roles of Opinion Leaders in Cooperative Extension Service?
As earlier pointed out, the duty of extension worker is to encourage the rural people to adopt innovations of proven value.
These innovations may be new ideas, methods, practices or techniques, which give the means of achieving sustained increase in rural productive activities.
The roles of opinion leaders in the diffusion of such knowledge to the rural people are immeasurable.
The picture of these roles will be made clearer as you go through the list below: (1) They mobilise rural people, e.g.
farmers to attend group meeting with extension agent.
(2) They convince their peers to adopt new practices.
(3) They are often chosen as contact farmers; and their farms are used as demonstration farms by extension agents.
(4) They make personal sacrifices, and provide resources for extension services.
(5) They shape businesses and industries.
(6) They influence study and debate.
(7) They spread new ideas, expand the conversation and give useful advice.
(8) They gain and sustain influence through words of mouth.
(9) They communicate messages to the rural people.
(10) They are often considered as target group for any company that conduct studies on consumer behaviour.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Mention seven roles of opinion leaders in your area?
3.4 From Directive to Participatory Extension Note that extension has long been grounded in the diffusion model of agricultural development, in which technologies are passed from research scientists via extensions to farmers (Rogers, 1962, 1983).
This approach is exemplified by the training and visit (T&V) system.
It was designed to be a management system for emerging extension staff, turning desk–bound, and poorly motivated field staff into effective extension agents.
Extension agents receive regular training to enhance their technical skills, which they then hope will be passed to all farmers 55 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION through regular communication with smaller numbers of selected contact farmers.
However, the contact farmers are usually selected on the bases of literacy, wealth, readiness to change, and “progressiveness”; and so these factors set them apart from the rest of the community.
The secondary transfer of the technical messages from contact farmers to the community has been much less successful than predicted, and adoption rates are commonly very low among non-contact farmers.
Important lessons have been learnt from the problems associated with T&V, and there is clearly a need to address the systematic issues facing extension.
Extension will need to build on traditional communication systems and involve farmer themselves in the process of extension.
Incentives system will have to be developed to reward staff for being in the field and working with farmers.
Participation, if it is to become part of extension, must clearly be interactive and empowering.
Any pretence of participation will result in little change.
Allowing farmers just to come to meetings or letting a few representatives sit on committees will be insufficient.
3.5 Causes of Attitude Change What makes the rural people accept new ideas?
What factors account for the acceptance of new practice?
We shall find answers to these questions in the course of our discussion in this section.
(1) The positive effects of an innovation will change the perception of the rural people on a particular practice.
For instance, application of fertilizers or herbicides which results in increased farm productivity will change the attitude of farmers towards the use of fertilizers, which they might have avoided in the past.
(2) Demonstration farms are usually sited where people pass.
If a farmer sees a demonstration farm, his attitude towards such farming techniques will be changed for better.
(3) A particular practice may be adopted if its proven value has been noted by the rural people.
Take for instance, water purification using alum or filtration, or irrigation system.
These are proven methods that have changed the attitude of the rural populace toward these practices.
(4) Communication media can be a cause of attitude change.
Radio, television, newspapers, meetings, exhibits, fairs etc., can convince people of certain practices or new ideas.
(5) The bandwagon effect is also a factor that causes attitude change.
(6) Peer pressures can influence people’s attitude concerning adoption of innovation.
56 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION (7) Opinion leaders can cause people’s attitude to change because people pay regard to the words and actions of opinion leaders.
If such influential people adopt an innovation, it is certain that others will follow the same process.
(8) Politicians can influence people to change their attitudes toward new ideas.
(9) Government agencies, like Agricultural Development Programmes (ADPs) can significantly influence people’s attitude towards certain practices through proven extension works.
(10) The clergy, religious leaders can alter people’s perception about new ideas and new practices which are not culturally and religiously repulsive, and consequently receptive.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Find out the roles of opinion leaders in your area.
4.0 CONCLUSION Opinion leaders are local leaders whose actions and inactions influence the people because the people easily understand them.
Any extension service must utilise the services of opinion leaders for effective dissemination of innovations to the rural people.
Opinion leaders can also influence formation of cooperative societies as promoters.
Such cooperatives will take care of the needs of the rural economy.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about opinion leaders, their roles in extension service and causes of change in attitude.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1. Who are opinion leaders?
2.
What is cooperative extension service?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Madukwe, M. C. & Obibuaku, L. O.
(1991).
“Effects of Personal Factors on the Effectiveness of Extension Supervisors”.
Nigerian Journal of Agricultural Extension, Volume 6, (1 and 2), pp.34 – 39.
Ugwu, F. N. (2008).
Need for Public Libraries Extension to Rural Communities in Nigeria.
(Special Collections Division).
Nnamdi Azikiwe Library, University of Nigeria, Nsukka (UNN).
57 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION MODULE 2 Unit 1 Planning as an Essential Tool for a Well Co-ordinated Cooperative Extension Programme Unit 2 Various Types of Planning in Relation to Extension Programme Unit 3 Case Studies in Cooperative Extension Service Unit 4 Analysis of Simple Case Studies and the Advantages of Case Studies in Cooperative Extension Service Unit 5 Innovation, Identification of Diffusion and Adoption Process Unit 6 The Role of Extension Agents in the Diffusion-Adoption Process and Training and Visit (T&V) System in Nigeria Unit 7 Implications of the Diffusion, Adoption Process for the Development of Cooperative in Nigeria UNIT 1 PLANNING AS AN ESSENTIAL TOOL FOR A WELL CO-ORDINATED COOPERATIVE EXTENSION PROGRAMME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Planning 3.2 The Planning Process 3.3 Characteristics of a Good Plan 3.4 Business Forecasts 3.5 Recognition of Planning as an Essential Tool for a Well Co-ordinated Cooperative Extension Programme 3.5.1 Reasons for Planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you learnt the roles of opinion leaders in cooperative extension service and the causes of attitude change.
In this unit, you will be taken through the definition of planning and the place of planning as an essential tool for a well co-ordinated cooperative extension programme.
58 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define planning  discuss the planning process  state the characteristics of a good plan  explain business forecasts.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Planning Virtually every establishment in existence- big or small, private or public, commercial or non-commercial has goals.
Planning aims at accomplishing these goals by specifying what the organisation is going to do, how it is going to be done and who is going to do what.
According to Glueck (1980), planning is a sort of managerial activities designed to prepare the enterprise for the future and ensure that decisions regarding the use of people and resources (the means) help achieve enterprise’s trends and determining the best strategies and tactics to achieve organisational objectives.
Decision-making activity is undertaken because of the gap between reality and the goals of the enterprise; planning helps to close this gap.
Planning bridges the gap between where we are (present) and where we want to be (future).
It is said to be the most basic of all other managerial functions and permeates every aspect of the activities of the organisation.
3.2 The Planning Process You should note that, planning begins with the establishment of objectives which cover economics, service and social dimensions of the enterprise, and a set of parameters by which the manager could determine the viability of the business.
The reason for the firm’s existence should be made clear through the statement of major objectives and sub-objectives, which will be influenced by the quality of forecasts, particularly in the areas of external and internal premise.
Beside the decision-making, objective setting and forecasting, the development of supporting plans becomes paramount.
Planning include the formation of policies, procedures, methods, standards and rules which serve to direct the activities of all members involved in the performance of the goal-oriented tasks.
No matter the 59 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION level of management, planning activity is undertaken.
Also there are certain basic specific steps to be followed.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 List the steps to be followed in planning in any enterprise.
3.3 Characteristics of a Good Plan According to Nwachukwu (1988), certain features distinguish a good plan from a bad one.
He further lists some of the distinguishing features, which make a good plan.
Good plans are: (a) realistic and capable of implementation.
(b) have clearly defined objectives in terms of scope, accuracy and clarity.
(c) must be comprehensive.
(d) flexible, to take care of contingencies (e) have economic effectiveness.
A good plan must be economically feasible.
3.4 Business Forecasts Nwachukwu (1988) argues that, the essence of planning is to decide what is to be done at specific points in time.
This requires information or assumption about the future; he further states that one of the priorities of business owners or managers is to determine what is most likely to happen in the future in order to plan for it.
You should note that forecasting is involved in all business activities- right from inception to winding up.
For instance, a farmers’ cooperative society, which decides to produce corn, is forecasting that there is a demand for corn.
If the society decides to produce a certain quantity, for instance 10, 000 tonnes of corn, the assumption is that demand will be equal or greater than the demand envisaged.
Nwachukwu (1988), therefore, clarifies that, forecasting helps in future planning.
And that forecasting makes it necessary to seek systematically, information on key business areas such as production information, human resources, accounting and sales information.
Nwachukwu (1988) further explains that, a comprehensive budget requires a forecast of sales, advertising, and manpower needs of the organisation in order to be realistic and useful to management.
He, therefore, lists the following as the ingredients of forecasting.
60 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION (a) A clear understanding of the industry and the company’s operation over the years.
This calls for trend analysis.
(b) A thorough knowledge of company’s history and a thorough analysis of company’s records to determine the performance of each product line, noting seasonal and yearly fluctuations.
(c) Estimating future business prospects based on the analysis on (a) and (b) above.
(d) Adjustments for unforeseen circumstances in the economy as a whole.
(e) Efforts should be made to compare actual results with estimated results, periodically, in order to adjust for deviations.
3.5 Recognition of Planning as an Essential Tool for a Well Co-ordinated Cooperative Extension As defined by Erchaman and Tinley (1957), cooperative is a voluntary organisation of persons with a common interest, formed and operated along democratic lines for the purpose of supplying services at less cost to its members, who contribute both capital and business.
Recall that the aim of planning is to accomplish the goals of an enterprise by specifying what the organisation is going to do, how it is going to be done and who is going to do what.
Planning will thus help a cooperative enterprise to accomplish its aims and objectives.
Cooperative extension planning will enable the society to attain the following goals or purposes among others.
 Providing the best possible service to its members, and not to create surplus or profit.
 The cooperative society is created by its members on a voluntary basis, and is intended to achieve a common purpose or to address a common need.
 Unlike a private enterprise, whose basis is its capital investment, the cooperative is based on its membership.
Recall that extension service has been defined as services employed in the diffusion of new innovations to people who live in the remote areas of a community.
They have limited access to their information needs in the areas of agriculture, building, trade, health care, domestic work and other areas of human activities.
Cooperative extension programme is a non-formal educational programme designed to help people use research-based knowledge to improve their lives.
In most cases, the 61 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION educational offerings are in the areas of agriculture and food, housing, the environment, community economic development, youth, etc.
Planning is, thus, recognised as an essential tool for a well co-ordinated cooperative extension programme because of the following benefits.
 It enables cooperative extension agents to delegate authority and responsibility.
 Subordinates are able to do their jobs without the extension agent’s direct personal supervision.
 It enables employees of limited or little experiences to fulfill useful organisational functions.
 Improves the quality of decision-making and permits effective supervision and control.
 Helps extension agents to cope with changes.
 Acts as ingredient to the other managerial functions.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Ask the manager of any cooperative society in your area how it’s budgetary process is undertaken.
3.5.1 Reasons for Planning There are many good reasons for planning.
Take note of the following: (1) To think ahead and prepare for the future (2) To clarify goals and develop objective.
When you clarify goal, you now have a focus.
You will consider the resources you have that are based on the amount of money you have in order to develop objectives for what you want to achieve.
(3) You must consider if the project is feasible based on the resources you have.
(4) You are to consider the amount of money involved in order to get fund and other resources.
(5) Implementation must be based on the following factors.
 Accept the situation  Set out the objectives  Calendar (date)  The execution  Evaluation.
62 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the meaning of planning and the place of planning as an essential tool for a well co-ordinated cooperative extension programme.
For any cooperative extension programme to succeed there is the need for a good plan.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been taught the following:  the meaning of planning  planning as an essential tool for a well co-ordinated cooperative extension programme.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define and explain planning according to Glueck (1980).
2.
What are the features of a good plan?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Enikanselu, S. A.; Akanji, S. O.
& Faseyiku, O. I.
(2005).
Principles and Economics of Cooperative.
Lagos: Dartrade Limited.
Nwadukwu, C. C. (1988).
Management Theory and Practice.
Onitsha: Africana-FEP Publishers Limited.
63 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 2 VARIOUS TYPES OF PLANNING WITH RELATION TO EXTENSION PROGRAMME CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Strategic Planning 3.2 Tactical Planning 3.3 Contingency Planning 3.4 Elements of Cooperative Extension Programme 3.4.1 Progressive Cycle of Extension Programme Planning 3.5 The Need for Cooperative Extension Programme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you learnt about the meaning of planning, the planning process, characteristics of a good plan, business forecasts as well as the recognition of planning as an essential ingredient for a well co-ordinated extension programme.
It was noted, in conclusion, that for any cooperative extension programme to succeed there is the need for a good plan.
There are three main types of planning, namely: - strategic planning - tactical planning - contingency planning You should remember that it has been mentioned that, planning bridges the gap between the present and the future.
As every establishment requires a smooth transition from its present state to a future state, planning assumes a vital premise of managerial activity that requires a lot of time, thought, paper work, forecast and commitment.
Planning in cooperative extension programme helps bridge the gap between the time of innovation and diffusion of the knowledge acquired from research.
It is in this regard that you will be considering the various types of planning in relation to extension programme in this unit.
This will 64 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION enable the planners of extension services and extension agents to determine the best plan for cooperative extension programme.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the meaning of strategic, tactical and contingency planning  describe the elements of cooperative extension programme  state the importance of cooperative extension programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Strategic Planning Commonly referred to as long-range planning, strategic planning determines the major objectives of the enterprise and the policies and strategies for obtaining and employing resources to achieve predetermined goals.
Strategic planning is usually done at the top management level, and it focuses on corporate goals rather than the departmental or unit level and immediate needs.
Long-range planning may, for instance, lay emphasis on the firm’s products and services, expansion, the markets to operate and diversification, etc.
Situating strategic planning to the extension programme, we observe that it enables planners of cooperative extension service to determine the type of knowledge and innovation to be disseminated to the targeted audience/people in the areas of products and service offerings, the nature of marketing, diversification, expansion and mergers in cooperative business enterprises.
3.2 Tactical Planning This is the process of developing details of short-term decisions about what is to be done, who is to do it, and how it is to be done.
Tactical planning takes care of the intermediate and immediate plans of the firm and is usually done at the lower levels of management such as setting annual budgets, preparation to enter a new market, etc.
Relating this concept to cooperative extension programme, it involves extension agents setting goals and how to accomplish such goals within the shortest possible time.
It involves how to conduct tours/field days to disseminate research knowledge to farmers.
65 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.3 Contingency Planning This is ordinarily referred to as “stand – by”; and it is the preparation of alternative courses of action that may be used if the primary plans do not achieve the objectives of the enterprises.
Such plans are made in anticipation of future changes.
Consider the case of Agricultural Development Programmes (ADPs) that was established in various states to take over the work of agricultural extension services.
The activities of ADPs involve distribution of farm inputs such as improved seeds, fertilizers, insecticides and hiring machinery to farmers at subsidised rates.
Through this programme, farmers’ productivity was intended to be improved.
However, the reality is that ADPs in various states of the federation face funding constraints.
Therefore, there must be contingency plans to solve this obvious problem.
Planning the research, and access to interpretation of research data as well as dissemination of the research findings to the audience is important.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why is planning essential for cooperative extension programme?
3.4 Elements of Cooperative Extension Programme Modern cooperative extension programmes have few common elements.
1.
Knowledge to impact 2.
People to be served or the audience 3.
Extension organisation 4.
The contact man or the extension agent.
Some participants involved in this concept, according to Anyanwu et al.
(2001) include: (a) government (b) co-operative societies, e.g.
farmers (c) universities or agricultural institutions (d) commercial firms.
These participants may be involved in some of the facets of the system, as listed below: 1.
Finance 2.
Role of extension in implementing government programmes 66 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.
Training of extension specialists and development of the profession of extension 4.
Research- both in the area of planning the research and access to and interpretation of research 5.
Needs of farmers- identification and satisfaction 6.
Conducive environment (political, etc) for extension workers to fulfill their professional responsibilities.
3.4.1 Progressive Cycle of Extension Programme Planning The figure below illustrates the progressive cycle of extension programme planning (M)pec (3) Methods programme evaluation and 2) Solution communication programme objective(s) po 6) Beginning (4) Evaluation next cycle success in extension 1) problems situation 5) analysis Reconsideration psa (follow-up re- adjustment Figure 10.1: Progressive Cycle of Extension Programme Planning This is a planning programme.
It is a cycle and a continuous process when one understands there is a problem to solve.
What ought to } ↓ Need What is 67 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION You are posted to a place of extension work and you are to plan, then you come up with what problem to solve, what need is to be addressed e.g.
education or planting or fertilizer application.
Once there is a problem the solution to the problem will be known.
Psa 1 need Spo 2 where → Mpec 3 film Ese 4 testing → → for fertilizer are you going to demonstration.
determine get the →How do you success or if fertilizer?
apply it?
there is any difference 5.
6.
Start another Adjustment → programme.
→ when pass or assist or buy another fertilizer Figure 10.2: Practical Illustration of Progressive Cycle of Extension Programme Planning If you are posted to a place and a problem arises, the situation analysis you need to solve the problem is the programme objective.
Then you may need transport to the place of your assignment.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List three government extension programmes.
3.5 The Need for Cooperative Extension Programme Extension programme is an avenue which the government uses to provide guidelines for change.
The first importance of extension programme is felt in its contribution to economic growth.
Since cooperative can be the ideal engine for rural development, extension programmes that will improve cooperative activities will go a long way to contribute to economic development of the country.
The importance of cooperative extension programme is also seen in the area of educational and training services it gives to the people.
This contribution has a very far reaching effect on the well-being of the farmers.
For many members of the cooperative, this is the only hope of learning and improving their lives.
It obviously brings education to those who have lost the opportunity for formal education.
68 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Cooperative extension programme can also improve the health of the citizenry.
Health services such as immunisation of children can gain from the extension services.
Through extension education and training, many farmers can acquire leadership training, which aid them in playing important roles in their communities.
In the same vein, some youth activities are started and encouraged through extension services.
Finally, the change brought about by extension influences members of the cooperative and their family in no small way.
Their attitude to life and their environment, their care for others, eating habits and goal in life are changed for better.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to the various types of planning in relation to extension programme.
As you would have noticed, planning is very crucial to achieve something worthwhile in any cooperative extension project.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the various types of planning with relation to extension programme.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain the three types of planning with relation to extension programme.
2.
What are the elements of cooperative extension programme?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyanwu, A. C.; Anyanwu, B. O.
& Anyanwu, V. A.
(2001).
Agricultural Science for Schools and Colleges.
Onitsha: Africana-FEB Publishers Limited.
Enikanselu, S. A.; Akanji, S. O.
& Faseyiku, O. I.
(2005).
Principles and Economics of Cooperative.
Lagos: Dartrade Limited.
69 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 3 CASE STUDIES IN COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Case Study 3.2 Description of Simple and Topical Case Studies in Cooperative Extension 3.3 The Guide to Case Study 3.4 Methods of Collecting Data 3.5 Reasons for Case Study 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you are going to learn about simple and topical case studies in cooperative extension service (the guide to case study).
You should note that case study is all about specific examples or evidences of a subject or topic.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define case study  describe simple and topical case studies in cooperative extension service  explain the guide to case study.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Case Study Case study is an intensive study geared towards a thorough understanding of a given social unit.
For instance, you can have a topic like-“Problems and Prospects of Agricultural Extension Service in Nigeria: A Case Study of Kogi State Agricultural Development Programme (KSADP), Lokoja”.
The social unit may be an individual, a group of individuals, a community or an institution (Mba A. I.
2003).
70 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Case studies are particularly appropriate for use in cooperative extension service.
They allow the deepening of understanding of ideas, issues and wants by having to examine and interpret them in a formal way.
Case study is a process of investigating, collecting, examining and interpreting ideas or issues.
The collection, investigation, classification and analysis of the information gathered are the aspects which give this method the name “case study” (Omeiza, M. E. 2004).
According to Mba (2003), case studies employ a variety of data gathering techniques such as questionnaire, observation, interview and test.
You should note that case studies are of limited generalisation.
Only very few units are involved in case studies and as such, the findings cannot be generalised to the population.
We should also note that they are time consuming since they often demand the direct participation of the researcher in collecting certain critical information from the unit (Mba, A. I.
2003).
3.2 Description of Simple and Topical Case Studies in Cooperative Extension Service You should remember that the concept of extension as a system is designed to introduce innovation to the rural people.
How the stakeholders acquire and use knowledge and interact provide a basis for understanding an extension system.
You should also note that the concept of innovation and dissemination of innovation originated from the practice of agricultural extension.
The success of extension and the emerging theories of diffusion of innovation attracted the attention of those in commerce and industry who have hoped to expand the concept and application for a wider use, including the cooperative sector.
In carrying out case studies in cooperative extension service, we must identify factors for analysing the extension innovation system; these are listed below:  Identify the key actors in the cooperative extension innovation system  Identify and map the linkages that exist between the actors in the extension system, and  Identify and analyse the technological capability of actors in the cooperative extension innovation system.
You should remember that technological capability is the knowledge required to master new technologies, adapt, adopt, improve, and diffuse them.
Obviously, you can see from the foregoing analysis that cooperative extension service provides a fertile ground for case studies on simple and topical issues such as the ones listed below.
71 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION  The effect(s) of innovation on the rural people.
 The reception or rejection of new idea, method and practice by the co-operators.
 The activities of stakeholders in cooperative extension service  The viability of cooperative enterprise in a particular area or trade or occupation or economic activities  The rate of diffusion of knowledge You can see that simple and topical case studies can be applied to every area of cooperative activities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What do you understand by the word “case study”?
3.3 The Guide to Case Study Before you start a case study, you must determine what you intend to do and how you intend to do this.
This is very important because it helps you to know the way and manner in which to write the case study.
You should consider the following as the guide to any case study you may wish to undertake.
 Determine the nature of the problem to study  Purpose of the study  The methods you will employ such as questionnaire, observation interview and test  The unit of interest- which can be an individual, a group, a community or an institution  Determine whether the case study is on subject or topical issue  You should know where to get the necessary information and how to collect the data about the case and also what to do with the gathered information so that it can help in solving the problem  Remember that, the collection, investigation, classification and analysis of the information gathered are the aspects which give this method the name- “case study”.
 There are different case studies for different objectives.
It is the objective that will determine the type of case study you will write.
You will be guided by the followings in determining the objectives.
i.
What is the objective, that is, the purpose of the case study?
ii.
What are the sources of data (information)?
Is it primary or secondary sources or both?
72 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION  You should observe communication rule when you are writing the case study.
That is clarity.
 You should observe your grammar, spelling and accuracy as well as cross – checking your figures and data.
 Identify the reader  Limit the topic  Draw a tentative outline  Establish the scope  Formulate a research plan  Write rough draft  Edit your draft  Plan your presentation technique.
3.4 Methods of Collecting Data You should note that in undertaking any case study, there is the need to gather information and data for possible analysis.
You should consider the following methods of collecting data.
(a) Questionnaire As the name suggests, the questionnaire is a list of questions, sometimes statements, designed to obtain information from people about a specific events or aspect of behaviour (Mba, A. I.
2003).
The questionnaire allows researchers to collect required information quickly and cheaply from a large number of people at the same time.
(b) Observation You can use direct observation to gather information.
You are to use instruments like check list and rating scales in order to systematise and qualify such information.
(c) Interview Kerlinger (1973), according to Mba (2003) defines interview as a “psychological and sociological measuring instrument”.
He adds that information elicited through interview can be used in measuring human abilities and dispositions that are not directly observable.
Often researchers, using the interview, do collect raw data from interviewees directly- since it is a face-to-face situation (Mba A. I., 2003).
He further adds that, “many times however, interviews are studied, presenting definite questions to which every interviewee is expected to 73 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION respond.
In such instances, interview schedule, similar to the questionnaire, are prepared”.
(d) Tests You should note that a researcher can use tests to gather information on the topic he is researching.
For instance, the researcher may like to know the average performance of loans given out to members of a thrift and credit society in terms of repayment and default rates.
3.5 Reasons for Case Study Case study enables learners to examine a particular problem and to solve the problem.
It equips the learner with a vital means of acquiring knowledge on his own, through active participation and he develops his mind by using it to solve problem.
Writing case study challenges the writer to find out information by himself.
It facilitates assimilation and retention of knowledge discovered by students themselves in the course of conducting the case study.
Writing case studies enables researchers to develop manipulative skills as they have contact with materials and data sources.
You should note that the mental adventure, which undertaking case study encourages, is very rewarding and enriching to the intellectual development of the learner.
Above all, writing case study encourages analytical thought.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Go to your local government headquarters and see the head of the cooperative department.
Find out how he performs his supervisory role.
You can design a simple questionnaire and take it to him or her.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have gone through the description of simple and topical case studies in cooperative extension service.
This description also touched the guide to case study.
This guide must be adhered to in order to have a good case study.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about simple and topical case studies in cooperative extension service.
The major components of a good case study and techniques of data gathering have also been considered.
You are to take note of all of these, as they will come handy in your quest for further knowledge.
74 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1(a) What is case study?
(b) Case studies employ a variety of data gathering techniques; list and explain four of these techniques.
2.
What are the reasons for case studies?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Mba, A. I.
(2003).
Research Method and Statistics in Education.
Lokoja: Onaivi Printing and Publishing Co. Ltd. Omeiza, M. E. (2004).
Social Studies Methodology for Schools and Colleges.
Abuja: Creative Image Publishers.
75 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 4 ANALYSIS OF SIMPLE CASE STUDIES AND THE ADVANTAGES OF CASE STUDIES IN COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Advantages of Case Studies in Cooperative Extension Service in Nigeria 3.2 The Challenges of Conducting Case Studies in Nigeria 3.3 Sample Case Studies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you learnt about simple and topical case studies in cooperative extension service, that is, the guide to case study.
The essence was to find out how to conduct case studies in cooperative extension service.
Now, you are going to learn the advantages of case studies in cooperative extension service.
Here, three case studies will be prepared and analysed.
Case studies are important in discovering and solving problems.
You should remember that a cooperative society is a group of individuals who have specific needs such as to consume, to save, to obtain credit, to produce, to market, to be housed, to transport and to be transported, to build, and have a pension.
These people freely enter into partnership in order to attain these common needs.
This is done by setting up an economic enterprise which is managed by the members themselves, in a democratic manner, and to which they are bound in the following ways:  members’ participation within the cooperative  the ways the capital of the cooperative is mobilised  benefits and risks of members of the cooperatives You can now see clearly that cooperative activities cover every area of rural economy.
The purpose of cooperative extension service is to provide avenues for the diffusion and adoption of innovation to the rural cooperatives.
76 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  state the advantages of case studies in cooperative extension service  explain the challenges of conducting case studies in cooperative extension service in Nigeria  write a case study 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Advantages of Case Studies in Cooperative Extension Service in Nigeria Since case study is the process of investigating, collecting, examining and interpreting ideas or issues, its role in the diffusion of innovation to the rural people cannot be over emphasised.
Some of the advantages of case studies in cooperative extension service in Nigeria are listed below: 1) Case studies provide skills of observation, information gathering and the analysis of information.
This will enable any problem that any cooperative society is facing to be discovered and solved.
2) These methods encourage members of a cooperative society to be objective and see varied dimensions and aspects of ideas and information.
This will enable members of the society to take a holistic view on any issue concerning their society.
3) Case studies challenge extension workers to find out information by themselves.
4) For intellectual discourse, conducting case studies facilitates assimilation and retention of knowledge discovered by learners themselves.
5) It encourages analytical thought in the students.
6) It helps learners to develop manipulative skills as they have contact with people, materials and places.
7) The mental adventure which undertaking case studies encourages is very rewarding and beneficial.
8) Simple and topical case studies will prepare the students for more complicated forms of case study in the future as well as lay a foundation of understanding.
9) Through the working out of simple case and formulation of generalisations, students gain necessary experience in understanding the operations of events, people and society (Omeiza, M. E. 2004).
10) Case study will improve upon the method of existing cooperative practices as new ideas, methods and practices will be adopted and diffused.
77 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Go to any cooperative society near you and find out if it has ever benefited from any case study on extension service.
3.2 The Challenges of Conducting Case Studies in Nigeria There are many obstacles to the successful conduct of any case study in the country.
Some of these are as listed below: a) Dearth of data We are notorious for not keeping adequate data; and this is a serious drawback.
b) Obsolete and irrelevant data Where we are lucky to obtain data, there are often obsolete and irrelevant current data which are hard to come by.
c) Un-cooperative attitude of government officials Asking for vital information from government agencies will, usually, not yield any result because more often than not, officials hide under the guise of official secret act to deny such requests.
d) Conducting case study in Nigeria has very high financial implication as much fund is needed for such exercise.
e) Case study method is slow and time consuming.
f) Case study cannot be used for a large area or population g) At times the information gathered may not be true h) Moreover, case study outcome may not be utilised by the target recipient.
3.3 Sample Case Studies Take a look at the sample studies below.
This will throw more light on the issues raised so far.
(a) Case study 1 78 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Problems and Prospects of Extension Service in Kogi State: A Case Study of Kogi State Agricultural Development Project (KSADP) Kogi State Agricultural Development Project (KSADP) started in 1974 as Anyigba Agricultural Development Project (AADP), a World Bank funded project.
Enclave Agricultural Development Projects were first established on trial basis with World Bank funding in Funtua, Gusau, Gombe, Anyigba, Lafia, Bida, Ibadan, Ekiti – Akoko and Oyo – North between 1974 and 1982.
The outcome of trials was good as the ADP was adopted in all the states of the Federation, including Abuja.
Studies show that the World Bank – ADP approach has been used in Nigeria to re –organise the management of the agricultural extension system for effective performance.
The main features of Kogi State Agricultural Development Project (KSADP) are the training and visit (T&V) extension system.
The system includes a single line of command, a well defined geographical boundary of operation for each extension worker, a supervisor to supervise ratio of not more than 1:8.
Other characteristics include a systematic programme of short training courses, removal of all non–agricultural extension monitoring and provision of adequate transport facilities.
These features ensure flexibility and prompt decision–making devoid of regular civil service bureaucracy.
Studies show that the performance of the extension services since the inception of this professional system has been encouraging.
For instance, extension contacts with farmers have increased; several technologies have been disseminated and adopted by farmers.
Anyigba ADP, for instance, greatly transformed the lives of the Igala people through the revolution in extension services delivery.
However, studies show that some prevailing problems existed and limited the effectiveness of the extension system under the ADP.
These problems include: - insufficient funding at state level.
- inadequate availability of inputs.
- poor logistics support and - inadequate staffing.
(b) Case study 2 Problems and Prospects of Cooperative Policy Formulation: A Case Study of the Cooperatives Department of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Garki, Abuja.
79 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION The Department of Cooperatives of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FMA&RD) performs the following functions.
i. Co-ordination of inter-governmental cooperative activities ii.
Formulation of broad national economic policy for co-operative development and financing and integration of cooperative policies into national development plans.
iii.
Cooperative education and training at the national level and relations with appropriate Nigerian and foreign educational institutions iv.
Inter–African and other international cooperative matters including relations with international cooperative organisations and specialised agencies of the United Nations.
v. Relations with the global central labour organisation and similar bodies, especially, in matters relating to jointly sponsored welfare schemes.
vi.
Co-ordination of research into cooperative problems.
vii.
Co-ordination of interstate cooperative activities.
viii.
Regulate the activities of national cooperative apexes and societies.
ix.
Compilation of information on all matters relating to cooperatives and preparation of reports on cooperative development in Nigeria.
In analysing the above functions of the Department of Cooperatives of FMA&RD, we observe that there is no linkage between “co-ordination of research into cooperative problems” and transmitting such research findings (diffusion and adoption) to the rural people.
This missing link does not augur well for the development of cooperatives in Nigeria.
(c) Case study 3 The Role of Cooperative Society in Rural Development: A Case Study of Farmers Development Union (FADU).
a) Identification Farmers Development Union (FADU), Adegoke Adelabu Road, GRA, Ibadan, Oyo State.
b) Type An NGO committed to poverty alleviation through the institutional and enterprise development of the low–income rural Nigerians with particular emphasis on farmers.
80 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION c) Area of coverage It covers 29 States of Nigeria d) Client The clientele are rural micro-producers.
e) History and Mission It was founded in 1989 to provide development programmes aimed at reaching the poor and vulnerable groups with basic economic and social services for improved rural income, nutrition, employment and living condition.
In addition to the above mission, FADU’s activities and objectives are those that are community interest driven, emphasise community ownership, create plans for long term solutions, provide structure for integrated programmes, facilitate and empower grassroots institutions that are service oriented, support community initiatives that also emphasise quality of life and building partnership with government agencies, donor agencies, NGOs and Community Based Organisation (CBO), and network.
f) Management and Governance FADU has a 17 member board of appointees elected bi–annually by FADU Delegates Assembly (FDA).
The chairman of the board is also elected by ADA.
The board has two committees– Finance/Budget Committee and Programme Monitoring Committee.
Board members meet every six months, while the committee meets every three months.
FADU has four operating division, namely- Resource Management Division, Finance Division, Administrative Division and Field Operation Division.
FADU has a total staff strength of 346 of which 65% are women.
g) Financial and Technical Assistance Received FADU receives financial assistance from: a) Eze in Germany b) EEC c) Ford Foundation d) Technoserve (technical assistance only) h) Financial Service FADU provides several types of financial services to its members.
Each service is tailo –made to suit different sectors.
There are 3 types of loan schemes: 81 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION i.
Agricultural loans to farmers ii.
Working capital loan for members in commerce sector iii.
Equipment loan.
FADU also operates several types of savings as follows: i.
Daily savings {these are either compulsory and/or voluntary}.
ii.
Weekly savings iii.
Monthly savings Amount saved varies from society to society.
Some of the savings are compulsory.
Each society must pay on monthly basis the sum of N50 to FADU as monthly dues.
FADU has over 50, 000 Societies (a society is made up of at least 10 people) with over 500, 000 members.
Members have to save regularly for six months before they can qualify for a loan.
Loans can be approved to a maximum of 4 times saving depending on member’s reimbursing capacity, the ceiling for an average first time borrower “trial loan” is N60, 000.00.
The interest on loan is currently 3.5% per month or 42% per annum.
Duration of loans varies, depending on the type of loan.
However maximum loan duration is 12 months, and minimum is 6 months.
FADU operates a group lending approach i) Non – Financial Services FADU also provides non financial services such as provision of training and dissemination of new but appropriate technologies and markets to its members (extension services).
They work with communities to design, plan and execute social programmes (health, environment, youth literacy and low-cost housing) but emphasise quality of life.
j) Results Currently FADU has over 500, 000 members, of which nearly 65% are women.
Similarly, they have staff strength of 346 out of which 65% are women.
Membership spans 29 states.
To date, FADU has 165, 000 borrowers out of which 70% are women.
Total loan volume to date is N100million.
Repayment rate is about 98%.
k) Future Plans FADU would like to improve on its saving mobilisation in order to generate larger internal resources and also to be able to meet the objectives of its 5 year self sufficiency project.
82 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION l) Analysis In section (i) of this study, it is on record that a private organisation (Technoserve) donates technical assistance to FADU.
We can also see in section j how FADU provides non–financial services such as provision of training and dissemination of new but appropriate technologies and markets to members.
These are extension services.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the advantages of case studies in cooperative extension service; and three sample case studies have also been presented for your perusal.
Case studies are important means of identifying problems of cooperative extension service with a view to solving them.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been exposed to the advantages of case studies in cooperative extension service.
You were equally presented with samples of case studies.
This will further boost your understanding of this course.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the advantages of case studies in cooperative extension service?
2.
What are the non–financial services provided by FADU (Farmers Development Union)?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Omeiza, M. E. (2004).
Social Studies Methodology for Schools and Colleges.
Abuja: Creative Image Publishers.
Saliu, O. J.
& Age, A. I.
(2009).
“Privatisation of Agricultural Extension Services in Nigeria–Proposed Guidelines for Implementation”.
Journal of Sustainable Development in Africa, Volume 11, No 2.
UNDP Support to Micro–Credit Promotion Report (1994 – 1997): Nigeria Assessment Report Extracted by the UNDP Nigeria Country Office from the Microstart Project Document.
83 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 5 INNOVATION, IDENTIFICATION OF DIFFUSION AND ADOPTION PROCESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Innovation 3.2 Meaning of Opinion Leadership 3.3 Diffusion and Adoption 3.4 The Attributes of an Innovation 3.5 Stages in Rates and Adopted Categories 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As earlier stated, the duty of extension worker is to encourage the rural people, that is, farmers to adopt innovations of proven value.
Innovations for the farmers may be regarded as new ideas, methods, practices or techniques which give the means of achieving sustained increases in farm productivity and income.
In this unit, you will learn about diffusion and adoption process.
You will also be taken through the definition of innovation, opinion leadership, diffusion and adoption as well as the attributes of innovation, strategies in rates and adopted categories.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  identify diffusion and adoption process  define innovation, opinion leadership, diffusion and adoption  explain the attributes of an innovation  state stages in rates and adopted categories.
84 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Innovation Innovation may be defined as new practices, methods, ideas and techniques which give the means of achieving sustained increases in farm productivity and income.
Innovation is aimed at discovering how to plan, exercise, and evaluate learning experience that will help people acquire the understanding and skills essential for solving farm, home, and community problems.
Consequently, innovation is generally related to discovering new ideas.
Agricultural innovation, for instance, passes through many stages before you can introduce it to farmers, e. g. crop and livestock.
An innovator must consider the following factors before introducing new practices to a rural area.
 Attitude of the rural people  The major features of rural area in Nigeria as listed below.
1) They are very traditional 2) High level of illiteracy 3) No adequate facilities 4) They are isolated 5) Low income 6) Subsistence system of farming 7) Inadequate communication system 8) Houses are not properly planned 9) They have rigid attitude 10) Inadequate storage facilities 11) No access to machinery 12) Low level of advancement SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Go to a rural area near you and find out the condition of the village.
3.2 Meaning of Opinion Leadership In every set-up, there are local leaders whose opinions are well respected within the locality.
Since opinion leaders are part and parcel of the society, the people understand them easily.
So, it is advisable for an extension worker to utilise local leaders in disseminating new ideas to the rural people.
The people will get the message easily if it is conveyed to them by their local leaders.
85 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Due to their social standing in the community, their opinions are highly regarded.
On a lighter note, if you come out in the night, you will see big stars and small stars.
Opinion leaders are the big stars.
They allow continuity when extension worker is transferred.
The disadvantage of using the opinion leadership in diffusion and adoption is that, if the local leader misunderstands the new ideas, he may teach the wrong thing.
3.3 Diffusion and Adoption These generally concern readiness to put what the farmer has learnt into practice.
The process of learning and adoption will be made clearer through a tabular presentation as follows.
Table 5.1: The Process of Learning/Adoption Awareness Interest Evaluation Trial Adoption/Rejection Learn about Get more Try it Use it Accept and use new ideas information mentally i. or try continuously or and about it e. it a reject because of practices advantages little trial state or more profit about a particular crop Table 5.2: Information Sources Awareness Interests Evaluatio Trial Adoption/Rejectio n n 1) Mass 1) Mass 1) Friends 1) Friends 1) personal media e.g.
media and and experience is the radio, tv, 2) Friends Neighbour Neighbour most important Newspaper and s s factor in continue s Neighbour 2) Agric 2) Agric use of an idea 2) Friends s Agent and Agent and 2) Friends and and Extension Extension Neighbours neighbours workers workers 3) Agric Agent and mostly 3) Mass 3) Mass Extension worker other media media 4) Mass media.
farmers 3) Agric Agent and extension workers You would have seen that people gain new ideas in stages.
Those things you need to do to gain new knowledge is what diffusion and adoption are all about.
86 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.4 Attributes of an Innovation Innovation has the following attributes.
1) It must be new 2) It should be practicable 3) It must be receptive to the audience 4) It must add value to the existing practice 5) It must build on the foundations laid in the existing practice 6) Innovation is usually a product of extensive research 7) Innovation should not be culturally and socially repulsive to the target audience.
3.5 Stages in Rate and Adoption Categories The stages in rate of adult learning are depicted, diagrammatically, as follows.
y nnovator rly adopter rly majority Late majorit Laggard I a a E E Figure 5.1: Rate of Adult learning 1) Innovator - they are categories of people that go ahead of you.
They are willing to take any risks.
They are eager to try new ideas.
They have high rate of communication and friendship among other innovators despite geographical distance.
They have ability to understand and apply complex technical knowledge.
They have high education and ability to accept new practice.
2) Early adopter - they are not ready to put what they have learnt into practice, but they will try.
Early adopters have the following characteristics.
 Large farm 87 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION  Large income  Take risk  Middle age  Actively seeking new ideas  Participation in many non-local group  They are respectable.
That is, they are more integrated into the social system  Potential adopter look to them for advice and information about innovation  They are the men to check with before using a new idea  Generally sought by local extension agent to spread new ideas (diffusion)  They are models to potential adopters Their sources of information are as listed below.
 College and research institute  Agricultural agent, e.g.
extension worker  Mass media  Other highly competent farmers- far and near  Commercial farmers  They are the embodiment of success and use of new ideas.
They also like to retain their position of esteem 3) Early majority adopters - they have the following characteristics.
 Average farm  Average income age between 50 and 60 years  Receptive, but not actively seeking information  They participate in local group/interaction  Interact with peers (people of the same group)  They deliberate before adoption [that they discuss extensively before starting a new idea].
Decision takes longer time than innovators and early adopters.
Their sources of information include the followings.
a) Adoption leader and other farmers b) Farm papers c) Magazines d) Radio e) Commercial source f) Agric Agency.
88 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 4) Late Majority Adopters - these are characterised by the following.
 Small farm  Low income  Security minded  Usually over 60 years of age  Seldom participate in formal meeting  They adopt new practice only after the average majority have adopted.
Their sources of information include the following.
a) Other farmers and adoption leader b) Farm papers, magazine, radio and television i.e.
in developed countries or advanced countries.
c) Local leader and peer people d) Almanac/calendar 5) Laggards - these also have the following characteristics.
 Late to adopt an innovation or they do not adopt at all  No opinion leadership  Very local in outlook  Many are very isolated socially or physically or both  Their point of reference is the past (they make reference to the past and not interested in new idea).
They always talk about what were done in many years back.
They are conservative, full of aged people, low income and low education  Decisions are made in terms of what had been done in previous generations  They interact with people with traditional value and idea  When they adopt an innovation, they are likely to have been superseded or taken over by another innovation or already in use by innovators  They are suspicious of innovation, innovators and change agents  Adoption lags far behind knowledge and ideas  He is alienated from a true fast-moving world  While most individuals in social system are expectant of changes, the laggards have their attention tied to the rear view mirror.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about diffusion and adoption process.
You have also been exposed to innovation and opinion leadership .
You 89 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION equally, have learnt about the attributes of an innovation as well as stages in rates and adopted categories.
You should note that diffusion and adoption process are the essence of extension service.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the diffusion and adoption process, innovation, opinion leadership as well as stages in rates and adopted categories.
You can move on to the next unit to study the role of extension agents in the diffusion and adoption process as well as the Training and Visit (T&V) system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain 10 major characteristics of rural areas in Nigeria, which affect diffusion and adoption.
2.
With the aid of a diagram, list and explain five rates of adult learning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Lecture Notes on Extension Method (Unpublished Works).
Zaria: Ahmadu Bello University (ABU).
Lecture Notes on Agricultural Extension (Unpublished Works).
Zaria: Ahmadu Bello University (ABU).
90 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 6 THE ROLE OF EXTENSION AGENTS IN THE DIFFUSIONS- ADOPTION PROCESS AND TRAINING AND VISIT (T&V) SYSTEM IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Role of Extension Agents in the Diffusion and Adoption Process 3.2 Extension Teaching Method 3.3 Creed of Rural Reconstruction Development 3.4 Responsibilities of Extension Specialist 3.5 Training and Visiting (T&V) System in Nigeria 3.5.1 Key Features of T&V 3.5.2 Strategies or Operation of T&V 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As noted in the very first unit of this course, extension is a type of education which is functional rather than formal.
It is better provided by extension workers whose main task is to convey information in a meaningful form to the rural people, especially farmers.
One of the ways they do this is by training a group of model farmers with the hope that such farmers will pass the knowledge on to other farmers.
As the bridge or middleman between the researcher and the farmers or the rural people, an extension agent plays a significant role in the diffusion and adoption process as well as training and visit (T&V) system.
You may recall the definition of diffusion and adoption process in the preceding unit.
In this unit therefore, you shall be taken through the role of extension agents in the diffusion and adoption process.
You will also learn about Training and Visit (T&V) in the extension system.
91 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the roles of extension agents in the diffusion and adoption process  describe extension teaching methods  state the creed of rural reconstruction development  discuss the responsibilities of extension specialists  explain Training and Visit (T&V) extension system in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Role of Extension Agents in the Diffusion and Adoption Process The role of extension agents is to create conducive atmosphere that is desirable to the acceptance of new ideas or new practices.
For example, it could be how to introduce improved technology to farmers.
As an extension agent, you are to create conducive environment that is acceptable to farmer, which will make them understand what you are saying about innovation.
It is the duty of the extension agent to create that environment which will enable him prove his points and convince the farmers about the new practice.
In doing this, you have to bring yourself to the level of the farmers by dressing like them, talking like them and joking with them.
As earlier pointed out, extension agent serves as a link between the rural people (farmer) and research institutes.
This is better depicted, diagrammatically, as follows.
What the farmer Research Institutes got to know IAR Farmers TITA Extension Bello Agent DAL Bola Chukwu What the government wants farmers to do.
The extension agent, we repeat once more, serves as a middleman between the farmer and the researcher.
They carry the information to the farmer as an intermediary or link.
Figure 6.1: Schema depicting the Link between Researchers and Rural People 92 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Extension agent helps the farmers in making wise management decision.
You do not do things for them, but you help them by showing them how to do it.
In doing this in the diffusion and adoption process, an extension agent performs the following tasks.
1.
Crop farming This involves telling the farmers how to till the soil and do the planting.
2) Home–making This is about food technology (food preparation) and how to take care of the home.
3) Cooperative activities Here, about 20 farmers can come together to enable them access credit facilities from government agencies.
4) Leadership and youth development Youth farmer’s club is formed to help them mobilise youth to farm.
The youths also help in disseminating message to the rural populace as well as serve as supplement to extension agents.
3.2 Extension Teaching Methods This will be better understood if presented in a tree format as shown in figure 6.2 below.
Farm and home visits Office call 1) Individual Method Telephone call Personal letter Informal contact Figure 6.2: Extension Teaching Methods 93 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION Organisational meeting Planning meeting 2) Group Method Training meeting Special interest meeting Community meeting Figure 6.3 3) Demonstration Method demonstration Tours & Field trip Extension school Group discussion Farmer training centre Figure 6.4 Posters (visual aid) Exhibit and display Newspaper 4) Mass Method Folder, leaflet and pamphlet Fact letter Radio-audio aid Television-audio/visual aid Modern cinema Figure 6.5 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Look for an extension agent close to you and find out the most effective method he or she employs in the diffusion and adoption process.
94 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.3 Creed of Rural Reconstruction Development These are listed below: 1.
Contact the peasant people 2.
Live among the peasant people 3.
Learn from peasant people 4.
Plan with the peasant people 5.
Work with the peasant people 6.
Start with what the peasant people know 7.
Build on what the peasant people know 8.
Teach by showing, learn by doing 9.
Not showcase but a pattern 10.
Not odds and ends but a system 11.
Not piecemeal but integrated approach 12.
Not to conform but to transform.
3.4 Responsibilities of Extension Specialists You should remember that the extension specialist is a link between the rural people and the researcher.
He is therefore seen as having the following features: (1) He is a manipulator (2) He is a change agent (3) He should be truthful; he must always speak the truth at all times and behave in an acceptable manner (4) The extension specialist must understand the principles of influence, as listed below.
(a) He must understand the language of the audience (b) He must be able to interpret his own communication or read to his audience (5) He must know the facts and figures he wants to present to the farmer (6) The extension specialist must know when to speak and where to speak and when not to speak.
That is, he must try to measure their comprehension level.
He must also understand that the farmer is an intelligent person.
(7) He must be able to predict the result of his communication with his clientele.
(8) He should use the common local language of the farmer, so that he can operate at their frequency (9) He must possess faith i.e.
have confidence in them and in what he is trying to communicate to them.
He must also have confidence 95 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION in himself before disseminating his message.
Confidence can be established if an extension worker is sure that his package will yield result.
(10) Extension specialist must realise that communication, essentially, involves language and semantics (what you add to it).
3.5 Training and Visiting (T&V) Extension System in Nigeria The purpose of Training and Visit (T&V) extension system is to build a professional extension service that will be capable of assisting farmer to raise production and increase their income.
T&V is also to provide appropriate support for agricultural and rural development.
Its aim is to have competent, well informed village level extension worker, who will visit the farmer with relevant technology, message and bring farmers’ problems to researchers.
This system is in use in over 40 developing countries of Asia, Latin America, including Nigeria.
It was introduced by World Bank since 1974 through Agricultural Development Programmes (ADPs).
3.5.1 Key Features of T&V The key features of training and visit (T&V) system are listed below: 1) Professionalism at all levels There are specialists in their various areas.
Agent must keep in close touch with relevant scientific development and research.
2) Single line of command There is single line of technical and administrative command.
This may be within the ministry or department of agric.
They need support from training/research institutes, inputs suppliers and other agricultural support organisations such as Nigerian Agricultural and Rural Development Bank (NACRD) and Nigerian Agricultural Insurance Corporation (NAIC).
There should be no conflict of interest.
No extension agent should be responsible to two extension officers.
3) Concentration of efforts This is based on the principle that the extension staff work only on agricultural and cooperative extension.
No extension duty should be 96 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION removed from the system.
For example, supply of inputs, data collation, processing of loan form for farmers.
Extension agent should perform specific duties, i.e.
in their specific area.
4) Time bound work Necessary skill must be taught to farmer on a regular basis.
In other words, extension agent must visit farmer regularly, once every fortnight.
5) Field and farmer orientation A group of farmers should be visited once every two weeks by the village level extension worker.
6) Regular and continuous training of extension staff This could be in form of a monthly workshop for the extension agent.
7) Linkage with Research Effective extension depends on close link with research in two ways: (a) Problems faced by farmers that cannot be solved by extension agent are passed on to research centers for investigation (b) Meeting with research staff to formulate production recommendation that will be adopted by extension worker is necessary to make the best use of the specific local environment.
3.5.2 Strategies or Operation of T&V This involves the following: 1) Monthly Technology Review Meeting (MTRM) It is the meeting between research institute, ministry and subject matter specialists.
2) Fortnightly Training Meeting (FTM) This is held at a particular zone.
The meeting is led by subject matter specialist because the subject matter specialist attends MTRM; so whatever was discussed at MTRM – will be delivered by him.
Even people from headquarters attend that meeting, just as Subject Matter Specialist (SMS), Zonal Extension Officer (ZEO), Area Extension Officer (AEO) and Village Extension Officer (VEO).
97 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION We should note that SMSs are employed by ADPs.
Research institutes provide logistics and other resources.
3) Fortnightly Visit (FV) This is to have contact with farmers.
The people to use as contact leaders should be:  regarded as opinion leaders  people that are respected in their community  have contacts outside their environment  people who want you to demonstrate on their farm  ready to sacrifice time and energy.
4) Small Plot Adoption Technique (SPAT) This has to be close to contact farmer farm 5) On the Farm Adaptive Research (OFAR) This is where the researcher is involved.
They practise the new technique with the contact farmer before taking it to the rural farmer.
6) Scheduled Visit (SV) Extension officer from ADP, agric ministry, research institutes, zonal officer visit the field at regular intervals 7) Use of contact farmer SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 On your own, read the following topic on T&V.
1.
Modification of T&V system.
2.
Problems of T&V system.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to the role of extension agents in the diffusion and adoption process, as well as the T&V system in Nigeria.
Extension staff should be well motivated through appropriate remuneration and incentive with adequate logistic support, to enable them carry out their important roles for rural development.
98 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the role of extension agents in the diffusion and adoption process, as well as the T&V system.
Extension agents, no doubt, are very crucial to the success of any extension program.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
In carrying out his extension duties, the extension agent performs some tasks.
What are these tasks?
2.
What are the strategies of Training and Visit (T&V) extension system?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Lecture Notes on Extension Method.
(Unpublished Manuscript).
Zaria: Ahmadu Bello University.
99 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION UNIT 7 IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIFFUSION, ADOPTION PROCESS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF COOPERATIVE IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Implications of the Diffusion and Adoption Process 3.2 The Spread of Cooperatives in Nigeria 3.3 The Role of Government in Promoting Cooperative in Nigeria 3.4 Agricultural Cooperatives in Nigeria 3.5 Importance of Cooperatives to Agricultural activities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The role of extension agents in the diffusion and adoption process as well as the Training and Visit (T&V) extension system were examined in the last unit.
In this unit, you are going to learn the implications of the diffusion and adoption process for the development of cooperatives in Nigerian.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the implications of the diffusion and adoption process for the development of cooperative in Nigeria.
 describe the role of government in promoting cooperatives in Nigeria  discuss agricultural cooperatives  state the importance of cooperatives to agricultural activities.
100 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Implications of Diffusion and Adoption Process The implications of diffusion and adoption process for the development of cooperative in Nigeria are both positive and negative; but let us first start with the positive implications.
(a) Positive consequences of diffusion and adoption process 1) It leads to the formation of more cooperatives, which in turn provide more employment opportunities.
2) It makes it possible for the extension agents to pass on new ideas, especially on agricultural practices to farmers.
3) Training and development of cooperative personnel is possible through cooperative colleges and extension training provided by government agencies.
4) Economic status of cooperative members can be enhanced through viable business arising from adoption and diffusion of innovations.
5) Technical assistance can be given to cooperative by the extension workers.
(b) Negative consequences of diffusion and adoption 1) Over expansion as a result of diffusion and adoption of innovations can lead to a large increase in the number of cooperatives, which may not be viable.
2) Due to the large number of cooperative vis-a vis diffusion and adoption of innovations, it can lead to mismanagement of cooperatives, which in turn can result in their liquidation.
3) Secondment of government officials by way of technical assistance may create ill-feelings as they will see it as government taking over their cooperatives SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Look for a cooperative society near you; ask the manager of the society if he has ever benefited from extension services.
What are the implications of their adopting new ideas?
3.2 The Spread of Cooperatives in Nigeria The colonial government contributed to the spread of cooperatives in Nigeria.
Right from independence to the present moment, concerted efforts are being made to bring cooperatives to every community.
New 101 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION ideas, new methods and practices are being spread by extension workers in the rural areas of the country.
As more states are created so also cooperatives are brought nearer to the grassroots, as each state will also create a department in an appropriate ministry and saddle such department with cooperatives matters.
A situation report was given in 1988 (when Nigeria has only 21 states).
This report makes the picture of the spread of cooperatives in Nigeria clearer, in terms of the number of registered cooperatives, number of registered agricultural cooperatives and others.
Table 7.1: Number of Registered Cooperatives in Nigeria in 1988(Source- Mijindadi, No.
1988, pp.
11 – 20) S/No State Registered Cooperatives Agric Cooperatives Others 1 FCT 50 20 30 2 Akwa - Ibom 70 10 50 3 Anambra 1337 156 1181 4 Bauchi 528 7 521 5 Bendel 2176 20 2156 6 Benue 3131 98 3033 7 Borno 873 15 858 8 Gongola 681 45 636 9 Imo 1858 33 1825 10 Kaduna 915 340 675 11 Kano 1612 - 1621 12 Katsina 811 113 698 13 Kwara 598 200 382 14 Lagos 525 69 457 15 Niger 344 360 484 16 Ogun 1014 275 739 17 Ondo 4126 41 4085 18 Oyo 5000 750 4250 19 Plateau 490 1 489 20 Rivers 1232 2 1230 21 Sokoto 1300 70 1230 You should note that while Mijindadi’s report did not give a breakdown of the other forms of cooperatives, the figures show the following: a) Agricultural cooperative (group farming) is practised as at 1988 in all states of the Federation, except Kano.
b) From experience, it can be deduced that the other forms of cooperatives would be mainly cooperatives in thrift and credit societies.
This is because of its popularity among Nigerians.
102 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Go to the relevant ministry in either the state capital or local government that you are currently residing and find out the following: i. the type of cooperatives existing ii.
the number of members for each type.
3.3 The Role of Government in Promoting Cooperatives in Nigeria After independence, state government’s involvement in cooperative activities increased, which gives government officials wider power to intervene in cooperative’s activities.
The common actions are the followings.
1) Creation of cooperative department Cooperative departments were created at both the states and federal government levels to supervise cooperative development.
There was a case where a full ministry of cooperative and supply was created.
2) The role of cooperatives in national development plans You should note that cooperatives were assigned role in national development plans and development projects, such as the various projects for agriculture and poverty alleviation.
3) Legislations Also note that, the most important role government plays in cooperative affairs is to legislate to direct the societies and give legal backing to cooperative activities.
That is why in Nigeria, we have legislations passed to regulate cooperative activities.
You should note that the current cooperative law is the Cooperative decree of 1993, which has the following provisions.
a) A definition of cooperative, bringing out its essential characteristics.
b) A description of the objectives of a cooperative, and procedure for establishment and registration, the amendments of statutes, and its dissolution.
c) The condition of membership, such as the maximum amount of each share, the rights and duties of members, which will be laid in greater details in the bye-laws of cooperatives societies.
103 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION d) The method of administration, management and internal audit, and the procedure for the establishment and functions of management.
e) The protection of the name- “cooperative”.
f) The machinery for the external audit and guidance of cooperatives and for the enforcement of the laws and regulations.
Consequently, the cooperative law as presently existing in Nigeria covers all cooperatives.
You should bear in mind that at the state level, the contents of each state cooperative law are not substantially different from that of the federal.
The states’ cooperative laws exist to take into consideration the peculiarities of each state.
4) Giving out loans to cooperative Government gives loans and grants to cooperatives to enable them execute viable projects.
Government also pays for the annual subscription of some apex organisations which existence is not purely economic but to provide services to the affiliate members.
These payments are made to apex organisations outside Nigeria such as, the International Cooperative Alliance (ICA).
5) Staff secondment Since there is shortage of skilled manpower for cooperative management in Nigeria, the government often second competent staff to cooperatives.
This secondment is, however, done without violating the independent nature of cooperatives.
3.4 Agricultural Cooperatives in Nigeria You should note that these are forms of cooperatives formed by farmers or agriculturists who have combined their resources together for the production and marketing of their produce.
They also intend to get some equipment and items to enhance the effectiveness of their production and marketing of the items with the hope of benefiting members financially and economically.
Agricultural cooperatives can be in any of these forms: i) Farmers’ multipurpose cooperatives ii) Agro–industrial cooperative iii) Piggery cooperatives iv) Produce marketing cooperative v) Food crop production and marketing cooperatives vi) Livestock cooperatives vii) Fishery cooperatives 104 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 3.5 Importance of Cooperatives to Agricultural Activities Cooperatives can be organised not only to serve economic benefits of its members, but equally provide social services especially in such areas as education, transportation, provision of rural infrastructure and civic responsibility (Enikanselu, S. A.: (2005).
Enikanselu et al., argue that government should not only encourage the formation of cooperatives, but more importantly, it should ensure that they are properly managed so as to take its rightful place as one of the government’s effective machinery for rural poverty alleviation and rural development.
Agricultural cooperatives encourage members to engage in joint cultivation of food and cash crops- among others.
Farmers can also take advantage of the new technologies (innovations) that will make them abandon old method of farming characterised by use of tools like cutlasses and hoes.
They can then switch to modern equipment such as tractors, ploughs, harvesters etc., with new hybrid seeds for better yields (diffusion and adoption).
Note that buying these modern implements can be difficult for a single individual to bear; however, his membership of an agricultural cooperative may accord the individual farmer the opportunity to use these tools at a reasonable and low cost.
Cooperatives can also help in the following areas.
 Irrigation  Produce marketing  Land and soil conservation  Storage facilities, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the implication of the diffusion and adoption process for the development of cooperative in Nigeria.
All these bring out the existing relationships between extension service and cooperative development in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you are now conversant with the implications of diffusion and adoption process for the development of cooperatives in Nigeria.
The knowledge you have received in this course provides the foundation on which to build further knowledge in cooperative management.
105 COP212 COOPERATIVE EXTENSION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain five positive implications of the diffusion and adoption process for the development of cooperatives in Nigeria.
2.
Justify the assertion that the major role of government in cooperative development is in the area of legislation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adesina, D. (1998).
Essential Information on Cooperative Credit Societies.
Ibadan: DAC-Prints.
Enikanselu, S. A.; Akanji, S.O.
& Faseyiku, O. I.
(2005).
Principles and Economics of Cooperatives.
Lagos: Datrade Limited.
Mijinadi, N. B.
(1988).
Group Farming Cooperatives in Nigeria.
A Report Commissioned by UNDP/ILO/FDAC Project NIR/83/041.
106
