 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: COP 318 COURSE TITLE: COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION  COURSE GUIDE COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION Course Team K. A.
A. Lawal (Course Developer/Coordinator)- NOUN O. Adelowo (Course Writer)-NOUN Dr. J.O.
Inegbedion (Course Editor)-NOUN Prof. O.L.
Oludimu (Programme Leader)-NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA None COP 318 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island, Lagos Abuja Office 5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2013 ISBN: 978-058-927-9 All Rights Reserved ii  COP 318 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………………………………………….. iv What you will Learn in this Course …………………………… iv Course Aims …………………………………………………… iv Course Objectives …………………………………………….. v Course Materials ……………………………………………… v Study Units …………………………………………………….
vi Textbooks and References …………………………………….
vii Assignment File ……………………………………………….
vii Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) …………………………… vii Final Examination and Grading ……………………………….
vii Course Marking Scheme ……………………………………….
vii How to Get the Most from this Course ……………………….
viii Tutors and Tutorials …………………………………………... viii Summary ……………………………………………………….
viii iii  COP 318 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION COP 318 — Cooperative Education and Extension is a two-credit course.
It is available for (300) level students in the School of Management Sciences.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about, relevant textbooks to consult, and how you can work your way through these materials.
It also contains some guidelines on your tutor-marked assignment.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THE COURSE This course will equip you with the skills and techniques for effective propagation of cooperative education and extension in various courses that constitute cooperative studies.
Before graduation you are likely to specialise in areas like cooperative education, cooperative finance and insurance, agricultural cooperative, cooperative business administration and cooperative management.
It gives a general background of what cooperative education and extension is all about, role of cooperative education in the cooperative movement and the principles of cooperative education.
This Course Guide is meant to provide you with necessary information about the course, the nature of the materials you will be using and how to make the best use of the materials towards ensuring adequate success in your programme.
Also included in this course guide are information on how to make use of your time and information on how to tackle the Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs).
There will be tutorial sessions during which your instructional facilitator will take you through your difficult areas and at the same time have meaningful interaction with your fellow learners.
COURSE AIMS The course aim is to give you a broad idea of what cooperative education and extension is all about.
At the end of the course, you should be able to decide the areas of cooperative studies you want to specialise in or the type of cooperative you want to associate with or join; you should know the factors to look at and how to deal with them to succeed in your own cooperative society.
This will be achieved by: • introducing you to the meaning of cooperative education and extension • discussing the objective of cooperative education and extension in Nigeria • discussing cooperative education and development of iv  COP 318 COURSE GUIDE cooperative in Nigeria • explaining the concept, procedure and principles of cooperative extension teaching • explaining basic characteristics, implications and steps of cooperative education extension teaching • describing training and visit system in cooperative education • discussing the use of extension methods in cooperative education • highlighting communication and information process in cooperative.
COURSE OBJECTIVES In order to achieve the aims set out above; the course set overall objectives.
You will also realise that objectives are always included at the beginning of each unit.
It is advisable to read through the specific objectives before studying through the unit.
The following are the broad objectives of the course; by striving to meet these objectives you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On the successful completion of the course, you should be able to: • discuss the skills techniques for effective propagation of cooperative education and extension • define cooperative education and extension • describe the qualities and role of a good cooperative extension worker • trace the history of cooperative education in Nigeria • trace the development of cooperative in Nigeria • list the problems (and solutions) of cooperative education in Nigeria • describe the procedure and principles of cooperative extension teaching • explain the basic characteristics, implications and steps in cooperative education extension teaching • explain the learning process in cooperative education and extension • discuss the concept of adult education in cooperative • describe training and visit system in cooperative education • identify methods use in cooperative education extension • describe communication and information process in cooperative • explain e-cooperative education.
COURSE MATERIALS The major components of the course are listed below.
1.
The course guide v  COP 318 COURSE GUIDE 2.
Study units 3.
Textbooks 4.
The assignment file 5.
Presentation schedule STUDY UNITS There are 17 study units in this course; these are listed as follows.
Module 1 Unit 1 Meaning of Cooperative Education and Extension Unit 2 Objectives of Cooperative Education and Extension in Nigeria Unit 3 Cooperative Education versus Formal Education in Nigeria Unit 4 The Principles of Cooperative Module 2 Unit 1 Qualities and Role of a Good Cooperative Extension Worker Unit 2 Benefits and the Importance of Cooperative Education and Extension Unit 3 Cooperative Education in Nigeria Unit 4 Development of Cooperative in Nigeria Unit 5 Problems of Cooperative Education in Nigeria Module 3 Unit 1 The Concept, Procedure and Principles of Cooperative Extension Teaching Unit 2 Basic Characteristics, Implications and Steps in Cooperative Education Extension Teaching Unit 3 Learning Process in Cooperative Education and Extension Unit 4 Concept of Adult Education in Cooperative Module 4 Unit 1 Training and Visit System in Cooperative Education Unit 2 Concept and Overview of the Use of Extension Methods in Cooperative Education Unit 3 Cooperative Education Extension Methods Unit 4 Communication and Information Process in Cooperative vi  COP 318 COURSE GUIDE TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCES There are no compulsory books for the course.
However, you are encouraged to consult some of those listed for further reading at the end of each unit.
THE ASSIGNMENT FILE The assignment file will be made available to you.
You will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marks.
The marks you obtain for this assignment will count towards the final mark you will obtain for this course.
Any further information on assignment will be found in the assignment file.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT On TMAs, you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and techniques you gathered during the course.
The assignment must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the laid down rules.
The total score you obtain in the TMAs will account for 30% of your overall course mark.
There are many TMAs in the course; you should subtract any eight to your tutor for assessment.
The highest four of the eight assessments will be counted and credited to your overall course mark.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of two hours.
This examination will count for 70% of your overall course mark.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercises and TMAs you have previously encountered.
You are advised to prepare adequately for the examination, since the general broad are of the course will be assessed.
COURSE MAKING SCHEME The following table lays out how the actual course making is broken down.
Assessment Marks Eight assignment submitted Best five assignments with 10 marks each --- 30% of overall course marks Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of overall course marks vii  COP 318 COURSE GUIDE HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE The distance learning system of education is quite different from the traditional university system.
Here the study units replace the university lecturer, thus conferring a unique advantage to you.
For instance, you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace; and at the time and place that suit you best.
Hence, instead of listening to a lecturer, all you need to do is read.
You should understand right from the onset that the contents of the course are to be worked and understood step by step and not to be read like a novel.
The best way is to read a unit to see the general aim of the contents and then re-read it carefully, and ensure that you understand the content.
FACILITATORS/TUTORS AND TUTORIALS The facilitators/tutors will guide you on any difficulties you might encounter, and provide adequate assistance to you during the course.
The tutorial classes will give you the opportunity to have physical and personnel contact with your tutor, and to ask questions.
Please do not hesitate to contact your tutor or programme coordinator if you do not understand any part of the study units.
SUMMARY Cooperative education and extension plays a vital role in equipping you with the skills techniques for effective propagation of cooperative education and extension.
Cooperative as a discipline -deals with the behaviour of people.
Cooperative education extension seeks to influence the behaviour of rural people through education and information exchange.
The aim is to assist them in gaining a livelihood, improving their physical and psychological level, and fostering rural community welfare.
The success of the extension process requires an atmosphere of mutual trust, helpfulness and respect on the part of both extension worker and rural people.
The concept that the broader function of cooperative work is to help people to solve their own problems, through the application of scientific knowledge is now generally accepted.
viii  MAIN COURSE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………….
1 Unit 1 Meaning of Cooperative Education and Extension …………………………………….. 1 Unit 2 Objectives of Cooperative Education and Extension in Nigeria ………………………….
9 Unit 3 Cooperative Education versus Formal Education in Nigeria ………………………….. 15 Unit 4 The Principles of Cooperative ……………….. 18 Module 2 ............................................................................ 26 Unit 1 Qualities and Role of a Good Cooperative Extension Worker …………………………….. 26 Unit 2 Benefits and the Importance of Cooperative Education and Extension ……………………… 33 Unit 3 Cooperative Education in Nigeria …………….. 37 Unit 4 Development of Cooperative in Nigeria ……… 44 Unit 5 Problems of Cooperative Education in Nigeria .. 50 Module 3 ………………………………………………….. 66 Unit 1 The Concept, Procedure and Principles of Cooperative Extension Teaching .......................... 66 Unit 2 Basic Characteristics, Implications and Steps in Cooperative Education Extension Teaching .............................................................. 72 Unit 3 Learning Process in Cooperative Education and Extension .............................................................. 79 Unit 4 Concept of Adult Education in Cooperative …… 86 Module 4 ................................................................................ 90 Unit 1 Training and Visit System in Cooperative Education ………………………………………….
90 Unit 2 Concept and Overview of the Use of Extension Methods in Cooperative Education ........ 105 Unit 3 Cooperative Education Extension Methods… .. 110 Unit 4 Communication and Information Process in Cooperative …………………………………….. 124 None COP 318 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 Unit 1 Meaning of Cooperative Education and Extension Unit 2 Objectives of Cooperative Education and Extension in Nigeria Unit 3 Cooperative Education versus Formal Education in Nigeria Unit 4 The Principles of Cooperative UNIT 1 MEANING OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions of Cooperative 3.2 Definitions of Education 3.3 Definitions of Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Since inception, the practice of cooperative societies in Nigeria, no doubt, had undergone series of dynamic changes.
All these changes were aimed at establishing independent training institution that will provide the right knowledge and manpower required for the understanding, application and transformation of cooperative theory and practice- traditionally, nationally and internationally in the areas of learning, teaching and research.
However, in this first unit our discussions shall be on conceptualising cooperative, education and extension.
Cooperative, education and extension are three vital but different streams that feed human culture.
Cooperative values are more tangible, education is concerned with less concrete goals like helping our young to become good citizens; while extension cooperates with other organisations which aim to develop individuals, community and the nation.
1  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the concept of cooperative • explain the concept of education • describe the concept of extension.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definitions of Cooperative There are different definitions of a cooperative.
We shall enumerate and explain various definitions one after the other.
In order to understand this definition clearly, let us examine it by analysing some key words in the definition.
It should, however, be noted that a cooperative Society is a business enterprise to be compared with one man business, partnership, joint stock company etc.
While in the others, an individual or a group of people are so financially strong to start and run the business; for a cooperative society, however, the members are financially weak, and through the association with others, the people could establish and run a business.
By starting the business, they become owners and can directly benefit from the business of the society.
Cooperative can be defined as a form of business organisation owned by two or more people, to their own benefit.
Calvert (1959) sees cooperative as a form of organisation wherein persons, voluntarily, associates together as human beings on the basis of equality for the promotion of their economic interests.
Roy (1981) defines a cooperative as a business voluntarily organised, owned, and controlled, democratically, by members-patrons who are the users of its services, and who share risks and benefits in proportion to their participation.
Chukwu (1990) also defines cooperative societies as institutions with a framework within which cooperation or joint activities take place.
Cooperative can be defined as working or acting together for a common purpose or benefit.
A cooperative is an “autonomous association of persons, united voluntarily to meet their COMMON ECONOMIC, social and cultural Needs and aspirations, through a jointly-owned and democratically controlled enterprise” (ICA, 1994).
Co-operatives in agribusiness can be described as where people engage in a common course of action for the purpose of promoting their economic interest, according to Adelaja, M.A.
(1996).
Now, to Banwo (1996), co-operative is an institution where two or more people work together for mutual 2  COP 318 MODULE 1 assistance, procurement of input at affordable cost, in order to achieve a desired, predetermined goal.
Cooperative, for instance, may be the ‘vehicle’ to obtaining improved markets or providing sources of supplies or other services which, otherwise, would have been unavailable, if members acted alone.
Cooperative, most effectively, serve their members by working together locally, nationally, regionally and globally for the sustainable development of their communities (Birchall 1998).
Cooperatives are voluntary organisations without gender, social, racial, political or religious discriminations.
They are democratic organisations controlled by their members who actively participate in management decisions and policies.
According to the International Cooperative Alliance (ICA), a cooperative can be defined as a group of people who are joined together in a common undertaking, in accord with the following principles: • membership is open and voluntary • there is democratic control, usually on the basis of one man, one vote • interest on share capital is limited • proportional distribution of surplus- according to the level of transactions • cooperatives devote some part of their surpluses to education • cooperatives cooperate among themselves.
The purpose of cooperative is to provide greater benefits to members by enhancing members' standard of living by providing important needed services.
International Labour Organisation (ILO) has defined a cooperative as an association of persons who have, voluntarily, come together to achieve a common purpose through the formation of a democratically controlled entity, making equitable contributions to the capital required and accepting a fair share of the risks and benefit of the undertaking in which the members actively participate.
Otokiti (2000) sees cooperative as a voluntary association with unrestricted membership and collectively owned funds, organised on democratic principles of equality by persons of moderate means and income who come together to supply their needs and wants through mutual action, in which the motive of production is to serve, rather than profit.
Despite the salient principles underscoring these definitions, some cooperatives do not always obey all of these principles, for example Scandinavian cooperatives are less rigorous-in certain cases.
Despite this theoretical definition, the application of cooperative principles to reality has always been a matter of priorities and 3  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION compromises.
These critical decisions pertaining to the cooperative movement must swiftly reflect the interaction between development and changing environment.
However, co-operative is a voluntary association of individuals with common, socio-economic felt needs and with the conviction that such needs can be best attained by pooling resources and efforts in a controlling and ensuring business organisation, sharing the recursion investment, equitably.
From the above explanation, the following salient points should be noted: • persons voluntarily associating together • formation of a jointly owned business organisation • democratically controlled, on the basis of equitability • returns on investment- shared equitably • pooling all production resources together, and promoting common economic interest.
3.2 Definition of Education Education is very important for an individual's success in life.
Education mainly begins at home; one does not acquire knowledge from a teacher, one can learn and get knowledge from a parent or a family member.
Generally, the word education is derived from a Latin word ‘‘educare’’, meaning ‘to bring up’, ‘to elevate’ or ‘to raise’ (Molagun et al.
: 2000).
Education is seen as the foundation and gradual process of developing the latent and manifest potentialities in the child.
Education provides pupils skills that prepare them physically, mentally and socially for the challenges of later life.
Education goes beyond what is being given in the school.
It includes every step taken by members of a society to impact the attitudes, ethics, skills, values etc., needed for growth and survival of the younger generations who will eventually take over the responsibility of initiating and sustaining the much cherished societal and economic development.
Education has been defined by several authors, philosophers and experts in various fields, in accordance with their discipline and their assessment of the society in general- as follows: • the transmission of life by the living • the art of making available to each generation the organised knowledge of the past (Carter Good) • Plato (1928) defines education as the process of interaction between the individual and the society 4  COP 318 MODULE 1 • the aggregate of all the processes by which a child or young adult develops the abilities ,attitudes and other forms of behaviours that are of positive values to the society in which he lives (Fafunwa) • the total efforts of a community to raise its economic, social and political standards of life (Taiwo, 2000) • the process of bringing up a person , according to such person’s abilities aptitudes, capabilities, and interest to enable such person function, successfully and effectively, in the society (Abdulkareem).
From the above, we can conclude that education can be defined in a number of ways; and that the views and submission of various authorities rests on the perception of their society.
Education, in its broadest, general sense, is the means through which the aims and habits of a group of people lives on, from one generation to the next.
Generally, it occurs through any experience that has a formative effect on the way one thinks, feels, or acts.
In its narrow, technical sense, education is the formal process by which society, deliberately, transmits its accumulated knowledge, skills, customs and values from one generation to another- e.g., instruction in schools.
Main purpose of education is to educate individuals within society, to prepare and qualify them for work in the economy; as well as to integrate people into society and teach them values and morals of society.
Role of education is means of socialising individuals and to keep society smoothing and remain stable.
In general terms, there are several types of educational systems- as enshrined in the national policy of education and other educational documents; but our major concern is on three main areas-namely: • informal • formal • non-formal These will be discussed in the next unit.
3.3 Definition of Extension The word extension came into use following the practice of Scottish universities having one educational programme within the precincts of the main location of the university, and another away from the main location (Patel 1983).
This latter programme was described by adding the word “extension” -as a qualifying adjective to the noun education.
Extension, according to Kidd (1978), aims at assisting people engaged in farming and home-making to utilise their resources fully.
Williams (1978) in his own opinion sees extension as a service which assists 5  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION farmers, through educational procedures, to improve their farming methods and techniques, thereby increasing their production efficiency, income and improving their levels of living.
(Omokare, 1983) defines extension as an informal educational system that is directed at adult, carried out thoughtfully and systematically, applying teaching and learning principles under the atmosphere of mutual trust and respect.
Adedokun, et al.
(2003) posit that extension has been developed as the only logical, scientific and successful way of bringing knowledge to farmers to help them perform their agricultural activities, effectively.
Mai-Lafia and Goshit (2009) define extension as a process or a service, a way of getting knowledge developed from one environment to the other.
By and large, extension is to assist farmers and non farmers to apply scientific findings, in a sustained manner, to improve their activities and way of life.
It should be noted that extension service is not restricted to agriculture alone.
It permeates and applies to all areas of human endeavour, where knowledge is generated and used for the welfare of humanity (e.g.
health, education, engineering, etc).
In other words, the overall objective of extension services is to plan, execute, and evaluate learning experience that will help people acquire the understanding and skills essential for solving farm, home and community problems.
Now, cooperative education and extension has three main facets; let us look at the following.
1.
As a discipline, it deals with the behaviour of people.
It is educational in content and purposive in approach.
Whether the content consists of cooperative agriculture, medicine (preventive and social medicine), public health, education, engineering, etc., cooperative education extension is always dependent on a firm knowledge and expertise in economics, business, management, sociology, anthropology, psychology, administration, communication arts, and political science, and so on.
2.
As a process, cooperative education extension seeks to influence the behavior of rural people through education and information exchange.
The aim is to assist them in gaining a livelihood, improving the physical and psychological level of living of rural families, and fostering rural community welfare.
The success of the extension process requires an atmosphere of mutual trust, helpfulness and respect on the part of both extension worker and rural people.
3.
As a service, cooperative education extension makes the government, ministry, the university or voluntary agency as useful as possible to the people who support it through taxes and 6  COP 318 MODULE 1 donations.
The concept that the broader function of cooperative work is to help people to solve their own problems through the application of scientific knowledge is now generally accepted.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define the term extension.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to the concept of cooperative, the concept of education and the concept of extension in order to understand the subject matter and have the knowledge of areas of differences and similarities.
5.0 SUMMARY In the course of this study, you learnt about the concept of cooperative, the concept of education and concept of extension from different views, opinions, writers, researcher’s and scholars.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the meaning of the following terms: a. cooperative b. education 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adelaja, M. A.
(1996).
“Cooperative Management and Supervision.” In Oludumu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.(Eds).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Adeokun, O.A., Adedoyin, S.F.
& Ayodele, I.A.
(2003).
Essentials of Fisheries Extension.
Ibadan: Anointed Hands Ventures.
pp.
3 -7.
Ibitoye, S.J.
& Mundi, N.E.
(2004).
Essentials of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ankpa: Rowis Printers.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludmu, O.L.
(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan: Asogun Publisher.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and 7  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Rochdale Pioneers Museum (2002).
Retrieved From http://www.manchester.com/tourist/rochdale Webster’s College Dictionary.
(1991).
New York: Randon House Inc. 8  COP 318 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 OBJECTIVES OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Cooperative Extension Education 3.1.1 Objectives of Cooperative Extension 3.2 Objectives of Co-operative Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learned the concept of cooperative, the concept of education and the concept of extension from different views and opinions and scholars.
In this unit, you will be exposed to cooperative extension education, the objectives of cooperative extension, objectives of co-operative education in Nigeria, cooperative extension and formal education, the principles of cooperative, Rochdale co-operative principles and principles of cooperative extension.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of cooperative extension education • list the objectives of cooperative extension and co-operative education in Nigeria • describe cooperative extension and formal education • state the principles of cooperative extension and Rochdale’s co- operative principles.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Cooperative Extension Education Cooperative extension education generally, is not easy to define in a short phrase because of its broad objectives.
It covers areas like economics, business management, agriculture, home economics and community development.
These areas interact with each other and are 9  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION therefore difficult to separate.
As a result of this, the term cooperative extension education may simply be referred to as the extension education in a particular field.
In the attempt to state the purpose of all extension work, Savile (1965) explains that the aim of cooperative education extension work is to teach rural people how to raise their standard of living by their own efforts, using their own resources of manpower and material, with minimum assistance from government.
Adams (1982) defines cooperative extension as assistance to farmers and non farmers to help them to identify and analyse their production problems and to become aware of the opportunities for improvement.
Lawal (2009) posits that cooperative education is a method of instruction that combines career and technical classroom instruction with paid employment directly related to the classroom instruction.
Both student’s instruction and employment are planned and supervised by the school and the employer, so that each contributes to the student’s career objectives and employability.
Lawal (2012) defines cooperative extension education as a voluntary, out of school educational programme designed to help rural people or farmers learn new skills, knowledge and acquire favourable attitude as a basis for making changes in their ways of living.
From the above submissions, it is clear that cooperative extension is a voluntary, out of school education, directed at farmers to help them improve on their standard of living through efficient utilisation of the resources of production available to them.
Essentially, the term embraces all scientific activities aimed at helping farmers and non farmers solve their problems with their own resources- not only on the farms and other business forms, but also in their families.
3.1.1 Objectives of Cooperative Extension The main objective of cooperative extension in Nigeria is to assist members and non- members increase their production capacity and improve their standard of living.
This, however, cannot be achieved in isolation; it has to be done in conjunction with other programmes.
The broad objectives of cooperative extension service therefore are as follows.
a.
Link between researchers and farmers and non-farmers Cooperative extension service serves as a link between researchers in universities or research institutes and farming communities and small business micro institutions.
In achieving these objectives, cooperative extension workers bring to the notice of farmers and non-farmers all the latest development in the field of cooperative from the research institutes through the 10  COP 318 MODULE 1 ministry of agriculture and department of cooperative.
In the same way, the problems of farmers and non-farmers are also taken to the researchers for solutions.
In this way, cooperative extension service tries to bridge the gap between researchers, farmers, and non-farmers.
b.
Adoption of new innovation Apart from bringing research findings to members, it is the responsibility of extension service to persuade the members to adopt new innovation.
Members sometimes are known for their reluctance to adopt new ideas that can bring changes; this is probably due to poverty, as well as their belief in past traditions.
They don’t want to take any costly risk that will adversely affect their income.
Through persuasion and education about the value of the improved method, it is possible for most of them to change.
c. Identification of available resources Another important objective of cooperative extension service is to help members to identify the resources available to them.
For members and non-members to adopt the new innovation, they need certain essential facilities.
It is the duty of cooperative extension service to educate the members on the availability of these resources.
Apart from the identification of these resources, cooperative extension services also educate the members on how to make use of the resources.
d. Improving living standard Improving the living standard of farmers/non-farmers and their family is another objective of cooperative extension service.
This objective is achieved through the education of the farmers/non- farmers on the management of their income/welfare, on the general improvement of the home and the essence of cooperative movement.
This objective is very important as it can affect the decision of the farmers/non-farmers with regard to the adoption of innovative ideas.
e. Development of local leaders It is the aim of cooperative extension service to develop local leaders among the rural community.
Leadership development is very essential in all cooperative extension work.
Cooperative extension service, most often, makes use of local leaders in executing their programmes.
The leader will provide a link between members and the cooperative extension agents; all the requests and problems of the members are, formally, channeled 11  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION through their leaders.
Any information from the agent will first be passed to the leader, before the farmers receive them.
f. Development of rural youth Youth development is another area of concern to cooperative extension service.
Cooperative extension service prepares the youths for adulthood through the formation of youth club, women’s club and farm settlement scheme.
This objective is aimed at making rural areas a better dwelling place for the youths.
This is necessary to arrest rural-urban drift.
Rural youths are known to be more positive towards the adoption of new innovation than adults.
There is therefore the need to retain some of them in their areas as innovators.
g. Dissemination of useful, practical information The dissemination of useful & practical information relating to cooperative agribusiness, agriculture, fertilisers, tools, pesticides, improved cultural practices- including improved seeds, poultry, nutrition etc.
The practical application of useful knowledge- here, this relates to practical application of useful knowledge to home and farm.
The ultimate is to improve all aspects of the life of the rural people, within the framework of national, economic & social policies involving the population as a whole.
3.2 Objectives of Cooperative Education in Nigeria The objectives of cooperative education in Nigeria are many.
These are as follows.
1.
Planting and promoting, in members, the right attitudes required for the reception of cooperative ideas and principles.
When cooperators receive cooperative education, it is a way of planting and promoting in them the attitude required in knowing how to behave, act, contribute to discussions, think etc., in a cooperative society.
2.
As a democratic and open organisation, education of members should be extended to members of the public; one of the objectives of cooperative education is to enlighten the members of the public on what a cooperative society is, what it does, how it can be run and the advantages members can derive from it.
This objective can be achieved through radio and television programmes, workshops, seminars, conferences, congresses, etc.
12  COP 318 MODULE 1 3.
To develop a strong virile cooperative movement in Nigeria- through cooperative education whereby awareness and positive attitude are created in cooperators, a strong cooperative movement can be built in Nigeria.
Cooperators should cooperate with one another and form a group to be reckoned with by the government, its agencies and other organisations that are not in the cooperative movement.
This will make the government respect the views and thoughts of cooperators and act on them when making public statements or development plans.
4.
Cooperative organisation will be able to survive in the competitive environment-cooperative education will enable cooperative organisations and the individual business enterprises of the members to be able to compete with other types of business organisations.
There will also be healthy competition among cooperatives- which will enhance their growth, in general.
In addition, cooperative education will remove lack of business experience in cooperators.
It will enable cooperators internalise principles which are essential to efficient administration and management of cooperative ventures.
5.
To develop co-operative field staff that will be able to, successfully, carry out their duties on the field-through cooperative education, field staffs like cooperative assistants, the auditors, extension officers, area officers, zonal officers, and director of cooperatives will be able to carry out their duties, successfully.
They will be able to organise people, successfully, into forming and running cooperative societies of all types; they will also be able to supervise, audit books and records of cooperative societies.
They will also be able to conduct feasibility studies and, generally, promote the growth of these organisations.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss the objectives of cooperative education in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taken through the meaning of cooperative extension education, the objectives of cooperative extension, and the objectives of co-operative education in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the following: • meaning of cooperative extension education • the objectives of cooperative extension 13  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION • the objectives of co-operative education in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is cooperative extension education?
ii.
List the objectives of cooperative extension.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adelaja, M. A.
(1996).
“Cooperative Management and Supervision”.
In: Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.(Eds.).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Adeokun, O.A., Adedoyin, S.F.
& Ayodele, I.A.
(2003).
Essentials of Fisheries Extension.
Ibadan: Anointed Hands Ventures.
pp.
3 -7.
Ibitoye, S.J.
& Mundi, N.E.
(2004).
Essentials of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ankpa Rowis Printers.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludimu, O.L.
(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan: Asogun Publisher.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Rochdale Pioneers Museum (2002).Retrieved From http://www.manchester.com/tourist/rochdale Webster’s College Dictionary.
(1991).
New York: Randon House Inc. 14  COP 318 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION VERSUS FORMAL EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Cooperative Extension and Formal Education 3.1.1 Formal Cooperative Education 3.1.2 Informal Cooperative Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learned the objectives of cooperative education and extension in Nigeria.
In this unit, our focus will be on cooperative education versus formal education in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe cooperative extension and formal education • describe formal cooperative education • explain informal cooperative education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cooperative Extension and Formal Education Cooperative extension education differs from the formal system of education in many respects; take a look at the following.
a.
Cooperative extension education, unlike formal education, is voluntary.
The members can decide, at any point in time, to attend or not to attend.
They cannot be forced by the cooperative extension agent to attend.
In the formal school setting on the other hand, it is compulsory for the students to attend classes.
b.
Cooperative extension education can be carried out in any place.
There is no specific place where teaching takes place- like schools, in the formal system.
Teaching of members can take place on their farms, at the market place or in their respective 15  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION houses.
In the case of formal education, there is a specific place and time when students and their teachers meet for lessons.
c. There is no age limit or sex difference in cooperative extension education.
Learning is open to everybody in the community, whether old or young, male or female etc.
There is, often, a limit to the number of pupil admitted yearly in the formal system of education.
The number is based on age, sex and performance at qualifying examinations.
d. In the formal system of education, there are certain subjects that pupils must study and there is also syllabus guiding the teaching of these subjects.
This is not true of agricultural extension education.
There is no specific subject for each day and there is no laid down regulation as to how teaching should be carried e. There is no award of certificate in cooperative management, cooperative economics and management, cooperative and rural development and agric cooperative extension education.
Members/non-members are never tested on what they have been taught: while in the formal system, pupils are evaluated on what they have done and certificates are also awarded based on their performances.
f. In cooperative extension education, problems of members/non- members are taken to researchers for solution; while innovations from the researchers are also brought to members for adoption.
Such arrangement does not exist in formal education.
g. Cooperative extension education is directed towards solving practical problems identified by the members themselves.
The members/non-members must see the problems by themselves and must be eager to do something about it.
In the formal system, courses are designed for pupils.
It is the duty of the teacher to follow the course outline as laid down, without any serious consideration for the pupils’ interest.
3.1.1 Formal Cooperative Education Formal cooperative education is given in classrooms.
This includes training in cooperative colleges, polytechnics, universities etc.
; education is imparted through formal teaching.
3.1.2 Informal Cooperative Education This is given to cooperators in the course of cooperative meetings- where members ask questions and the cooperative staff/officer answers the questions.
It also include the education cooperators receive through workshops, conferences, radio and television programmes.
16  COP 318 MODULE 1 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Distinguish between cooperative education and Formal Education.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has exposed you to the differences between formal cooperative education, formal education, informal cooperative education and cooperative extension education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • Cooperative Extension and Formal Education - Directed towards solving practical problems identified by the members themselves • distinguish between cooperative education and Formal Education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain cooperative extension and formal education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adelaja, M. A.
(1996).
“Cooperative Management and Supervision”.
In: Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.(Eds.).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Adeokun, O.A., Adedoyin, S.F.
& Ayodele, I.A.
(2003).
Essentials of Fisheries Extension.
Ibadan: Anointed Hands Ventures.
pp.
3 -7.
Ibitoye, S.J.
& Mundi, N.E.
(2004).
Essentials of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ankpa Rowis Printers.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludimu, O.L.(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan: Asogun Publisher.
Oludimu, O.L & Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Webster’s College Dictionary.
(1991).
New York: Randon House Inc. 17  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION UNIT 4 THE PRINCIPLES OF COOPERATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Principles of Cooperative 3.2 The Rochdale Co-operative Principle 3.3 Principles of Cooperative Extension 3.4 Principles of Cooperative Extension Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learned cooperative extension and formal education.
Here, you will be exposed to principles of cooperative, Rochdale’s co- operative principle and principles of cooperative extension.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the principles of cooperative and Rochdale’s co-operative principle • describe the principles of cooperative extension and principles of cooperative extension education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Principles of Cooperative Here, let us consider the following.
a.
Association of persons- cooperative society is an association of persons, people who are ready to work together, who understand themselves, who are ready to solve their common problems jointly, who are socially fit to associate with one another.
It is when these are taken into consideration that the society can stand on its feet.
b.
Limited means- these persons who associate with one another are, usually, of limited means.
They are regarded as poor- but not people living in abject poverty that are so poor and will not be 18  COP 318 MODULE 1 able to make some capital contribution to the society.
For example, a cooperative society is not an association of beggars.
Intending members must be able to make financial contributions (like entrance fees, share capital etc.)
to the society.
‘Limited means’ connotes that they don't have enough money.
They are still looking for more money and they hope to get more by becoming members of a cooperative society.
c. Voluntarily joined together- cooperative societies are voluntary organisations.
People should not be forced, directly or indirectly, to join cooperative societies.
In some parts of the country, people are indirectly forced to form cooperative societies by asking them to join cooperative societies so that they will get fertilizer or loan from the government.
It then means that the people become members, not out of their own volition, but because the government wants them to join cooperative so as to benefit something.
Experience has shown that people will rush to join such a society to benefit from what largesse the government will give to them.
This may however be regarded as their own share of the national cake.
Apart from that, if this “gift” is no more forthcoming, then the members will disperse and the society will die a natural death.
d. Achievement of common economic end- the main aim of forming a cooperative society is to achieve economic goals; such economic goals include, increasing members ability to have more money, the opportunity of buying goods at a cheaper rate, getting interest friendly loan that can be used to expand business etc.
e. Democratically controlled- the business that is formed by the people is usually democratically controlled.
Democracy in a cooperative society connotes “one man one vote”.
Each member has only one vote to cast when a decision on matters affecting the business of the society is to be taken.
It is one man one vote, irrespective of each member's capital contribution to the society; irrespective of wealth, social or religious status.
A member has the right to vote only once when a decision is to be taken.
Apart from this, voting by proxy is not allowed.
In addition, the decision of the majority is final; and whatever is decided in a meeting (with the required quorum) remains binding on all members.
f. Equitable contribution- since cooperative Society is a business venture, intending members must make some capital contributions.
However, an individual’s capital contribution must be in relation to his/her financial ability.
In practice, minimum and maximum capital contribution is, usually, stated; example of this is share capital.
g. Accepting a fair share of risks and benefits- each member must contribute to the running of the society.
Cooperative society is 19  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION not like public limited liability company or joint stock company whereby the shareholder may not participate directly in the running of the business.
Cooperatives like other types of business ventures are interested in making surplus.
If at the end of the business year, the society makes surplus, each member will have a fair share of this benefit and smile.
On the other hand, if the society makes a loss, the members will share in the risks too.
h. Giving members adequate cooperative education- the cooperative assistant should endeavour to attend the meetings of the society, regularly.
He can pass a lot of information to the members when they are holding a general meeting.
Apart from this, he can organise seminars and workshops for members.
It is, usually, during meetings or training sessions that members can receive cooperative education.
He can use this opportunity to discuss their problems with them, answer their questions, and guide them aright by using the cooperative’s laws, principles of cooperation and the society’s bye-laws as guide.
Members should learn how to be good business men/women using business principles and methods.
i.
Business organisation A cooperative society is a business organisation.
It is not a humanitarian organisation like the Red Cross Society- where business principles are neglected.
For example, when a society wants to be humane, it may give "blanket loan" to majority of its members without regard to laid down rules.
Such society may collapse within a short time.
Business techniques and principles must be employed to run the activities of a cooperative society.
It must be run to make surplus and render maximum services to members.
Also, the society or the business belongs to the members and it should not be seen as a business set up by government.
3.2 The Rochdale Cooperative Principle The main thrust of Rochdale cooperative principles are as discussed below.
• Open, voluntary membership- membership of a co-operative society should be voluntary and without artificial restriction or any social, political, racial or religious discrimination, to all persons who can make use of its services and are willing to accept the responsibilities of membership.
• Democratic control- co-operative societies are democratic organisations.
Their affairs should be administered by persons elected or appointed in a manner agreed to by members.
20  COP 318 MODULE 1 Members should enjoy equal right of voting (one member, one vote); and all should participate in decisions affecting the society.
• Limited return ( if any) on equity capital- share capital should only receive a strictly limited rate of interest.
• Net surplus belongs to user-owners- the economic proceeds arising out of the operations of a society belong to the members of that society and should be distributed equitably.
This may be done by decision of the members as follows: • by provision for development of the co-operative • by provision of common services • by distribution among the members in proportion to their transactions with the society.
• Honest business practices- cooperatives should deal openly, honestly, and honourably with members and the general public.
• Ultimate aim is to advance common good- the ultimate aim of all cooperatives should be to aid the advancement of the common goal.
• Education- all co-operative societies should make provision for educating members, officers, employees and the general public on the principles and techniques of co-operation.
• Cooperation among cooperatives- all cooperatives, in order to best serve the interest of their members and their communities, should actively cooperate in every practical way with other cooperatives at local, national and international levels.
3.3 Principles of Cooperative Extension The principles of cooperative extension are the essential elements that guide the effective teaching of cooperative extension.
Failure to abide by these principles may lead to total failure of the cooperative extension programmes.
Some of these principles are as follows.
• Cooperative extension programmes should be based on the needs and interest of members.
Programmes should never be forced on members.
It is therefore essential for the cooperative extension agent to seek the opinion of members before introducing a new project to them.
• Closely linked to the above principle is that all cooperative extension programmes should be concerned with the welfare of the community.
If the programme is not related to their welfare it may not be readily accepted.
Farmers will be interested in any programme that touches on their well-being.
• Cooperative extension education is also based on the conditions that exist in the community.
All extension programmes must respect the norms and values of the people in the community.
21  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION Any cooperative extension activity that runs contrary to the critical belief of the people will not be accepted by the members.
Cooperative extension service also believes in the economic achievement of the members.
This also determines the types of projects that can be introduced in a particular area.
• One of the basic principles of cooperative extension is the use of local leaders in executing the cooperative extension programmes.
It is essential that cooperative extension agents should seek the cooperation of local leaders before introducing new ideas.
If the leaders accept the idea, it is believed that more than half of the people in the community will also accept it.
Using local leader has a multiplier effect on the success of cooperative extension programmes.
• It is also the principle of cooperative extension to involve the entire family in its programmes.
Members may be taught on how to increase their productivity; while for the men, for instance, their wives will be engaged in home management and the children will also be involved in youth development programmes.
The cooperative extension agent should allow the family to participate in the activities, rather than carrying them out on their behalf.
• All cooperative extension service should be in line with government policies and objectives.
Any cooperative extension programme that runs contrary to the wish of government may likely fail, even if the community is interested in it.
• Cooperative extension programme is concerned with the quality of the work done rather than quantity of the work.
The programmes are continuously evaluated to assess the progress made.
The pace of the work is largely determined by the economic level of the people.
It is therefore important that cooperative extension agent should not be too much in a hurry to complete the project as this can have adverse effect on future projects.
It is very essential for cooperative extension service to make use of any existing club or societies in the community.
Cooperative societies are good sources of approaching the local members.
Rural societies are agents of change and cooperative extension service should take advantage of any existing one in the rural area.
Cooperative extension agents should try, by all means, to avoid associations having political undertone.
3.4 Principles of Cooperative Extension Education Cooperative work is based upon some working principles, and the knowledge of these principles is necessary for a cooperative worker.
22  COP 318 MODULE 1 Some of these principles, in relation to agricultural extension, are mentioned below.
1.
Principle of adaptability- people differ from each other, one group differs from another group, and conditions also differ, from place to place.
An extension programme should be flexible, so that necessary changes can be made- whenever needed, to meet the varying conditions.
2.
Principle of cooperation- a cooperative is a venture.
It is a joint democratic enterprise in which rural people (for instance) cooperate with their village officials and other state officials to pursue a common course.
3.
Principle of cultural difference- cooperative work is based on the cultural background of the people with whom the work is done.
Improvement can only begin from the level of the people where they are.
This means that the extension worker has to know the level of the knowledge, & the skills of the people, methods and tools used by them, their customs, traditions, beliefs, values etc., before starting the cooperative programme.
4.
Principle of interest and need- cooperative work must be based on the needs and interests of the people.
These needs and interests differ from individual to individual, from village to village, from block to block, and from state to state; and therefore, there cannot be one programme for all people.
5.
Principle of participation- cooperative helps people to help themselves.
Good cooperative work is directed towards assisting rural families to work on solving their problems, rather than giving them ready-made solutions.
Actual participation and experience of people in these programmes create self-confidence; and in the process, they are able to learn more.
6.
Principle of satisfaction- the end-product of the effort of cooperative teaching is the satisfaction that comes to the farmer, his wife or youngsters as the result of solving a problem, meeting a need, acquiring a new skill or some other changes in behaviour.
Satisfaction is the key to success in cooperative work.
7.
The evaluation principle- cooperative also applies element and principles based upon the methods of social and management science; and so, there is the need for constant evaluation.
The effectiveness of the work is measured in terms of the changes in knowledge, skill, attitude and adoption behaviour of the people, but not merely in terms of achievement of physical targets.
8.
The grass roots principle of organisation- a group of rural people in the local community should sponsor extension work.
The programme should fit into local conditions.
The aim of organising the local group is to demonstrate the value of the new 23  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION practices or programmes so that more and more people will participate.
9.
The leadership principle- cooperative work is based on the full utilisation of local leadership.
The selection and training of local leaders to enable them to help to carry out cooperative work is essential to the success of the programme.
People have more faith in local leaders and they should be used to put across a new idea so that it is accepted with the least resistance.
10.
The ‘whole-family’ principle- cooperative work will have a better chance of success if extension workers have a ‘whole- family’ approach instead of piecemeal approach or separate and unintegrated approach.
Cooperative work is, therefore, for the whole joint effort of members- as a family ( i.e.
for male, female and the youth).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate the principles of cooperative extension.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the principles of cooperative, and Rochdale cooperative principles.
This unit has also exposed you to the principles of cooperative extension and the principles of cooperative extension education.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has so far demonstrated that for the right candidate to be In this unit, you have been exposed to the following: • the principles of cooperative, and the Rochdale co-operative principles • the principles of cooperative extension - the essential elements that guide the effective teaching of cooperative elements; and • the principles of cooperative extension education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT State the principles of cooperative, and the Rochdale cooperative principles.
24  COP 318 MODULE 1 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adelaja, M. A.
(1996).
“Cooperative Management and Supervision”.
In, Oludumu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.(Eds).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Adeokun, O.A., Adedoyin, S.F.
& Ayodele, I.A.
(2003).
Essentials of Fisheries Extension.
Ibadan: Anointed Hands Ventures.
pp.
3 -7.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2012).
Nigeria and International Cooperative.
The Rochdale Pioneers Museum (2002) – http://www.manchester.com/tourist/rochdale.
25  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION MODULE 2 Unit 1 Qualities and Role of a Good Cooperative Extension Worker Unit 2 Benefits and the Importance of Cooperative Education and Extension Unit 3 Cooperative Education in Nigeria Unit 4 Development of Cooperative in Nigeria Unit 5 Problems of Cooperative Education in Nigeria UNIT 1 QUALITIES AND ROLE OF A GOOD COOPERATIVE EXTENSION WORKER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Qualities of a Good Cooperative Extension Worker 3.2 The Role of Cooperative Extension Worker 3.3 Education duty of Cooperative Societies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt the principles of cooperative.
In this unit, you will be exposed to the qualities of a good cooperative extension worker.
The unit will also consider the roles of cooperative extension worker; and the education duty of the cooperative will also be given attention.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the qualities of a good cooperative extension worker • explain the roles of cooperative extension worker • highlight the education duty of the cooperative.
26  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Qualities of a Good Cooperative Extension Worker Certain criteria are very essential in the selection of the cooperative extension worker.
Any person lacking in any of these qualities should not be chosen as a cooperative extension agent.
The basic qualities that a good cooperative extension worker should possess are as follows.
a.
Educational qualification- it is essential that a cooperative extension worker must have a basic knowledge of the subject matter.
The qualification required will depend on the level of entry into the profession.
At the administrative level, the Cooperative Extension Officer (CEO) normally, must have, at least, a first degree in cooperative or related courses.
Close to him is the Cooperative Superintended (CS) who is, normally, an HND holder in cooperative or related courses.
At the community level are the Cooperative Assistants (CA), who are normally OND holders in cooperative or related courses.
The last set of the people are the Field Officers (FO), who may be school certificate holders or an experienced primary school holder.
Field officers should undergo some training before they are allowed into the profession.
b.
Ability to speak the local language- this quality is very essential for cooperative extension worker at the community level.
About 90 percent of the local farmers/non farmers are illiterates.
They cannot read, write or speak English language; now, to communicate effectively with the farmers/non-farmers, the cooperative extension worker must be able to speak their dialects.
However, this quality is not important for the administrative officer as they are not directly linked with the farmers.
c. Experience of the cooperative extension worker- experience, people say, is the best teacher.
The experience acquired on the job will, largely, depend on the age and years of service of the cooperative extension worker.
Through experience, the cooperative extension worker will be able to find solution to some of the farmers’ problems without necessarily referring the case to the highest authority.
He will also be able to tackle most of the farmers’ problems in the ways that will satisfy them.
d. Passion for the job- a cooperative extension worker must be highly interested in the job before he can perform efficiently.
Some extension agents take the job, probably, because there is no other opportunity opened to them.
This group of cooperative extension workers may not be committed to the job as expected of them.
27 CO P 318 MODULE 2 e. Attitude towards the job- the cooperative extension worker must show positive attitude towards this job.
He must be punctual and prepared to stay in the rural area.
It is common to find cooperative extension agent posted to rural areas living in urban centers in order to enjoy electricity and pipe-borne water.
As a result of this, some may absent themselves from duty for up to two or three days in a week.
f. Attitude towards members- the cooperative extension agent must not place himself too high above the members.
He should feel free to mix and eat with them.
He should not be ashamed to associate with the members of their families.
He must also be ready to abide by the norms and values of the people.
It is only when this is done that the members will be prepared to receive his message.
The members will, equally, be happy to narrate their problems to him.
g. Personal character- generally, the cooperative extension worker must be somebody of good behaviour.
He must be respectful and obedient.
He must always have patience so as to be able to cope with illiterate members.
He must be hardworking, tolerant and be prepared to work for 24 hours every day.
3.2 The Role of Cooperative Extension Worker a.
As an educator- the cooperative extension agent plays a vital role in the education of the members and their families.
The members rely on the cooperative extension agent for solution to all their educational problems.
This is why it is essential for cooperative extension workers to have some basic educational qualification to be able to cope with the demand of the members.
He teaches the members, generally, on how to raise their standard of living through their own efforts.
b.
As a link between researchers and the members- cooperative extension workers are largely responsible for the transmission of research findings to cooperative members.
All research findings, especially, in the field of agriculture, cooperative and agribusiness are simplified by the cooperative extension workers for the members.
In the same process all the problems of the members regarding production and co operative activities are taken to the researchers.
Without the help of cooperative extension workers, there will be communication gap between the researchers and the members.
c. As a change agent- prior to the introduction of intensive cooperative extension service in Nigeria, Members were known to be reluctant to change from their traditional system of business activities.
Nowadays, through the help of cooperative extension workers, most members realised that before they can progress in 28  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION life it is inevitable for them to change to the modern techniques.
The success is largely attributed to the role played by cooperative extension workers.
As a result of this, the members have been able to, substantially, improve on their standard of living through increased productivity.
d. As a supervisor- cooperative extension agents do not, merely, pass information to members; they also make sure that the information is carried out to the letter.
This is possible through direct supervision of the members.
The members are guided by the cooperative extension workers at all stages of the project.
The projects are never carried out, directly, by the cooperative extension worker, what they normally do is to guide the members on how it should be done especially through demonstration or pilot projects.
e. As a programme planner- this role is being performed mainly at the administrative level.
It is the duty of the cooperative extension officer to plan all the projects to be carried out each year and how it should be done.
The plan is based on the needs and aspirations of the people concerned.
3.3 Education Duty of Cooperative Societies In Nigeria, majority of the members of cooperative societies are illiterates.
Hence, they are not good businessmen.
Before they can be good businessmen they have to be educated.
If the cooperative society is taken to be a business venture, it has to be run like a business before the members can be successful.
To be able to carry out their educational duty, the cooperative assistant needs to be educated.
He must possess, at least, a secondary school certificate before he can be employed as a cooperative assistant into the relevant department of cooperatives.
After this, he has to undergo training in one of the cooperative colleges for an academic session.
If he is successful, he becomes a qualified cooperative assistant and a holder of a certificate in cooperative studies.
It is after this course that he is qualified to be an educator of cooperative societies.
He would have, at this stage, been trained to be a trainer.
He would have got a good knowledge of the principles of cooperative business, as well as cooperative laws and regulations, and the bye-laws of cooperative societies.
He should also have a good accounting knowledge.
Apart from this training at the cooperative college, he must be having constant training, from time to time, in form of refresher courses, workshops, seminars etc.
The Cooperative assistant may also enjoy in service training from time to time.
He/she may go for further studies in the polytechnic, university or cooperative college to enable him/her perform his job better in the field.
Whenever the cooperative assistant is 29 CO P 318 MODULE 2 well equipped to carry out the educational duties, effectively, he must channel the educational activities along the following lines.. a.
Education of Members The cooperative assistant must teach members of the societies allocated to him to be able to read and understand the bye-laws of the society.
They must also learn to use the bye-laws to run their society.
The members must be educated on how to run the society effectively, by utilising business principles.
They must be taught what their rights and duties in the society are.
He must teach the members how to hold meetings, how to discuss effectively in meetings, how to take decisions in meetings and the importance of meetings.
They must also be taught how to choose their officers and committee members.
They should understand that they must choose capable officers who are ready to work for the society selflessly and in line with the aims and objectives of the members.
The members of the society should also be taught to be able to discuss and evaluate reports on their society's business.
They should be able to formulate policies which will eventually lead them to making good decisions for the betterment of their organisation.
b.
Officers of the society The officers of the society-the president, secretary, treasurer, vice president, members of committees should know what their duties and responsibilities to the society are and how to carry out these duties, effectively.
This is necessary since they run the society according to the mandate given to them by them by the members of the society.
It is important for them to be well educated since any mistake made by these officers will be detrimental to the success of the society.
c. Employees of the society The employees of the society are not members, nevertheless, since they work for the society, they need to receive education on the organisation and members of the society they are working with.
The employees should know what the organisation is all about, the characteristics differentiate it from other business organisations; they should also know the principles of cooperation, the cooperative law and the bye-laws of the society.
They should know also how the organisation operates and how they can perform their duties, effectively, in such an environment.
The employees should not be selected on be basis of their social relationship with any of the members but on their qualifications, experience and their foreseen ability to perform the duties that will be assigned to them diligently.
Apart from 30  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION making the right selection, they should be trained and retrained from time to time.
It is also important that the employees should be well remunerated so that they can decide to work with the organisation for a long time.
The idea of losing experienced employees as a result of low remuneration will be minimised if members are well remunerated.
This will reduce the urge to defraud the society.
d. The members of the public The cooperative assistant needs to educate members of the public on what a cooperative society is all about and the benefits people can derive from it, how to form a cooperative society, how to run and administer it etc.
This action will give more enlightenment about cooperation to the members of the public and as a result they will embrace it and there will be tremendous increase in the number of societies that will be formed in the area which the officer is supervising.
e. Teaching the officers their duties The secretary should be taught his/her duties.
This is more pronounced where a qualified secretary has not been employed.
He should be taught how to write minutes of meetings, how to post transactions of the society into the appropriate books of accounts and records, how to prepare the final accounts of the society etc.
The president and the treasurer must also be taught how to perform their duties; they have to know the penalties they will face if they do not carry out their duties as laid down in the byelaws.
It should be noted that the secretary is the pivot on which the society rotates; also the secretary must be up and doing, efficient and hardworking.
f. Free training programmes Members of registered cooperative societies enjoy free training programmes from the government or its agencies in the past.
They are, usually, given handouts, writing materials free.
At times they are given free food and accommodation in expensive hotels.
However, if the economic situation in the country is bad, free training programmes for members will reduce drastically or even stop.
The field, in some cases, had been taken over by non- governmental cooperative consultants who offer training to members at a fee.
In some areas where this does not happen at all, members lack substantial cooperative training.
Even when some cooperative departments organise training programmes for members, these days, trainees are charged some training fees.
31 CO P 318 MODULE 2 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate the education duty of a cooperative.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you learnt the qualities of a good cooperative extension worker.
The unit also considered the role of cooperative extension worker, education duty of the cooperative; these concepts will enhance your understanding of the operations of cooperative societies.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • the qualities of a good cooperative extension worker • the role of a cooperative extension worker • the education duty of cooperatives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Explain the qualities of a good cooperative extension worker.
ii.
Discuss the role of cooperative extension worker.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludimu, O.L.
(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan :Asogun Publisher .
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
32  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION UNIT 2 BENEFITS AND THE IMPORTANCE OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Benefits of Cooperative Education 3.2 The Importance of Cooperative Education and Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you were exposed to the qualities of a good cooperative extension worker.
In this unit, you will be learning about the benefits of cooperative education, and the importance of cooperative education and extension 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list the benefits of cooperative education • highlight the importance of cooperative education and extension.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Benefits of Cooperative Education These will be examined in relation to certain stakeholders involved in the ‘cooperative processes.
a.
Benefits of cooperative education for students • Students have the opportunity for learning useful employment skills on real jobs under actual working conditions.
• Interest in classroom work is stimulated by the application of academic and job related learning skills to job situations.
33 CO P 318 MODULE 2 • As wage earners, students develop understanding, appreciation, and respect for work and workers.
• The ability to get and hold a job helps young people develop a mature and realistic concept of self.
• The transition from school to employment is made easier.
• The ability of the student to develop a post-high school plan for employment and continuing education is enhanced.
b.
Benefits of cooperative education for the school • A school that conducts cooperative on-the-job training is able to extend educational opportunities that are beyond its own physical and financial resources.
• Interaction with professionals outside the school environment is provided in the training of young people.
• Teachers, guidance counselors, and school administrators are provided with improved opportunities to keep in touch with changing employment conditions.
• Cooperative on-the-job training is a living demonstration of the concept that education is indeed a ‘community- wide’ partnership.
c. Benefits of cooperative education for the community • The number of young people making a successful transition from school to work is • increased, thereby adding to the number of economically productive members of society.
• A continuing pattern of school-community partnerships is developed.
• Training experiences through cooperative education help to improve the community’s pattern of job stability by giving students employment skills and civic competence.
d. Benefits of cooperative education for the employer/training sponsor • Employers are assisted in analysing jobs and developing training outlines.
• The private sector is provided with opportunities to take an active part in the education and career preparation of students in the local community.
• Students are prepared to work in their own localities under supervision, following the methods of a specific local employer.
• Classroom instruction gives student-learners a more thorough understanding of job related theory and knowledge.
34  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.2 The Importance of Cooperative Education and Extension Education is very important, no doubt about this; cooperative education and extension service will help members and non-members to live a better life.
Cooperative education and extension does make a remarkable impact on one’s personality.
Getting proper cooperative education, and finally earning a professional degree prepares an individual to make far reaching contributions in the area of business and the society at large.
Cooperative education prepares members to be able to do something constructive in near future.
Cooperative education involves gathering of knowledge in whatever aspects.
It helps a person to make the best of his/her mind and spirit.
Cooperative education plays a vital role in the personal growth and the social development of a member.
With the sense of urgency of cooperative education and extension among all members, many nations have already come up with their ideas in maximising literacy and awareness on self help among all.
Spreading the awareness of cooperative education has become quite a challenging factor in many developing countries.
In spite of that, there are a number of cases where almost all the people get the privilege to get educated On account of the high importance of cooperative education and extension among members, steps taken by respective governing bodies have eventually led to high literacy rate in many regions.
Cooperative education and extension support member with all that is needed to attain a proper lifestyle.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate the importance of cooperative education in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taken through the benefits of cooperative education-in relation to the stakeholders involved in the cooperative process.
You also learn the importance of cooperative education and extension.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • the benefits of cooperative education extension • the importance of cooperative education and extension.
35 CO P 318 MODULE 2 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the benefits of cooperative education extension 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ibitoye, S.J.
& Mundi, N.E.
(2004).
Essentials of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ankpa Nigeria :Rowis Printers.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludimu, O.L.
(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan :Asogun Publisher .
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
Oludimu.
O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running A More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode :Triumph Book Publisher.
36  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION UNIT 3 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 History of Cooperative Education in Nigeria 3.1.1 Other Institutions Involved in Cooperative Education Nigeria 3.1.2 The Department of Cooperative at the Federal Ministry of Agriculture 3.2 Overseas Institutions that have contributed to Cooperative Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last unit focused on the benefits and importance of cooperative education and extension.
This unit will consider cooperative education in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss cooperative education in Nigeria • state other institutions that are involved in cooperative education Nigeria • highlight the overseas institutions that have contributed to cooperative education in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 History of Cooperative Education in Nigeria The history of cooperative education in Nigeria can be traced to the appointment of Mr. C. F. Strickland; who looked into how cooperative societies contributed to the overall development of cooperative in Nigeria, in the year 1893.
Strickland’s report was submitted to the colonial Government 1894.
At the period, majority of the members of cooperative societies were either illiterates or semi-literates and they were expected to form as many cooperatives as possible, which should 37 CO P 318 MODULE 2 play a great role in the development of both urban and rural Areas- despite the circumstances and limitations.
Cooperatives are business ventures and any business that is devoid of education and training will not develop well.
A cooperative organisation has to be managed well, then proper cooperative education will be inevitable.
The colonial government and later, succeeding indigenous administration emphasised on education for civil servants i.e.
the director of cooperative department and his support staff.
In order to achieve this, a Cooperative Staff Training School was set up in 1943 which was to train registrars of cooperatives, cooperative inspectors and the employees of the cooperative movement under supervision of Mr. C. Bateye; who was then an assistant registrar.
The aim was that these officers will train members of cooperative societies who were in dire need of cooperative education.
This school is what is today known as the Federal Cooperative College, Ibadan.
It was converted into a college in 1957, following the recommendation of a World Bank Mission that visited Nigeria.
The school trained cooperative personnel from other African countries like Ghana, Sierra Leone and Gambia.
Apart from training inspectors and auditors at that time, the college also put up refresher courses for executives and members of the cooperative movement.
Later, the college ran certificate course in cooperative studies for newly employed inspectors and auditors.
There is also a diploma course, which is for newly employed registrars of cooperatives in the cooperative department.
The two courses, which were accompanied by practical field work, ran for a year each.
On 1st April 1976, the college was taken over by the then military administration.
This was to ensure greater effectiveness in the development of cooperative movement in Nigeria.
In addition to that of Ibadan mentioned above, the federal government also took over other existing colleges.
These colleges are the Cooperative College, Awgu- now in Oji-River (Enugu State), and Zaria which has moved its permanent site to Kaduna, Kaduna State.
The directives of the federal government empowering state governments to establish their own state cooperative college led to the establishment of many state cooperative colleges- some of such colleges are listed below: • Ondo state cooperative college, Akure • Oyo state cooperative college, Oyo • Imo state cooperative college, Orlu • Kaduna state cooperative institute, Ikara • Edo state cooperative college, Benin City • Lagos state cooperative college, Agege, Lagos.
38  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION These colleges run certificate and diploma courses in cooperative studies.
A number of interesting developments have taken place in relation to the spread of cooperative education.
Polytechnics and Colleges of Technology now run Ordinary National Diploma (OND) and Higher National Diploma (HND) courses in cooperative studies.
Examples of these are Kwara Polytechnic, Ilorin (Department of social work, administration and cooperatives), Institute of management and technology, Enugu, (cooperative studies department), Kaduna polytechnic, (department of social services and cooperatives), Kano state polytechnic, (school of social and rural development), and the Federal cooperative colleges, in Ibadan, Kaduna and Oji River.
A number of universities are now offering undergraduate and postgraduate programmes in cooperative studies.
The University of Nigeria, Nsuka had of late upgraded its centre for cooperatives and rural development to an institute; National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) runs undergraduate and postgraduate diploma.
Nnamdi Azikwe university offer undergraduate and postgraduate courses in cooperative economics and management; while Olabisi Onabanjo university runs first degree and masters degree in cooperative and business management.
Some other Universities have researchers and professors who are doing some research and consultation in cooperatives; these universities are the University of Ibadan, Obafemi Awolowo university, Ile Ife, Federal university of technology, Akure, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, and Federal university of agriculture, Abeokuta etc.
3.1.1 Other Institutions Involved in Cooperative Education Nigeria Apart from the institutions mentioned above, there are a lot of other institutions involved in cooperative education.
There is the Cooperative Research Institute in Abuja, which is involved in short courses in agricultural management and training; there is the Federal department of agricultural cooperatives/International labour organisation/United nations development programme project which offers short courses in management in its Centre for rural development and cooperatives.
The State cooperative federations also engage mostly in non-formal training of secretaries, printing of cooperative posters, textbooks and leaflets.
Other activities include organising seminars, workshops, and teaching rudiments of accounts.
The national apex of the cooperatives in Nigeria, the Cooperative federation of Nigeria limited was involved mainly in non-formal 39 CO P 318 MODULE 2 cooperative education.
It was involved in sponsoring authors who write textbooks on cooperative; it organises seminars, workshops, and conferences.
It also links Nigerian cooperatives with other cooperative organisations overseas.
Some Cooperatives have, in the past, gone for further studies in overseas countries through Cooperative federation of Nigeria.
The Agricultural Rural Management Training Institute (ARMTI), in Ilorin, engages in cooperative education.
It also conducts research in cooperatives.
The activities of freelance consultants in cooperative education cannot be left out.
They liaise with the cooperative departments and the cooperative federations in their respective states to organise workshops, conferences, seminars for cooperative organisations at various levels.
There is also the Agriculture, Extension and Research Liaison Services (AERLS), Zaria; this organisation is involved in the production of booklets on agriculture and cooperatives.
The departments of cooperatives both at the state and federal levels are active in contributing to the growth of cooperatives through cooperative education; at the federal level, this is the Federal department of cooperatives.
At the state level, the department of cooperatives is in various ministries.
Some are in Ministry of agriculture and cooperatives, while some others are in the Ministry of commerce, industry and cooperatives.
These departments of cooperatives train cooperative assistants who visit and educate members at primary, secondary and tertiary levels.
They also train other members of staff.
They organise workshops and seminars; also, they finance cooperative training institutions like the state cooperative colleges.
Another institution that has contributed, immensely, to the development of cooperative through education is the NIG/EEC Cooperative Education Project, initially based in Ibadan, but later moved to Abuja.
It had two training units.
These were the Basic Education and Promotion Unit (BEPU) and the Curriculum Methods and Materials Unit (CMMU).
BEPU was mainly responsible for grassroots education and supply of training equipment to federations, while CMMU trained managers, trainers, executives of cooperative organisations etc.
The National Association of Cooperative Credit Union of Nigeria (NACCUN) also contributed to the development of cooperatives (especially, thrift and credit societies) through cooperative education.
They engaged in printing and distribution of newsletters, carried out risk management programmes, organised seminars and consultancy services for cooperatives.
The organisation also publishes books like model accounting manual for Cooperatives.
40  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.1.2 The Department of Cooperative at the Federal Ministry of Agriculture The functions of the department of cooperative at the Federal ministry of agriculture are as itemised below.
• Co-ordination of inter-governmental activities on cooperatives • Formulation of broad economic policy on financing and developing cooperatives; and integration of cooperative policies into national development plans.
• Cooperative education and training at the national level and relations with appropriate Nigerian and foreign educational institutions.
• Co-ordination of Inter-African and other international cooperative matters including relations with international cooperative organisations and specialised agencies of the United Nations.
• Relating with global central labour organisation and similar bodies, especially on matters relating to jointly sponsored welfare schemes.
• Co-ordination of research into problems on cooperatives.
• Co-ordination of inter-state cooperative activities.
• Regulating the activities of national cooperative apexes and societies • Compilation of information on all matters relating to cooperatives and preparation of reports on cooperative development in Nigeria.
3.2 Overseas Institutions which have contributed to Cooperative Education in Nigeria The under listed institutions in overseas countries have contributed to the development of cooperative education in Nigeria.
In many cases, the cooperative institutions give scholarships to members of cooperative societies through the government or through the Cooperative Federation of Nigeria (CFN) to study in these institutions; a few others who have benefited from the institutions are sponsored by organisations in Nigeria.
The institutions are as follows.
• Coady International Institute, Nova Scotia, Canada.
• International Cooperative Training Centre, Jiloviste.
Czech.
• Institute for Cooperation in Developing Countries, Marburg,Germany.
• Institute for Development of Agricultural Cooperatives, Japan.
41 CO P 318 MODULE 2 • International Institute for Development, Cooperatives and Labour Studies, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
• RVB, Netherlands International Institute for Management, Maastricht, Netherlands.
• International Cooperative Training Centre, Loughborough, United Kingdom.
• University Centre for Cooperatives, University of Wisconsin, U.S.A. • Moscow Cooperative Institute, Moscow, Russia.
• L. O.
International Centre for Advanced Technical and vocational Training, Turin, Italy.
• Swedish Cooperative Centre, Stockholm, Sweden etc.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate the institutions that are involved in cooperative education Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been taken through the history of cooperative education in Nigeria.
The unit also considered the institutions that are involved in cooperative education Nigeria, as well as the overseas institutions that have contributed to cooperative education in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • the growth and development of cooperative education in Nigeria • the institutions that are involved in cooperative education Nigeria • overseas institutions that have contributed to cooperative education in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss the growth of cooperative education in Nigeria.
ii.
Highlight the Overseas institutions that have contributed to cooperative education in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, M.E.
(1982).
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
Nigeria: Rowis Printers, pp 3-9.
42  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION Benor, D. & Harriston, J.O.
(1977).
Extension: The Training and Visit System.
Washington D. C.: World Bank.
Ibitoye, S.J.
& Mundi, N.E.
(2004).
Essentials of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ankpa Rowis Printers.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludmu, O.L.
(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan: Asogun Publisher.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2012), Nigeria and International Cooperative.
NOUN.
Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
43 CO P 318 MODULE 2 UNIT 4 DEVELOPMENT OF COOPERATIVE IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Development of Cooperative in Nigeria 3.1.1 Pre-Independence Development 3.1.2 Post- Independence Development 3.2 Agricultural Extension in Nigeria 3.3 Reforming Cooperative Education and Extension in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt about the growth and development of cooperative education in Nigeria; you were also exposed to the institutions (including those outside the shores of Nigeria) that have been involved in the development of cooperative education in Nigeria.
In this unit we shall discuss the development of cooperative in Nigeria, as well as reforming cooperative education and extension in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the development of cooperative in Nigeria • describe pre and post-independence development • explain the reforming cooperative education and extension in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Development of Cooperative in Nigeria The practice of cooperative in Nigeria started as far back as 1907. Notable among the earliest cooperative societies was Agege Planters Union (A.P.U.)
- made up of cocoa producers.
About four hundred (400) cocoa farmers came together to ensure that cocoa was the major farm 44  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION produce earning foreign exchange for Nigeria.
The development of cooperative in Nigeria is synonymous to the development of agriculture.
The development of agriculture in the country also follows the same pattern with the historical development of the country.
This development can be grouped into two: a. pre-independence development b. post-independence development 3.1.1 Pre-Independence Development Government’s involvement in a purposeful agricultural and cooperative extension development started with the colonisation of the country by the British.
The main purpose then was to increase the agricultural production of the export crops.
This was aimed at getting a ready source of raw materials for their industries in Britain.
As a result of this, all extension works at that time were directed towards the development of export crops.
The period between 1890 and 1905 can be described as a period of trial and error.
Many projects were tried, but all failed.
The colonial masters, based on the report of Mr. Strickland, enacted a cooperative legislation in 1935.
He also proposed and actually drafted the relevant ordinance and regulations.
Later the government saw the need to promote savings habit among the low-income people.
With another report which Mr Strickland submitted in 1936, Co-operative Thrift and Credit Societies (C.T.C.S) were formed and it spread all over eastern and western Nigeria.
More so, the enactment of the ordinance engendered rapid development of cooperatives- since the enabling framework has been provided.
Even though some of the early cooperatives collapsed for a number of reasons, the mistakes having been learnt, a lot more was formed, especially after Nigeria’s independence 1960.
From independence to the present, concerted efforts are being made to bring cooperatives to every community.
As more states are created, so also cooperatives are bought nearer to the grass roots.
Four years after government involvement in the cooperative societies, the cooperative society’s ordinance was passed in 1935.
From then, registered cooperative societies started to receive government recognition and financial assistance.
The period between 1951 and 1960- before independence was a period of major landmarks in the development of agriculture and extension in Nigeria.
The initial achievement of the government on cooperatives was the promulgation of cooperative laws and regulations on the 6th February, 1936.
In 1937, Gbedun cooperative produce marketing society became 45 CO P 318 MODULE 2 the first cooperative society to be the first registrar of cooperative societies in Nigeria.
After these developments, several cooperative societies and unions were formed and registered by the government through the Western ministry of trade, industry and cooperative.
In 1953, The Cooperative bank plc was established by the cooperative movement to provide for financial needs of members of cooperative societies in Nigeria.
A sum of one million pounds (part of the proceeds realised from cocoa export) was approved for the take off of the bank by the late Chief Obafemi Awolowo- the then Premier of the western region.
For instance in 1952, as a result of constitutional changes, three regions were created, namely- northern, western and eastern regions.
Separate regional Ministries of agriculture were also created.
This also led to the creation of a separate extension units under the ministries.
Due to this major reorganisation, extension service was given a prominent role to play in the education of farmers and the supply of essential farming materials.
Departments for cooperative development were created in the appropriate ministries and this helped in the promotion of cooperatives in all parts of Nigeria.
The Cooperative federation of Nigeria was formed in 1945 and formally registered in 1967.
It is the national apex organisation which represents the entire cooperative movement in Nigeria.
3.1.2 Post-Independence Development Nigeria got her independence in October, 1960.
Three years after the independence, midwest region was created in 1963 and this brought the number of ministries of agriculture and departments of cooperative to four.
As a result of the regional creation of the ministries of agriculture and cooperative, development of agriculture and cooperative became a regional concern.
Each region made several attempts to make use of all the agricultural and cooperative potentials in their areas; such attempts included the establishment of rural farm settlement projects, agricultural financing agencies, marketing boards, cooperative societies etc.
Most of these projects could not succeed due to political and financial problems.
However, they were able to make significant impacts on agricultural and cooperative development, especially in the area of extension.
More purposeful agricultural programmes were initiated during the 1970s, all aiming at increasing agricultural productivity.
Notable among them were the National Accelerated Food Production Project (NAFPP), Agricultural Extension and Research Liaison Services (AERLS), River Basin and Rural Development Authorities, Operation Feed the Nation (OFN) etc.
1980s witnessed further development of Agriculture and extension.
During the change to civilian rule between 1979 and 1983, 46  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION the Green Revolution Programme was launched.
This programme could not succeed for political reasons.
Despite all the transformation, the country has witnessed in the agricultural sector and cooperative, the Country continues to experience food shortage and the extension unit of the sector is still at the mercy of our policy makers.
3.2 Reforming Cooperative Education and Extension in Nigeria Some of the strategies that could be adopted to improve the effectiveness of cooperative education and extension in Nigeria and to ameliorate the above problems include the following.
a.
As a way of encouraging the cooperative extension staff working in the rural areas, in-service training should be granted to them after two years of active service.
This is essential for them to increase their knowledge and also to be able to compare class work with field experience.
There is also the serious need to train all cooperative extension staff in the operation and maintenance of modern farm tools.
Farmers/members who may wish to adopt these modern tools may eventually call on the cooperative extension staff for help.
This demands that cooperative extension staff must be well informed about the operation and maintenance of this equipment before they can render any advice.
b.
The present ratio of cooperative extension workers to farming families is too high for effective coverage; this is worsened by lack of mobility.
It is therefore highly recommended that government should embark on urgent recruitment of cooperative extension staff to reduce this ratio.
In addition to employment of more staff, vehicle loan should be given to all cooperative extension staffs serving in rural areas.
Most of the roads linking the rural areas should also be graded, periodically, to provide easy accessibility to these villages.
c. The provision of essential facilities for cooperative extension staffs, especially, those serving in the rural areas is very important.
Such facilities include prompt payment of salary, leave grant, promotion, in-service training and the like.
These facilities when provided promptly and regularly will motivate the extension staff to stay in the field.
The supply of resources such as audio-visual aids, improved seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, farm tools etc., should also be timely.
Farm inputs should be supplied at subsidised prices.
It will be meaningless for extension agents to advocate the use of these inputs when the farmers cannot afford to buy them.
d. One of the identified problems militating against effective performance of extension service in Nigeria is the lack of capital 47 CO P 318 MODULE 2 and credit facilities.
When this credit is granted to a few privileged members/farmers, they often misused it by using it for the provision of social amenities and other things that are against the purpose for which the loan is granted.
One way of solving this problem is for the banks to engage on supervised credit.
In addition to this, some of the money can be given to farmers in form of inputs.
The credit guarantee scheme should be the only condition for granting loan to members/farmers.
The members/farmers on their own part should not see the loan as a way of sharing the national cake.
The money should be judiciously used for cooperative agricultural production.
Formation of cooperative movement will enable the members/farmers to reap economy of scale.
e. To improve the effectiveness of cooperative extension service in Nigeria and also to eliminate the unnecessary bureaucracy of the civil service, extension service should have autonomous board.
That will enable the staff to operate more efficiently.
This may also enable the extension service to operate at national level since the board will have offices throughout the states Performance evaluation of the board will also be easier.
f. There is also the need to introduce adult education for the illiterate members/farmers.
This will enable them to read and write at least in their major local language.
Certificate should be awarded at the end of the course, which should be the pre- requisite for receiving government assistance in farm operation.
If the level of illiteracy is reduced, adoption process will be faster.
This is because most farmers/members will be able to read and understand any leaflet or poster given to them.
Research findings sent to members/farmers should be those that are profitable to the members/farmers, simple to adopt and must not be in conflict with the existing farming and business practices in the country.
These conditions can be met by carrying out field trials under different soil and climatic condition.
The trial should be carried out under the supervision of the cooperative extension agents in those areas.
It will also include the variation between the expected and the observed results.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Enumerate ways of reforming cooperative education and extension in Nigeria.
48  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the development of cooperative in Nigeria.
You have also been taken through the dynamics of, pre and post- independence activities relating to the development of cooperatives.
The unit also considered ways of reforming cooperative education and extension in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • development of cooperative in Nigeria( pre and post- independence development activities) • ways of reforming cooperative education and extension in Nigeria .
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the development of cooperative in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING David, A. S. (1998).
Essential Information on Cooperative Credit Societies.
Nigeria: Dac-Print Publishers, pp 4-78.
Epetimehin, F.M.(2006).
Understanding the Dynamics of Cooperatives.
Nigeria, pp 5-67.
Fred, E. (2006).
Introduction to Cooperatives.
National Open University of Nigeria, pp1-6.
Lawal, K. A.A. & Oludimu, O. L. (2011).
Management Theory, Practices and Focus.
Ibadan: Asogun, pp 76-100.
Oludimu, O. L. & Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Triumph Ijebu Ode: Book Publishers, pp 45-90.
Owojuyigbe, S. (2007).
Cooperative Administration and Fieldwork in Nigeria.
(3rd ed.).
Ibadan: Samlolly Publishers, pp 56-105.
Umebai, E.E.
(2008).
Rural Development and Management.
National Open University of Nigeria, pp.36-44.
49 CO P 318 MODULE 2 UNIT 5 PROBLEMS OF COOPERATIVE EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of Cooperative Education in Nigeria 3.2 Problems of Cooperative and Agricultural Extension in Nigeria 3.3 Suggested Solutions to Problems of Cooperative Education in Nigeria 3.4 Regulations and Guidelines for Cooperative Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt the growth and development of cooperative in Nigeria.
In this unit, our focus will be on the problems of cooperative education in Nigeria; the unit will also come up with suggested solutions to problems of cooperative education in Nigeria 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the problems of cooperative education in Nigeria • state the possible solutions to problems of cooperative education in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problems of Cooperative Education in Nigeria Cooperative education has many problems which make it difficult for the objectives mentioned earlier to be realised.
The problems are as follows.
50  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION • Too many cooperative training institutions- with some operating below capacity One of the problems is that there are too many cooperative training institutions in Nigeria.
The fact still remains that very little fraction of the Nigerian populace embrace ‘cooperation’.
Hence, embarking on cooperative education via formal cooperative institutions- in excess of demand is a wasteful exercise.
The opportunity given to each state to establish its cooperative college (if it so wishes) had contributed to the fact that some colleges admit students far less than what they require in an academic year.
In some cases also, many of such institutions may not haw a single student in an academic year because of non-patronage.
While there is low patronage in some cooperative institutions, some receive applications far more than what they can admit.
The latest development is that the certificate course in cooperatives in all cooperative colleges has been discontinued.
This is so because some of these schools/collages are ill equipped and cannot cater for the needs of students/learners.
The few that are equipped admit few numbers of students far beneath their capacity.
• Cooperative textbooks are difficult to come by Nigeria is, at the moment, witnessing a period when indigenous textbook are few, because only few Nigerian authors write on cooperatives.
When they write, they have little or no fund to publish them.
Also, foreign cooperative text books are difficult to get, and when they are available, they are very expensive.
In addition to the above, most cooperative institutions have poorly equipped libraries.
Books in many of the libraries are old and outdated.
To compound these problems, many primary cooperative societies, secondary societies and even the apex organisations have no libraries or shelves on cooperative books.
May I state here that majority of the cooperators in Nigeria cannot read and write in English which most of these textbooks are written.
This is a great hindrance to cooperative education and the greatest hindrance is that Nigerians don't have a reading culture.
• Few qualified trainers in cooperative subjects/shortage of manpower Qualified trainers in cooperative subjects are few relative to the demand for them.
In many cases, people that are not qualified to train or impart cooperative education are doing so presently because there are insufficient trainers in Nigeria.
51 CO P 318 MODULE 2 • Weak position of cooperative unions and federation Cooperative members’ education is expected to be the main responsibility of the state cooperative unions/federations.
However, many have neither the funds nor the personnel to ensure effective execution of this programme.
• Shortage of fund Funds provided for membership education is usually a paltry sum and therefore inadequate to sponsor education programmes adequately.
Though, the cooperative regulation stipulates that all cooperative societies must keep part of their surplus as education fund so as to use it to train their members; in many cases, this education fund is only on paper and cannot be easily accessed or converted into cash.
The result of this is that the cooperative society cannot use the money to train their members.
Apart from the above mentioned fact, some cooperative do not make surplus at all let alone have a reserved funds for educating members.
• Attitude of members Many members sometimes give themselves and others the impression that they have joined cooperative to please the government.
At times cooperatives are regarded as government organisation to be funded and administered by the government.
In another vein, people are encouraged or educated to form or join cooperatives so that they may be able to get essential social basic benefits, commodities and loans from the government.
It is clear that people are misinformed; thus, to revert the belief and the mentality to the right path is a difficult task.
• Supply of training equipment and facilities In cooperative training institutions, there is short supply of training equipment and other training facilities.
Training equipment like audiovisual aids, internet facilities, computers, projector, flip chart boards etc., are difficult to come by.
In some areas, there are hardly suitable accommodations for cooperative membership education.
• Many students attending cooperative institutions tend to read cooperative programme as last resort Many school certificate holders resolve to attend the formal cooperative training institutions as a last resort.
This is to say that if they had better results, they would have preferred other institutions or other courses.
As a result of this, after their graduation they slip off cooperative line with the slightest opportunity.
52  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION • Members have been used to free cooperative education Members, especially, at the grassroots level had been used to free cooperative education in the form of seminars, workshops, conferences, congresses, symposia etc.
In the past when these trainings were taking place, the members of cooperative societies were usually given free accommodation; free food and even they were usually paid kilometer allowances depending on the distance between where they came from and the venue of the training.
Nowadays, when free education is no more available, it tends to be difficult to convince them to pay for cooperative education.
• Unwillingness to release cooperative staff for cooperative training Many cooperative societies are unwilling to release any of their staff for cooperative training because they feel it would be an opportunity for them to look for greener pasture after the completion of the education.
Some other societies feel nobody would be doing the officer's job while he/she is away on course, hence, should stay put on the job.
Another reason for this is that the societies do not want to spend any money on their staff to improve them.
On the other side, the members of staff themselves do not want to leave their seat for any cooperative education, because while they are away, likely issue of fraud may occur.
Misappropriation of funds or embezzlement may be discovered.
Others feel they are indispensable that no one can do their job while they are away.
3.2 Problems of Cooperative and Agricultural Extension in Nigeria Nigeria has witnessed a series of transformation in the area of cooperative and agricultural extension for almost a century ago.
Despite all these changes, cooperative agricultural extension is yet to find its feet in terms of development.
The reasons for this are many and vary from state to state.
Some of the generalised problems facing cooperative and agricultural extension in Nigeria are as follows.
a.
Lack of adequate training It is essential that cooperative and agricultural extension workers should be well equipped with modern agricultural knowledge in order to cope with the demand of the members/farmers.
Most of our cooperative extension workers could not proceeds further in their training especially in their specialised work.
This is due to the refusal of government to grant in service training to them.
As a result of lack of in-service training, most of the cooperative 53 CO P 318 MODULE 2 extension workers find it difficult to cope with the field experience.
b.
Lack of proper coverage The ratio of cooperative extension agents to members/farming families in Nigeria is about 1: 2,000.
This is by far above the recommended ratio members/farming families.
Other problems militating against effective coverage of cooperative extension work are lack of mobility for extension agents and deplorable conditions of our feeder roads.
Despite the wide areas the cooperative extension agents are expected to cover, vehicles loan are not provided for them.
Some areas are not motorable, especially during the rainy season.
As a result of these problems, cooperative extension agents find it difficult to maintain close contact with their clientele.
c. Lack of coordination with research institutes It has been alleged in many quarters that most of the researches conducted in Nigeria are not very useful to our members/farmers.
They are either not adaptable or too complicated for the members/farmers to understand.
In others the expected results are quite different from the actual results obtained in the field.
One of the major reasons for this is lack of proper co-ordination between researchers and cooperative extension workers.
Cooperative extension workers are supposed to play the role of middlemen between the researchers and the members/farmers; bringing to the notice of the members any new innovation from the researchers and the business and farmer’s problems to the researchers.
This role has not been effectively performed due to lack of proper coordination between extension workers and researchers.
d. Political instability Nigeria has witnessed more than ten changes of leadership since 1960 when the century got her independence.
These changes had effects on the cooperative extension programmes as each leader tended to condemn most of the work of their predecessors bring in their own ideas, which in most cases may quite differ from the former programmes.
This often leads to abandonment of some cooperative extension programmes and the introduction of new ones.
This is reflected in the development cooperative agricultural extension in Nigeria.
Such projects are the Farm Settlement Scheme, OFN, River Basin Development Authorities, and Green Revolution etc.
This has also made proper evaluation of cooperative agricultural extension programmes very difficult.
54  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION e. Lack of commitment Most of the cooperative extension workers serving in the rural areas are, normally, neglected at the headquarters.
Most of the amenities such as vehicle loan, in-service training, payment of allowances etc., are normally reserved for those staff at the headquarters.
Coupled with the fact that most of our areas lack essential amenities such as electricity and pipe borne water, it is uncommon to find most of the cooperative extension workers posted to rural areas living in the nearby urban centers.
Some of them only report for work once a week.
Some engage themselves in other forms of business thereby neglecting the work assigned to them.
This has contributed in no small measure to the poor performance of cooperative and agricultural extension service in Nigeria.
f. Lack of resources Lack of essential facilities has serious impact on the effective performance of cooperative and agricultural extension duties.
Some of these resources include- sources of transport, audio visual aids, office accommodation, farm inputs and other equipment.
Some of these facilities when provided are grossly inadequate.
Farm inputs such as fertilizers, treated seeds, pesticides etc do not arrive at the appropriate time that the farmers are supposed to use them.
Some treated seeds are brought into this country after they have expired.
All these have negative effect on the agricultural extension worker, as farmers tend to put all the blames on the cooperative extension agent in case of any failure.
This can also affect future acceptance of agricultural programmes.
Certain posters are supposed to be used at a specific time of the year.
For instance, posters on planting of seeds are supposed to be distributed to the farmers before the planting is done.
Audio visual aids are necessary to supplement the work of the cooperative extension agents.
g. Lack of credit facilities With the removal of subsidy from most of the farm inputs such as fertilizers, insecticides, herbicides and farm tools, it is very difficult for peasant farmers to use these inputs.
The prices of these inputs are by far beyond the reach of the peasant farmers.
Commercial banks are not willing to give loan to farmers/members despite federal government directives.
This is because of the lack of collateral security normally demanded by the banks in addition to the credit guarantee scheme by the Central Bank of Nigeria.
55 CO P 318 MODULE 2 h. Channels of communication The organisational structure of cooperative extension in Nigeria follows the line type.
The positions are arranged in a hierarchy, each lower office being under the control and supervision of a higher one.
In this regard the cooperative extension field officer who occupies the lowest position has to report farmers’ problems to the cooperative assistant who will in-turn report to the cooperative superintendent.
This channel will be followed until when the information will get to the highest officer for necessary actions.
This channel appears to be too long for matters demanding urgent attention, e.g.
outbreak of disease, pest invasion and other natural disasters.
i. Illiteracy of members/farmers More than 80 percent of our peasant farmers/members are illiterates.
They can neither write nor read.
Among the few that can read and write, some of them cannot communicate in English Language.
Most of the extension guides are writing in English language.
Most of the cooperative extension guides are writing in English.
These leaflets are essential to supplement the efforts of cooperative extension workers, especially, in those areas where they cannot effectively cover.
The problem of illiteracy has great impact on the adoption process.
Adoption of agricultural and cooperative business innovations among these illiterate members/farmers is often slow because of their attitudes towards new innovation.
This problem also demands that for any cooperative extension agent to perform effectively, he must be able to speak the local, language in the area he is posted to.
Lack of unified cooperative extension service One of the problems facing cooperative and agricultural extension in Nigeria is lack of unified cooperative extension service.
At present each state is solely responsible for organising own cooperative extension services.
This problem renders the evaluation of cooperative extension service at the national level difficult.
Comparison of cooperative extension service between states is almost impossible.
In some states, extension service is limited to cooperative and agricultural development only, while in others it may include community development, some states have no well defined cooperative extension service.
In a case where cooperative extension agents will be under the control of two or more ministries, it will be difficult for them to perform efficiently.
56  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.3 Suggested Solutions to Problems of Cooperative Education in Nigeria Here are some suggested solutions to the problems of cooperative education in Nigeria.
• Establishment of cooperative training institutions should only be done after proper feasibility study Though each state has the freedom to establish cooperative training institutions, despite this, any state that is willing to establish such institution should do so only after a careful feasibility study indicating that it will serve the purpose for which it is established.
• Need to maintain the accreditation given to cooperative colleges in Nigeria Cooperative institutions need to maintain the resources, equipments and facilities that enabled them get accreditation from the relevant authorities, especially the National Board for Technical Education (NBTE).
Such resources include, good libraries stocked with relevant and modern books, good medical facilities, good learning environment, good auditorium for students, computer units, office accommodation for lecturers, recruitment of staff teaching core subjects; standard classrooms for students etc.
Other institutions offering cooperative courses should also ensure that these courses are accredited by the authorised institutions.
• Education and training for members of cooperative societies Cooperative societies must provide education and training for their members, elected representatives, managers and other employees from time to time so that they can contribute effectively to the development of their cooperative.
The members of the public must also be educated and informed about ‘cooperation’.
This will enable them to know about cooperatives and they may from there decide to form one.
To be indicted in the list of those to benefit from cooperative education are members of staff of the cooperative department at federal and state levels.
These include the director of cooperatives, his members of staff like the zonal officers, area officers, cooperative assistants, etc.
A cooperative is a business owned and controlled by the people who use its services.
They finance and operate the business or service for their mutual benefit.
By working together, they can reach an objective that would be unattainable if acting alone.
57 CO P 318 MODULE 2 3.3 Regulations and Guidelines for Cooperative Education Department of education regulations and guidelines for cooperative education apply to all Career and Technical Education (CTE) program areas offering cooperative education.
Questions related to interpretation or implementation of these regulations and guidelines should be directed to program area specialists at the department of education.
Questions concerning certification or endorsements should be directed to a specialist in teacher certification at the department of education.
• Qualification of teachers Teachers-coordinators must be endorsed to teach the course in which the cooperative method is used; they must be professionally competent, and must demonstrate technical ability and actual business/industry experience within the discipline for which they provide instruction.
• Professional development Teacher-coordinators should have continuing professional development in cooperative education and in their technical areas.
A workshop for new cooperative education teacher- coordinators is offered each summer by the department of education, office of career and Technical education services.
Other professional experiences could include summer institutes and conferences, college courses, teacher internships in business and industry, and other state and local staff-development options.
• Policy statement Each school division should have a written policy statement on cooperative education that includes teacher-coordinator qualifications and responsibilities; requirements for recruitment/selection of students and training stations; content of the training plan and training agreement; required length of training; and information about course credit, student wages, records, reports, and administration.
• Class size and facilities “Career and technical education programs using the cooperative education method of instruction shall be limited to an average of 20 students per instructor per class period (with no class being more than 24) where the cooperative method is required”.
In programs where the cooperative method is optional, class size shall not exceed the number of individual workstations or an average of 20 students per instructor per class period (with no class being more than 24) if all students participate in cooperative education.
Schools should allocate sufficient and appropriate 58  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION classroom and office space, equipment, and material for teaching the occupational skills.
• Coordination time and travel “Career and technical education programs using the cooperative education method of instruction shall have a class period assigned to the instructor for on-the-job coordination for each 20 students participating in on-the-job training, and specify provisions for instructor travel for on-the-job coordination.” Instructional time for teacher-coordinators within a block schedule must be equated to the teaching load in the Standards of Accreditation (SOA).
Note that the coordination period for the teacher-coordinator is based on a traditional, single-period class period.
For example, if a school is operating on a block schedule, the coordinator must have a minimum of 45 minutes for each 20 students.
Alternate-day block schedules may allow for daily 45- minute coordination class periods or alternate-day 90-minute class periods.
Where more than one coordination period is required (due to the number of students enrolled), the periods should be scheduled, consecutively, to allow for travel time to and from job sites.
Adequate coordination time must be provided for teacher-coordinators to obtain training stations; supervise the employment experience component of the program; and plan, organise, and complete all cooperative education activities.
(For a more complete listing of coordination activities, see the section on “selecting the teacher-coordinator”.
• Extended contracts Teacher-coordinators should be assigned extended contracts to ensure effective cooperative education coordination.
An extended contract is defined as a period of time provided to instructors for employment beyond the regular contractual period.
Program specialists recommend a minimum of 20 days in addition to the regular contract.
• Training agreement “A training agreement shall be developed and followed for each student receiving training through cooperative education.
Parties to the training agreement shall include the student, parent or guardian, instructor, employer, and a school administrator.” The agreement identifies the responsibilities of the student, the employer, and the coordinator (school).
If the teacher-coordinator supervises students from other classes within a program area, the students’ classroom teacher(s) must also be involved in this 59 CO P 318 MODULE 2 process and sign the training agreement.
All signers should retain a copy of the agreement.
• Training plan “A training plan shall be developed and followed for each student receiving training through cooperative education”.
The teacher- coordinator, training sponsor, and the student must jointly prepare the training plan.
The format and content of the training plan are determined by the individual program or school division.
The plan, which provides documentation for evaluation, should include development of both the technical skills required by the occupation and employability skills.
• Supervision In programs where the cooperative method is required, teacher- coordinators must teach the students they supervise.
Students taking the education for employment reasons have needs in cooperative education employment placement that are not typical of other cooperative education students; therefore, it is required that the cooperative education coordinator for education for employment students be the teacher.
In programs where the cooperative method is optional, teacher-coordinators may supervise students from other classes within a program area where the number of students enrolled in cooperative education does not justify an additional coordinator.
Where this situation exists, the guidelines outlined below must be followed to ensure the integrity of the cooperative experience.
• Students must be currently enrolled in a course within a program that is approved for the cooperative method of instruction.
• Teacher-coordinators may work only with students in the program area for which they are certified and currently teach courses.
• Every effort should be made to assign teacher-coordinators to classes within programs where the greatest numbers of students who will be coordinated are enrolled.
• Teacher-coordinators must meet with the students’ career and technical education classroom teachers before each training station visit and, if there is a need, after each visit.
• Meetings between teacher-coordinators and the students’ career and technical education classroom teachers must be documented on the training plans.
• Career and technical education classroom teachers’ involvement in the development of the training agreement 60  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION and training plan must be certified by signature on each document.
• Training agreement and training plan forms must be modified to account for the meetings with and involvement of other program classroom teachers (if applicable).
• Block schedules The cooperative education experience must be continuous throughout the school year even if the classroom instruction is in the second semester.
The students must be placed by the coordinator in jobs related to the career area and must be supervised and visited by the coordinator throughout the year.
The students must adhere to the regulations and guidelines set forth in this handbook.
Released time for coordinators is outlined under “coordination time and travel”.
• Training stations Training stations should be carefully selected so that students are placed in locations that provide quality learning experiences that are compatible with their career goals.
Cooperating businesses should appoint a training sponsor to assist the teacher-coordinator in student training, supervision, and evaluation.
• Coordination Teacher-coordinators should strive for a minimum goal of one coordination visit to the training station per month, and not less than one visit per grading period.
The visits should include conferences involving the student, teacher-coordinator, and training sponsor to discuss training plans and to evaluate student performance and progress.
• Supervised work experience hours required for approved programs Credit for career and technical cooperative education during a 36- week school year should be based upon successful completion of the course and continuous employment throughout the school year, averaging between 11 and 15 hours a week, with a minimum of 396 hours.
Research has shown that fewer than 11 hours does not provide the working environment experiences that students need to support classroom instruction and that more than 15 hours is detrimental to the student's ability to complete all school assignments.
61 CO P 318 MODULE 2 • Federal and state labour regulations Programs using the cooperative education method are subject to acceptable federal and state labour regulations.
Teacher- coordinators must keep abreast of such regulations to ensure compliance.
Coordinators are not to interpret labour laws.
Labour laws are made available to coordinators during an annual training workshop for new coordinators to provide an awareness of all safety and legal aspects of coordinating students’ cooperative education experience.
If any procedure is questioned, coordinators should call either the state or federal office for assistance.
A coordinator should never attempt to interpret the law or to confront an employer.
• Role of guidance Teacher-coordinators should work closely with guidance personnel in establishing selection criteria for cooperative education.
Students should be placed in programs with content compatible with their interests, aptitudes, abilities, and career goals.
Students participating in cooperative education should demonstrate a genuine interest in the career field and understand that the emphasis of the cooperative experience is on learning, not on earning money.
• Advisory council Programs using the cooperative education method of instruction should have an active advisory council of business/industry representatives, labor representatives, school personnel, parents, and students.
• Reports department of education The department of education requires, for purposes of program accountability, one comprehensive report that includes numbers of students, job classifications, and wage and hour information.
• School records Each participating school must maintain the following records for each student.
• Training agreement • Training plan • Course competency record • Annual wage and hour report • Documentation of all out-of-school coordination activities, including dates of training station visits.
62  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION The retention and disposition for cooperative education records- as shown below: • enrollment- retain 1 year, then destroy.
• evaluation- retain 3 years, then destroy.
• program review annually; destroy those records that have no administrative value.
Student records: • work experience forms- retain 5 years after student graduates, then destroy.
• record of employment- retain 5 years after student counseling and placement graduates, then destroy.
Work experience forms would include training plans, training agreements, course competency records, annual wage and hour reports, and documentation of site visits.
• Instruction Cooperative education provides for employment experience that is directly related to the classroom instruction.
The Career and Technical Education (CTE) programs ensure a unified approach to instruction in which the teacher-coordinator blends classroom learning, employment experiences, and student-organisation activities.
This instructional approach provides opportunities for students to acquire the academic and technical knowledge and skills that will enhance their employability, enable them to advance in a career, and continue their education to maintain their competitiveness in the workplace.
In tertiary schools, career and technical education is organised in career clusters that provide course sequences within career areas and roles.
Coordinators, counselors, administrators, parents, and students are encouraged to learn about these career areas and the course sequences available.
The following program areas provide opportunities for cooperative education- agriculture education, business and information technology, career connections, family and consumer sciences, marketing, and trade and industrial education.
Each program area will identify in the course instructional frameworks the courses that provide for the cooperative education method of instruction.
• Planning guide All CTE programs have task/competency lists that are available through either the CTE resource center or the CTE web site.
These task lists have been correlated to the academic standards of 63 CO P 318 MODULE 2 learning.
Instructional frameworks will be available for each career and technical course.
These frameworks will contain course descriptions, duty areas, task/competency lists, related standards of learning, and crosswalks with CTE Student Organisation activities and national standards.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Highlight and explain workable solution to the problems of cooperative education.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you learnt the problems of cooperative education in Nigeria.
The unit also covered suggested solutions to problems of cooperative education in Nigeria- for human capital development that are essential in the administration, management and organisation of cooperative societies.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the problems of cooperative education in Nigeria; the unit also explored probable solutions to these problems of cooperative education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the challenges facing cooperative education in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, M.E.
(1982).
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
Longman Intermediate Tropical Agriculture Series.
Benor, D. & Baxter, M.N.
(1984).
Training and Visit System.
(Agricultural Extension).
Washington D.C., pp.
2-9.
Benor, D. & Harriston, J.O.
(1977).
Extension: The Training and Visit System”.
Washington: World Bank, pp.
3-10.
David, A. S. (1998).
Essential Information on Cooperative Credit Societies (CTCS/CICS).
Ibadan: Dac-Print Publishers, pp.
4-15.
Epetimehin, F.M.
(2006).
Understanding the Dynamics of Cooperatives.
Ibadan :ICReTI Publishing House, pp.
5-70.
64  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION Fred, E. (2006).
Introduction to Co-operatives.
National Open University of Nigeria, pp.1-6.
Ibitoye S.J.
& Mundi, N.E.
(2004).
Essentials of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Nigeria: Ankpa Rowis Printers, pp.13-40.
Lawal, K. A.A. & Oludimu, O. L. (2011).
Management Theory, Practices and Focus.
Ibaban: Asogun, pp.
131-145.
Oludimu, O. L. & Adedoyin, S.F.(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu Ode: Triumph Book Publishers.
Owojuyigbe, S. (2007).
Cooperative Administration and Fieldwork in Nigeria.
(3rd ed.).
Ibadan: Samlolly Publishers pp.
4-70.
Umebai, E.E.
(2008).
Rural Development and Management.
National Open University of Nigeria, pp.36-44.
65 CO P 318 MODULE 2 MODULE 3 Unit 1 The Concept, Procedure and Principles of Cooperative Extension Teaching Unit 2 Basic Characteristics, Implications and Steps in Cooperative Education Extension Teaching Unit 3 Learning Process in Cooperative Education and Extension Unit 4 Concept of Adult Education in Cooperative UNIT 1 THE CONCEPT, PROCEDURE AND PRINCIPLES OF COOPERATIVE EXTENSION TEACHING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Cooperative Extension Teaching 3.2 Procedure for Effective Teaching in Cooperative Extension Work 3.2.1 Strategies for Teaching 3.2.2 Teaching Tools 3.3 Principles of Cooperative Extension Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, the focus shall be on the concept of cooperative extension teaching and principles guiding the branch of knowledge of teaching or instructional approaches.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define the meaning/concept of cooperative extension teaching • explain the procedure for effective teaching in cooperative extension work • state the principles of cooperative extension teaching.
66  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Cooperative Extension Teaching Members are referred to as adult learners and cooperative education extension workers as teachers.
Cooperative education extension workers are continuously striving to bring about changes in the behaviour of members/farmers and their families.
They want members/farmers to discard ancient methods of production and business and follow new techniques.
They strive to show members the advantages of better and improved production and business effectiveness with the profits that will follow their use to provide more and better food for their families, better clothing, better their housing and happier living.
This is teaching in its truest sense.
Teaching is a process of arranging situations that stimulate and guide learning activities towards goal that specify desired changes in the behaviour of people.
That is, cooperative extension teaching is the process in which situations are so arranged as to stimulate and guide learning activities towards achieving some specified desired behavioural changes in individuals.
This involves getting the attention of learners, developing their interest, arousing their desires and promoting action.
Good cooperative extension teaching is the successful creation of opportunities or situations in which people gain abilities and stimulation necessary for successfully meeting their needs and interests in such a way as to attain continuous improvement and self actualisation.
Teaching is closely associated with learning.
According to Williams et al.
(1984), teaching is closely associated with learning by which an individual through his own activity becomes changed in his behaviour.
It is, essentially, a response to a teaching situation where the learner is an active participant in his own education.
Learning is not a “filling up” process, but the learner has to be active to require knowledge, skills and interest.
Learning is a personal matter in terms of learner’s needs.
No one learns for others because learning takes place within the individual.
In general, we learn through five physical senses – sights, sound, touch, taste and smell.
When we say a learner changes his behaviour through his own activities, what are these activities?
These activities involve using one or more of the five senses for a specific purpose.
3.2 Procedure for Effective Teaching in Cooperative Education Extension Work For effective teaching in cooperative education extension work, the following procedures should be taken into consideration.
Ensure visibility for all.
Arrangement of exhibits and other materials such as chairs should not obstruct participants’ view.
Participants should see 67 CO P 318 MODULE 3 clearly what is being taught (Yahaya, 2003).
Speaker should speak clearly.
Adults comprehend spoken words better than written words.
Speaker should be seen by all participants.
Talk with and to the people or even at the people.
Always start with the present needs and problems of the members.
Presentation should be logical in sequence.
One idea or one theme at a time: • be it in written or spoken words, one sentence or one idea is ideal • use practical devices to show relationship between ideas • repeat ideas being presented, make physical environment conducive • summarise your presentation.
3.2.1 Strategies for Teaching Strategies touch the different senses; it stimulates and spurs the students into action and the teacher into achieving the desired goal.
This is because the different methods of teaching have been combined to achieve the learning goal.
The strategies include the following.
1.
Individual instruction 2.
Small group instruction 3.
Large group instruction 4.
Selective group instruction (Njoku).
Explaining the different group will help you know what each group is capable of achieving.
1.
Individual group instruction This is divided into two groups: a. individual paced learning -this makes it possible for the learner to work at his/her own pace towards the stated goal.
b. individual prescribed learning -it allows the learner to work at his/her own pace, but it has to be with the help of teacher who chooses a specific goal for the learner to reach.
The step to be taken at each stage has to be graduated before moving to the next step.
Generally, no two people are the same, people learn at different rates, perceive value of learning differently and have different approaches to learning and may not be expected to reach the same goal at the same time.
One great advantage of this type of strategy is that it makes the learner to become less dependent, encourages critical thinking and helps them to develop a positive thinking about themselves.
68  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 2.
Small group instruction This group can be carved out from a large group.
The small group gives the learner a better opportunity for interaction with other members.
a.
He is no longer lost in a large group and can now have a sense of belonging.
b.
Finally, he is enabled to be grouped with those that share similar interests and learning problems.
If people without similar interest and learning problems are put together, they may have friction and the teacher may experience a little problem, which may later die down.
This type of grouping motivates the students and gives them a better chance for communication, which helps to develop them.
Everyone contributes to the group and the group appreciates the contribution of each in ember.
Explain, convincingly, the group you would adopt to handle your class in teaching the functions of a secretary in a modern office.
3 Large group instructions This enables the teacher to avoid duplication of effort.
As the teacher you have to assemble and teach the students for the achievement of the set goal.
No consideration is given to any individual as each and every student is seen as driving at the same time and pace.
In a large group instruction, up to2/3 of the students are not carried along.
Similarly, learning activities tend to be restricted since it may be impossible to attend to everyone.
4.
Selective group instruction This is where the teacher may decide to select some students who need help and render such help to them.
This is usually done during break periods, at agreed location.
He may be influenced to carry out this type of strategy because of his relationship with the few, on request or voluntarily.
This strategy generates envy and may lead to the students hating the course and teacher.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES i.
Identify five physical senses through which farmers learn.
ii.
What are the benefits of a small group instruction?
Explain two of them.
iii.
Explain the two methods that you consider appropriate in the teaching of cooperative to the students/learners.
69 CO P 318 MODULE 3 3.2.2 Teaching Tools Here, let us consider two basic tools a. Chalkboard The chalkboard is the main teaching tool.
The teacher demonstrates on it for students.
In fact, this is very important in some subjects where most of the diagrams/symbols would be presented on the chalkboard.
The teacher must make sure that each student sees the chalkboard from his/her seat.
b. Textbooks Where every student has his or her textbook, it will be easy for the teacher to operate.
This is very true in Technical/Vocational Education (TVE) subjects.
Examine the level of the material and match it with the age, and level of understanding of the students.
3.3 Principles of Cooperative Education Extension Teaching Principles are a kind of philosophy guiding the branch of knowledge (Learning) of teaching or instructional approaches.
Cooperative education extension teaching is guided by the following principles.
1.
Principle of activities- active in the use of teaching methods or approaches.
2.
Principle of communication- ability to communicate teaching methods.
3.
Principle of interest- interest should be developed in teaching because without interest, specific objectives will not be achieved.
4.
Principles of linking with life- link teaching with real life situations.
5.
Principles of practice- in teaching, practice is emphasised; there is what is called teaching practice.
Practice makes perfection.
6.
Define aim or purpose- that is, teaching should be purposive and definite.
7.
Principle of selection- the teacher or extension worker should be able to select appropriate teaching methods.
8.
Principle of teaching steps by steps- that is, doing one thing at a time.
9.
Principle of vision.
4.0 CONCLUSION Cooperative extension teaching will be ineffective without adhering to the procedure and principles of teaching cooperative education extension; also proper understanding of the strategies and tools for impacting knowledge is crucial.
In this regard, the application of the different methods and strategies, as well as making effective use of 70  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION teaching tools in learning would help to drive home the point and effect behaviour change.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • procedures for effective teaching in cooperative extension • principles guiding cooperative extension teaching.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Identify five procedures for effective cooperative extension teaching.
ii.
List and discuss five principles of cooperative extension teaching.
iii.
Define cooperative extension teaching.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ahukannah, L. I.
(2002).
‘Teaching Methodology in Vocational/Technical Education’.
Paper Presented at a Workshop Organised for Lecturers of Polytechnics in the South-East Zone at the Federal Polytechnic, Nekede, Owerri, 2nd – 6th, September.
Ayeni, B.
& Ajiboye, B.
(1999).
Basic Issues in Adult Education.
Raytel Communications Ltd., pp.
1-14.
Lawal, K. A.A. & Oludimu, O. L. (2011).
Management Theory, Practices and Focus.
Ibaban: Asogun, pp.
131-145.
Njoku, C.U.
(2002).
‘Teaching Methods in Technical and Vocational Education: A focus on the New Curriculum’.
Paper Presented at the Workshop Organised on the Implementation of the New Curriculum for Mechanical Trade Teachers of Technical Colleges in the South-East Zone at the Staff Development Centre, Federal Polytechnic, Nekede, Owerri, 3rd – 7th June.
Williams, S. K., Fenley, J. M. & Williams, C. E. (1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Les Syraden Press, p. 54.
Yahaya, M. K. (2003).
Development Communication: Lessons from Change and Social Engineering Projects.
pp.
198 – 200.
71 CO P 318 MODULE 3 UNIT 2 BASIC CHARACTERISTICS, IMPLICATIONS AND STEPS IN COOPERATIVE EDUCATION EXTENSION TEACHING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Basic Characteristics of Cooperative Education Extension Teaching 3.2 Implication of Teaching Process for Cooperative Education Work 3.3 Steps in Cooperative Education Extension Teaching 33.1 Four-Step Teaching Approach 3.4 Advantages and Limitations of Cooperative Education Extension Teaching 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you studied the concept, procedure and principles of cooperative education extension teaching.
In this unit, you will learn some basic characteristics, implications and steps in cooperative education extension teaching.
This unit will help you understand subsequent units.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain some basic characteristics of cooperative education extension teaching • state the implications of teaching process for cooperative education extension work • highlight the steps in cooperative education extension teaching.
72  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Characteristics of Cooperative Education Extension Teaching There are a number of characteristics of teaching which, if understood by the cooperative education extension worker, can help the clientele to gain a good understanding of the ideas he is trying to sell to them.
Some of these are discussed below.
1.
Cooperative education extension teaching requires specific clearly defined objectives.
A teaching objective is simply the term used to describe the end product desired.
All purposeful teaching should be seen as having specific objectives.
2.
Cooperative education extension teaching, usually, requires that several methods of presentation should be used to make for optimal effectiveness.
No one cooperative extension method will reach all the people, nor will it influence all that may be reached.
3.
Cooperative education extension teaching requires that learners have effective learning experiences.
A learning experience is the mental or physical reaction one makes through seeing, learning or doing the things to be learnt through which he gains an understanding and meaning of the content.
4.
Cooperative education extension teaching should provide learning situations that include the following elements: a. an effective learning situation include teacher who joins the learning group to provide good stimulation and guidance of learning activity b. learners who are properly motivated and recognised the needs for learning c. teaching aids should be properly used so that learning experience is identified.
5.
Cooperative education extension teaching requires careful evaluation of results which should guide future efforts.
Cooperative teacher should constantly evaluate results in a precise and objective manner and base future effort on the findings.
6.
Cooperative education extension teaching should link up new materials with what is already known.
The cooperative instructor has some responsibility for learning, understanding level of his learning and adequately preparing them for new understanding.
7.
Cooperative education extension teaching must accomplish certain kinds of educational changes in relation to the subject matter (topic) to be learnt; for example changes in knowledge- such as varieties, amount of capital/fund to use, etc; changes in 73 CO P 318 MODULE 3 skills, ability such as mental skill e.g.
working out solutions to problems.
3.2 Implication of Teaching Process for Cooperative Education Extension Work The above characteristics of teaching process have some implications for effective cooperative education extension work; these can be summarised as follows.
a.
Arrange and use equipment that will enable the audience to see clearly what is going on.
b.
Adults comprehend spoken word better than written word at every speed of presentation.
c. Start with the present interests and needs or problems of the group.
d. Present topic step by step in logical sequence; that is, teaching one thing at a time.
e. Employ or use every possible practical device to show relationship of ideas and materials.
f. Frequently repeat ideas to be passed across to the group.
g. Make physical surroundings comfortable and attractive.
h. Always endeavour to have them leave in a spirit of accomplishment and desire for more.
i.
A good summary of the content, giving what was attempted, what was accomplished, what is yet to be done is always essential.
3.3 Steps in Cooperative Education Extension Teaching The cooperative education extension worker is a teacher.
He/she is, continually, working to bring about desirable changes in human behaviour.
If he is to achieve success in his/her efforts, he/she must understand and follow certain teaching steps.
1.
Getting the attention of the learners- most members/farmers are quite unaware of the great improvement in farming methods that have been developed by scientific research and how the use of these methods can make farming more profitable.
The first duty of cooperative worker as a teacher is to direct the attention of the members/farmer to the newer methods of business/farming suggested by research source.
2.
Stimulating the learners’ interests- when the members/farmer’s attention have been directed to the newer methods, the next step is to appeal to the interest by showing him how the new method may be of value to him, how it may save labour or increase his yield and profit.
74  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.
Arousing the learner’s desire for information- when the attention of the farmer has been directed to a new method and his interest aroused in a way or possibility that his new method may be of direct value in meeting his demand the farmers will want to get all possible information on how the new method may be used to his advantage.
4.
Convincing the learner that he should act- cooperative teacher has directed the attention of a members/farmer to a new method, he has stimulated his interest, supplied him with all information on the new method into operation.
When a member/farmer- through the above steps, has become convinced that the new method will lead to profit and satisfaction, this is not difficult to do.
5.
Getting action by the learner- teaching is without value unless converted into action.
The cooperative teacher must do everything possible to make action easy.
If the improvement requires fertilisation or an insecticide or new equipment, the cooperative worker must take the responsibility of arranging for its purchase by the members/ farmer at a convenient source and at a fair price.
The members/farmer by himself cannot do this and he will not act if there are obstacles in the way of action.
6.
Making certain that the learner derives satisfaction from his action- the cooperative worker has follow-up job.
He must help the learner evaluate the progress made, measure an increase yield and strengthen the satisfaction obtained.
A member/farmer that meets a want by the successful application of a new method becomes a local learner in influencing his neighbours to satisfy their wants by following the same practice and he finds prestige and satisfaction in teaching and helping them.
Also, when a member/farmer has used a new method and realised profit and satisfaction from it, he gains confidence in his own ability to learn and is ready to try other new methods.
• SATISFACTION • ACTION • CONVICTION • DESIRE • INTEREST • ATTENTION 3.3.
1 Four-Step Teaching Approach One instructional theory that is quite simple and is a tried and true model for teaching is the four-step teaching approach developed by a psychologist in the early 1800s.
You can share this approach with training sponsors to help them develop instructional competence.
75 CO P 318 MODULE 3 PREPARATION • Prepare the learner: • Put learner at ease.
• Explain the reason for instruction — motivate learner.
• Get complete attention.
• Prepare the lesson: • List or decide on major points to be presented.
• Determine how you will present the material.
• Decide upon a standard of performance.
• Make available all materials learner will need.
PRESENTATION • Present the material to be learned.
• Teach one point at a time and do so slowly.
• Pause to allow time for questions during the presentation.
• Review the material.
APPLICATION • Let learner demonstrate the procedure.
• Ask questions about procedure to assure learner understanding and correct any mistakes.
• Assist when necessary during the initial tryout and for the first few times the procedure comes up again.
EVALUATION • Check the learner in the actual work setting against your established standards of performance.
• Correct errors.
• Encourage questions.
• When satisfied that the learner can perform at established standard, allow him/her to assume the responsibility.
3.4 Advantages and Limitations of Cooperative Education Extension Teaching Here, let us look at the following.
Advantages of cooperative extension teaching a.
It stimulates and guides learning activities towards goal.
b.
It specifies desired changes in the behaviour of people.
c. It assists the clientele to gain an understanding of ideas the agent is trying to impact or sell them.
Limitations a.
The following are the limitations.
b.
Requires a lot of time for preparations.
76  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION c. Problem of individual differences, and d. Not all clientele (farmers) may be attentive to teaching.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has examined some basic characteristics of teaching, implications of teaching process and steps in cooperative extension teaching.
It is hoped that by now, you would have been be able to understand some basic issues in extension teaching.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • basic characteristics of cooperative education extension teaching • implications for effective cooperative work • steps in cooperative education extension teaching.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Identify and explain five implications of teaching process for cooperative work.
ii.
List five steps in cooperative education extension teaching and explain them.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Laogu, E. A.
(2005).
‘Extension Teaching/Learning Process and Methods’.
In: S. F. Adedoyin (Ed.).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.202 -203.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludmu, O.L.
(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan: Asogun Publisher.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2012).
Nigeria and International Cooperative.
NOUN Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
77 CO P 318 MODULE 3 The Rochdale Pioneers Museum (2002).
Retrieved from http://www.manchester.com/tourist/rochdale/.
Williams, S. F. T., Fenley, J. M., & Williams, C. E. (1984).
A manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria, pp.57-58.
78  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION UNIT 3 LEARNING PROCESS IN COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Learning 3.2 Principles of Learning in Cooperative Education and Extension 3.3 Characteristics of Learning in Cooperative Education and Extension 3.4 Transfer of Learning in Cooperative Education and Extension 3.5 Factors Affecting Learning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you were taken through characteristics, implications, steps, merits and demerits of cooperative extension teaching.
In this unit, you will learn concept of learning, how to learn, transfer of learning, characteristics and essentials in adult learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of learning • demonstrate how people learn in cooperative education and extension • describe how transfer of learning takes place in cooperative education and extension • state the principles and the characteristics of learning in cooperative education and extension • highlight factors affecting learning • discuss the essentials of learning in adults.
79 CO P 318 MODULE 3 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Learning Learning is a process which impacts the behaviour (knowledge, attitude) of an individual (Williams et al., 1984).
Learning is, essentially, a response to a teaching situation.
The learner is no longer regarded as a passive agent, but an active participant in his own education.
Learning is not a “filling up” process.
The learner has to be active to acquire knowledge, skills, attitude which satisfied his or her needs and interest.
Learning is a personal matter- in terms of learners’ needs.
No individual can learn for others because learning takes place within a person.
There are two types of learning, namely incidental and deliberate learning.
Incidental learning occurs when learning takes place without efforts.
Deliberate learning results from a specific, purposeful activity or experience, in other words, it results from some motivated efforts.
The learner directs his learning along a definite, planned manner.
Abdullai (2002) defines learning situation as one in which all elements necessary to promote learning are present; such elements include (a) instructor (agent), (b) learners, (c) subject matter, (d) learning materials (e) physical factor.
Learning experience is a mental or physical reaction one makes through seeing, learning or doing the things to be learnt through which one gains the meanings and understanding of the materials to be learnt.
Learning is the process by which one becomes changed in behaviour, skills, understanding, interest, and appreciation as a result of experience.
The essence of learning is to, systematically, acquire knowledge and experience.
We learn through five physical senses, namely – sight, sound, touch, taste and smell.
When we say a learner (farmer/member) changes his behaviour through his own activities, what are those activities?
Those activities involve using one or more of these five senses for a specific purpose.
There are seven major ways by which learning takes place in individuals- that is, the ways by which we learn.
1.
Conditioning- this is when learning takes place through the establishment of a connection between a stimulus and a response, referred to as conditioning.
Pavlov, in his experiment, conditioned dogs to salivate when a bell is rung.
2.
Trial and Error- when an individual is faced with a problem, he discovers a solution by trial and error.
This procedure takes a long time and it is not efficient.
Considerable time is wasted in unsuccessful efforts.
80  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.
Problem solving- this procedure involves the use of the product of the previous learning experiences when faced with a problem.
It also involves higher mental processes such as reasoning, concept formation and testing a hypothesis.
4.
Training- this is similar to conditioning.
It is, especially, useful in the development of skills, habits and attitudes.
There is considerable use of rewards and punishment during training for success and failure respectively.
5.
Insight learning- here, a solution is found as a flash.
There is the feeling of relief when a solution occurs in a flash.
The learner does not have complete understanding about how the solution works.
6.
Imitation- this implies copying and following a pattern of behaviour without much reasoning.
Opinions and beliefs expressed by leaders and books are adopted quickly by many people.
7.
Memorisation- this is learning without understanding, but attempt is made to commit everything under focus to memory, verbatim.
3.2 Principles of Learning in Cooperative Education and Extension There are guidelines or factors to be considered by cooperative extension workers or teachers in the instructional process.
a.
Learning has to do with growth and it is continuous; here, growth depends on the past experiences of the learner.
So, it has to commence from where the learner is.
For instance, farmers have certain ideas and knowledge before- e.g.
pests reduce yield or production – what do they know about pest control on their farms / fields; and from here, introduce the use of pesticides for large areas.
Relate new ideas to the old- as this increases effectiveness.
Ideas to be learnt should be brought to the attention of the learners, repeatedly.
b.
Learning is purposeful- learning is purposeful when it makes sense to the learner- i.e.
meaningful from the learner’s viewpoint.
Help farmers/members to fix achievable goals through helpful activities e.g.
field trips, demonstrations, etc.
to satisfy needs.
c. Learning is challenging- it is more effective if it is more appropriate and timely and recognition is given to the learners’ achievements.
It is also challenging if the standard demands of the learner are suited to his ability i.e.
the extension worker/teacher helps the learner to build a mental picture of himself in the new situation.
d. Learning is effective- if it results in fundamental understanding- memorising is useless unless there is practical application to it.
81 CO P 318 MODULE 3 Activity that stimulates the actual situation is most effective and there must be need for information.
e. Learning is influenced by the social or physical environment- the instructor should see that the physical conditions are appropriated and the learner has no fear.
f. Gradual process- usually it requires several exposures before change is observed.
For effective learning, several exposures are to be made to get over each point.
g. Learning is an active process- the learner is an active, exploratory individual; and learning results from the activities of the individual.
It is what he does when he learns; skills – the learner must practice them; facts – the learner must relate them; attitudes – he must change them.
3.3 Characteristics of Learning in Cooperative Education and Extension Here, these characteristics of learning will be examined as a foundation for planning and executing extension outreach programme.
a.
Learning is meaningful; learning should enable learners to be able to solve related problems.
This is attained by relating new terms and knowledge to that which the learners already known, i.e.
there should be a connection between familiar and unfamiliar concepts.
b.
Learning is facilitated when two or more senses are used by the learners/farmers; while in the process there should be a variety of learning activities to use more of our senses.
c. Learning is more effective where the learner actively participates.
The learner is more active when he realises that learning goals are not forced on him.
d. Learning is affected by physical and social environments.
The general physical environment should be suitable to the kind of learning taking place and to the activities selected for the learning situation.
The cooperative extension worker/teacher should recognise and use the effect of the social environment on learning.
e. Learning is continuous; new knowledge should be built on the old.
In essence then, learning is cumulative in nature, and is a gradual process.
Hence, learning is a lifelong activity.
3.4 Transfer of Learning in Cooperative Education and Extension Transfer of learning takes place when an idea in one situation is used in another.
Cooperative extension agent is concerned with the transfer of 82  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION learning because when the agent teaches an idea to a farmer the learning situation (e.g.
a demonstration or field trip) is not the same situation as that on the farm of the farmer.
Learning should not be the compartmentalisation of learned matter.
The transfer may be knowledge, skill, ideas, and attitude from one situation to another, (Yahaya, 2003).
Transfer of learning depends upon on a number of similar components in the two situations and the degree of generalisation that can be achieved for deriving principles that can be applied to various situations.
Transfer of learning also depends upon the mental capacity of the learner.
Transfer of learning can be achieved in the following ways: a. encourage the learner to look for similarities in various situations b. encourage learner to apply the ideas in other similar situations c. encourage learner to generate principles personally rather than being told, allowing the learner discovers similarities and principles.
d. discourage memorisation of data or content of learning process by the learner.
Lay more emphasis on understanding and application of ideas.
3.5 Factors Affecting Learning Some factors are related to the characteristics of the subject matter, or of the external situation in which learning takes place.
Others are characteristics of the individual and what he brings to the learning situation.
i.
Motivation - this can influence learning in form of reward or punishment; and it can be intrinsic or extrinsic– (extrinsic includes hunger, thirst, etc.
; intrinsic relates to interest in the learning task.
ii.
Nature of materials to be learnt- this includes amount which should be within the memory span- e.g.
four to six units can be remembered at one time, familiarity of material and meaningfulness.
iii.
Efficient conditions of practice- these include knowledge of results, distributed versus massed practice i.e.
short well placed learning periods and long concentrated ones, whole versus part learning; guidance as an aid to learning; special aid learning such as films, visual aids, television, and so on (Onwubuya, 2005).
iv.
Learning under special conditions- these include learning during sleep.
Studies have shown that there is no learning during sleep but these are evidence that proved learning may be achieved 83 CO P 318 MODULE 3 under hypnotism use of drugs, beverages and drinks bring down output in learning, poor nutritional status of the individual.
v. Comfort while learning- this relate to quality of chairs or furniture, aeration, humidity, noise, etc.
distracts learning.
vi.
Emotional problems- this can affect efficiency of learning.
vii.
Fatigue- tiredness brings in discomfort and reduces efficiency.
viii.
Monotony of presentation- this also reduces level of attention, interest and attitude in learning.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to the concept of learning, how learning takes place, how learning is transferred,, characteristics of learning, and the factors and principles of learning in extension.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt the following: • learning is a process that leads to change in behaviour • learning takes place in individuals through conditioning, trial and error, problem solving, training, insight, imitation and memorisation • learning is influenced by motivation, nature of the materials to be leant, emotional problems, fatigue and mode of presentation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
List and explain five major principles of learning in cooperative extension.
ii.
Identify and discuss three essential factors in adult and cooperative learning.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdullai, A.
(2002).
Motivating Farmers for Action.
How a Strategic Multimedia Campaign Can Help.
Frankfurt: GTZ, pp.125-126.
Laogu, E. A.
(2005).
‘Extension Teaching/Learning Process and Methods’.
In: S. F. Adedoyin (Ed.).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.202 -203.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and 84  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Onwubuya, E. A.
(2005).
‘Social and Educational Psychology in Extension’.
In, S.F.
Adedoyin (Ed.).
Agricultural Extesnion in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.
126-127.
Williams, S. F. T., Fenley, J. M., & Williams, C. E. (1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria, pp.57-58.
Yahaya, M. K (2003).
Development Communication: Lessons from Change and Social Engineering Projects.
85 CO P 318 MODULE 3 UNIT 4 CONCEPT OF ADULT EDUCATION IN COOPERATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Adult Education 3.2 Functional Literacy and Vocational Programmes 3.3 Extension Education as Part of Adult Education and Manpower Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you were exposed to the basics of learning; in this unit, you will learn the concept of adult education in cooperative.
Here, the focus will be on functional literacy, as well as vocational programmes and cooperative education as part of adult education and manpower development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of adult education in cooperative • list functional literacy and vocational programmes • discuss extension education as part of adult education and manpower development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Adult Education An adult is a human being or living organism that is of relatively mature in age; it is typically associated with sexual maturity and the attainment of reproductive age.
Adult education is the practice of teaching and educating adults.
Adult education takes place in the workplace, through 'extension' school (e.g.
Harvard Extension) or 'school of continuing education' (Columbia School of Continuing Education).
Manpower can simply be said to be the capability of any individual personnel in a given 86  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION organisation.
It may therefore be considered as economic resource and in this context, it represents the aggregate skills and attitudes resulting from education plus training that equips the labour force with the capacity to plan, organise and carry out economic activities when, efficiently, allocated.
De-Bettignies (1975) defines manpower development as the attempt to improve manpower effectiveness through a planned and deliberate learning process.
Manpower development brings a balance between demand and supply of skills needed for production and management.
Adult education is a necessary tool for national development because adult is developed to be useful to both himself and the country at large.
Therefore, the essence of adult education is to train and develop the needed manpower for the nation’s economy.
It is necessary to identify the various programmes that adults are involved in, such as full educational programmes, literacy programmes, distant learning programmes, on-the-job training etc.
Looking at these various programmes and trainings, one can analyse them as follows- functional literacy programmes and vocational or job oriented programmes and extended educational programmes.
3.2 Functional Literacy and Vocational Programmes Functional illiteracy is a term used to describe reading and writing skills that are inadequate to manage daily living and employment tasks that require reading skills beyond a basic level.
It is contrasted with illiteracy in the strict sense, meaning the inability to read or write simple sentences in any language.
It can also be defined as incorporates reading materials that relate directly to community development and to teaching applicable or useful life skills.
Vocational education prepares trainees for jobs or careers at various levels from a trade to a craft or a position in engineering, accounting, nursing, medicine and other healing arts, architecture, pharmacy, law etc.
literacy serves as a link that elevate primitive life of an individual to a modern life.
It serves as a key to the realms of skills and also improves the human personality and the attainment of self-realisation (Anyanwu 1980; 76).
In the process of developing the individual and the society at large, functional literacy should be a life-long education that is an education from the cradle to the grave.
Adult education should serve as bedrock of literacy and functional literacy programmes.
Functional literacy programme should be channeled to develop the receipt and the community to which he belongs, politically, socially and economically.
In summary, Omolewa (1981) sees functional literacy as the eradication of illiteracy, development of manpower and promotion of civic training.
Therefore, in order to meet the much fast dynamism of the society, there 87 CO P 318 MODULE 3 is need for education and this includes adult education in which functional literacy and various vocational training activities serve better and can be developed upon.
3.3 Extension Education as Part of Adult Education and Manpower Development Cooperative education learning system is a dynamic, non-formal system for developing and implementing programs.
The system consists of numerous complementary and interactive components, each contributing to the success of the total system.
The individual components are the organisation's mission; situation analysis; target audiences; needs assessment; program objectives; content; learning strategies; and the non-formal learning system, which includes inputs, evaluation and adjustment.
An adult education programme designed to reach out to those adult who are not close to the institutions where adult education programmes are being offered, is referred to as an extension education programme (Braimoh 1990).
It is a programme designed to bring education to the center where recipients can receive it.
It entails community project and help in urban-rural integration.
Most Nigerians reside in the rural areas and there is a need for them to be educated.
In order to achieve a balanced social, political and economic development, these set of people need to be included in the development plan particularly the education plan, so as to enable them contribute their own quota to the overall development of the nation.
To get this done, the need for the cooperative programme is highly essential for the development of the nation’s manpower.
The cooperative programme can be given throughout the nation and this is now taking place through different government ministries, such as the ministry of agriculture, ministry of health, and other adult education agencies.
This enables the rural areas to increase in their productivities, for example, farmers are given this programme to improve their skills planting and harvesting through the cooperative workers from the ministry of agriculture who serve as agents in the rural areas.
Apart from this, correspondence education also helps as extended programme.
Many adults were able to develop on their own through correspondence colleges because “they could not enjoy the formal school system and they could also not resign their appointments to go to formal school” (Braimoh, 1990).
This takes care of one of the aspects of the adult education objectives in the National Policy on Education.
This process helps the recipients to improve academically and at the same time keep his job and earn a steady salary because it is a kind of on the job programme.
Many higher institutions and universities now have this type of educational programmes.
Such institutions include the National 88  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION open University of Nigeria, Open and Distance Learning (ODL) programme of the University of Lagos and so on.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss functional literacy and vocational programmes.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the concept of adult education in cooperative.
This unit also considered functional literacy and vocational programmes.
These concepts are essential in the cooperative extension education as part of adult education, manpower development, community development and organisation development.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the following: • the concept of adult education in cooperative.
• the functional literacy and vocational programmes.
• cooperative extension education as part of adult education and organisational development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the concept of adult education in cooperative.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abdullai, A.
(2002).
Motivating Farmers for Action.
How a Strategic Multimedia Campaign Can Help.
Frankfurt: GTZ, pp.125-126.
Laogu, E. A.
(2005).
‘Extension Teaching/Learning Process and Methods.’ In: S. F. Adedoyin (Ed.).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.202 -203.
89 CO P 318 MODULE 3 MODULE 4 Unit 1 Training and Visit System in Cooperative Education Unit 2 Concept and Overview of the Use of Extension Methods in Cooperative Education Unit 3 Cooperative Education Extension Methods Unit 4 Communication and Information Process in Cooperative UNIT 1 TRAINING AND VISIT SYSTEM IN COOPERATIVE EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Training and Visit (T & V) System 3.2 Merits of Training & Visit System 3.2.1 Demerits of Training & Visit System 3.3 Features of Training and Visit System 3.4 Training Sponsor Preparation 3.4.1 Training Sponsor Manual or Resources 3.4.2 Orientation Training Checklist 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt about the concept of adult education in cooperative, about functional literacy and vocational programmes and cooperative extension education as part of adult education and organisational development.
In this unit, you will be exposed to a new field of training and visit system in cooperative education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain training and visit system in cooperative education • discuss the concept of Training and Visit (T & V) • list the merits and the demerits of T & V system • state the features of Training and Visit system.
90  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Training and Visit (T & V) System The training and visit system is an attempt to reform and improve on the conventional extension system in many developing countries which has not made the necessary impact on agricultural productivity.
It is a management procedure involving regular intensive training sessions for Village Extension Workers (VEW) followed by a scheduled of visit to farmers.
The system emphasises simplicity in organisation, objective and operations.
It has a well-defined organisation, mode of operation and provides continues feedback from the farmers to the extension and research workers.
It also allows for continues adjustments to the farmers needs.
It is spreading rapidly in many developing countries because of its effectiveness as a means of increasing agricultural production and incomes of farmers and as a flexible management tool that is suited to the needs of many developing countries.
Its basic extension techniques is a systemic programme of training the Village Extension Workers (VEW) combined with frequent visits by him to the farmer’s fields.
Its central theme is efficiency in the use of resources available to the extension service and the farmers.
3.2 Merits of Training & Visit System The key advantages of training & visit include the following.
a.
It improves the organisation of the extension service by introducing a single line of command with clearly defined duties at each level.
b.
It establishes a well-defined geographical boundary of operation for each extension worker.
c. It improves coverage by limiting the number of farmers the extension worker is expected to visit.
d. It limits the number of extension supervisor to supervise ratio of not more than 1:8 which allows for adequate monitoring of performance and concentration of efforts to achieve maximum impact.
e. It provides a systematic programme of short training courses at which instructions on the current technical messages to be extended to the farmers are explained to the VEWS followed by a predetermined schedule of visits to selected contact farmers.
f. It improves agricultural research through the provision of specialists who are expected to maintain regular contacts with the 91 CO P 318 MODULE 4 research institutes and to ensure continuing flow of technical information to the farmer’ problems back to the research institutes.
g. It removes all non agricultural extension functions from the responsibility of the extension workers.
h. It provides adequate transport facilities or other logistics support that help improve the mobility of the extension worker.
3.2.1 Demerits of Training and Visit System a.
It assumes that all the essential infrastructural facilities and essential inputs are already available and are in good working condition shape in all development countries.
Many of these countries still have a long way to go to establish viable institutions to take care of these.
b.
It is too rigid, top oriented and does not allow for active participation of the farmers in its programme planning.
c. Not many developing countries can afford to have the large number of Subject Matter Specialists (SMSs) required to make the system effective.
d. It is costly to operate because of high recurrent personal costs.
e. It is too heavily focused on technology transfer at the expense of human resource development.
f. Because of the hierarchical authority structure of many extension organisations and long channels of communication in the extension organisation in many countries, supervision is not often sufficiently positive or morale boosting.
3.3 Features of Training and Visit System The system involves the systematic application of well-known management principles with a view to professionalising the extension service.
These principles or the basic features of the Training & Visit, according to Benor (1984), are as follows.
a. Professionalism- this is the capability of extension staff to identify production problems in the field, recommend appropriate messages to solve them and train farmers on how to use the messages on their farms.
b.
Single line of command- the extension service should technically and administratively be responsible to a single unit of authority.
c. Concentration of efforts- this emphasises the educational role of extension service, that non-educational function should be severed from extension.
And in training sessions focus should be on major or impact points.
92  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION d. Time bound work- farmers are taught in regular timely scheduled son that they make the best use of their information and other resources at their disposal.
e. Field and farmer orientation-emphasises that the village extension agents must spend most of their time visiting farmers and their farms.
f. Regular and continuous training of their field staff through fortnightly training for village extension agents and black extension agents and through Monthly Technology Review Meetings (MTRM) for subject matter specialist and other staff should be ensured.
g. Linkage between research- this system supports a close tow way linkage between research and extension based on joint responsibility for field activities such as identifying production constraints and formulating production recommendations and organising MTRM.
Other essential features and requirement of the training & visit monitoring are built on supervision, continuous up-grading of staff monitoring and evaluation of all extension activities and provision of production recommendations that are economically feasible and relevant to the needs and resources conditions of the farmers.
The main idea behind the system is to have a competent VEWs who will visit farmers frequently and regularly with useful technical messages and bring farmers problems to research (Benr and Baxter, 1984).
They maintained that the methods to achieve this may vary from place to place to suit the prevailing conditions but the features must be closely followed.
Otherwise the potential effectiveness of the system, which then may no longer qualify as training and visit extension will be drastically curtailed.
3.4 Training Sponsor Preparation Coordinators should make a concerted effort to translate the theory of the cooperative method into the practice of successful sponsor preparation.
One way to apply this theory is to create a sponsor development plan.
This plan can in turn help the sponsor to provide relevant and meaningful experiences for the student.
The sponsor development plan can be described as a written plan that identifies what the coordinator must do to prepare the training sponsor to be a better teacher of the student-trainee.
Preparation of a sponsor development plan can be viewed as consisting of two stages- (1) training sponsor preparation and (2) continuing sponsor development.
Strategies that can be used in executing the plan include interviews during individual visits, group conferences with several training sponsors, and written guidelines in the form of a sponsor-training manual.
93 CO P 318 MODULE 4 Training sponsor development begins to take place during the coordinator’s first visit.
This initial face-to-face contact is crucial to the success of sponsor development because the way in which the program is initially presented will ultimately determine the long-term relationship with the training sponsor.
The preparation of the training sponsor for the role to be assumed sets the stage for all activities to be undertaken during the year.
The following are items that should be covered during the initial visit: a. orientation to cooperative education b. training sponsor’s role c. student’s role and responsibilities d. school/coordinator’s role.
a. Orientation on cooperative education The concept and philosophy of the cooperative method of instruction should be covered thoroughly.
This discussion establishes the foundation for successful operation of the program.
A study on cooperative education substantiates the importance of this discussion.
In the study, expectations of students in cooperative programs were contrasted with expectations of participating employers.
Results showed that students expected specific training for an occupation; academic credit for the work experience; varied and interesting work assignments; pleasant, fair, and helpful supervision; at least the minimum wage; and experience leading to further training.
The expectations of employers were quite different.
They expected the students to have the ability to perform a variety of tasks, to exhibit good work habits, and to display desirable personal attributes.
The employers wanted the school to provide specific occupational training, effective coordination, and solutions to problems that might arise.
It has been noted that the study identifies a most critical potential defect of cooperative education; employers may view the student essentially as a part-time worker, while students expect the experience to have educational significance.
The study indicates how essential an orientation component is to the development of a viable training station.
All participants in cooperative education must understand that the training station is to serve, primarily, as a training medium, rather than, merely as an opportunity for the student to obtain remunerative employment, or for an employer to obtain part-time help.
In the sponsor development plan, provision is made for this concept to be introduced and reiterated to training sponsors so that they will thoroughly understand it.
94  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION b.
Training sponsor’s role and responsibilities Training sponsors need and want to know what is expected of them while participating in the cooperative method of instruction.
A brief discussion of the sponsor’s major responsibilities is sufficient during the initial session.
Training sponsor responsibilities include: • conducting orientation for the student-learner • training and supervising the student-learner • providing the student-learner with learn-by-doing experiences • teaching specific skills and attitudes • evaluating student performance • counseling the student-learner on good work habits and attitudes, such as responsibility and dependability, and on other job-related matters • communicating with the coordinator about job-related matters concerning the student-learner.
c. Student’s Role and Responsibilities It is essential that the sponsor understand what is expected of a student enrolled in the cooperative method of instruction.
The sponsor must be aware of the policies and procedures that apply to the student as well as the fact that the student has been selected to participate in the program to further a particular career objective.
The sponsor should encourage the student to acquire particular career skills on the job through practice under supervision.
Student’s responsibilities include: • maintaining hours of work/school attendance • earning academic credit • adhering to specific school policies regarding participation in the cooperative method of instruction • communicating with the teacher-coordinator and training sponsor regarding job related matters.
d. School and teacher-coordinator’s roles and responsibilities The training sponsor also needs information about how the school experience and the teacher-coordinator fit into the cooperative partnership.
Items that should be discussed include: • the provision for related classroom instruction (content and objectives of curriculum) • the coordinator’s role as a teacher and as a partner in developing the training plan and a worksite visitation schedule • the purpose of visits 95 CO P 318 MODULE 4 • the preferred times of visits • the frequency of visits • related student-organisation involvement • evaluation of the student and of the total program • reporting policies and procedures.
e. Group sessions Although training sponsor preparation usually takes place during individual visits by the teacher-coordinator to each training station, a school-sponsored group function in which employers and/or training sponsors are brought together can prove beneficial.
The purpose of such an activity may be for training sponsors to hear a presentation on the cooperative method, to participate in a workshop, or simply to exchange ideas.
Ideally, such a session is scheduled as a luncheon or afternoon meeting held at the school or area career and technical education center.
It may be desirable to go to a community or business location.
The session should not be too long and probably will be well attended if held during the middle of the regular workweek.
The coordinator should be responsible for making all the necessary arrangements and planning the agenda.
In large school systems, a joint activity with coordinators and training sponsors from several high schools may be advisable.
The session can be planned by all or a committee of coordinators.
With this type of session, training sponsors from all over the city can be brought together for discussion and interaction among themselves and with coordinators.
Several topics that lend themselves to this type of session include: • sponsor preparation/orientation held early in the year • instructional techniques workshop • supervisory techniques with youth • training sponsor’s role in affiliated student organisations • program evaluation.
Group sessions have many advantages and should be considered as a strategy in implementing a sponsor development program.
f. Continuing Sponsor Development Once the foundation has been laid during the sponsor preparation phase and the training sponsor is aware of the instructional 96  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION approach in cooperative education, the coordinator should reinforce the concepts and assist the training sponsor in the performance of responsibilities as the “off-campus teacher”.
This reinforcement and assistance is a continuous process and one that should be prepared in advance.
It is carried out during the regularly scheduled visits of the coordinator to the training station.
By means of observation and discussion with the student and training sponsor, areas of assistance needed by the training sponsor can be discovered.
Care should be exercised, however, not to imply that the training sponsor is lacking in skill as an instructor or supervisor and therefore needs training.
Rather, a collegial relationship in which the sharing of information and expertise will result in a team approach should be stressed.
Consideration during the continuing phase of the sponsor development program should be given to preparation and utilisation of the training plan, instructional techniques, supervisory techniques, student evaluation, integration of affiliated student organisation activities, career awareness, and program evaluation.
g. Preparation and utilisation of the training plan In the continuing sponsor development program, a thorough knowledge and understanding by the sponsor of the purposes of and techniques for use of the training plan are essential.
After the initial conference items are described in the “preparation” stage, emphasis is given to the development and use of the training plan.
The sponsor should be acquainted with what a training plan is and what purposes it serves.
Next, the joint planning of the training plan with the student, sponsor, and coordinator should be accomplished.
A working session with all three persons present will expedite this planning session.
Finally, the coordinator and the training sponsor should devote a short period to review the training plan.
Although the use of a training plan will be continuous throughout the time a student is with an organisation, a specific visit early in the sponsor development program should be devoted to an extensive discussion and development of the training plan.
Involvement in the preparation of the training plan will help the sponsor become aware of the student’s occupational goal.
Also, the sponsor will then be more likely to provide adequate work activities and on- the-job instruction to assist the student in meeting individual objectives.
97 CO P 318 MODULE 4 h. Instructional techniques The coordinator should realise that the occupational competence of the training sponsor does not ensure teaching competence.
In fact, training sponsors may assume that the learner can perform a task after being told and shown once how it should be done.
Actually, research has shown that students can take from two to ten times longer to perform a task than is normally required by experienced workers.
Sponsor development in instructional techniques will be an on-going process.
In other words, an entire session will not, usually, be devoted to instructional techniques.
Rather, a sharing of information and spontaneous responses to a sponsor’s manifested need will establish the format.
This is easier said than done, for even though a coordinator has encouraged the training sponsors to discuss any concerns they may have regarding their instructional roles, most will be reluctant to communicate their teaching deficiencies openly with the coordinator.
Therefore, the coordinator, by means of observation and individual discussions with the training sponsor and the student, must determine specific areas and topics where the training sponsor needs assistance.
The coordinator should avoid any implication that the training sponsor is incompetent as an instructor.
The coordinator’s task is to serve as a resource person to the sponsor, providing needed information and assisting the sponsor in fulfilling the responsibility as the “out-of-school teacher”.
i.
Supervision of youth Supervision is the general charge of overseeing the student- learner on the job.
For most students, the cooperative experience is their first contact with the world of work.
Therefore, the supervisory techniques used by the training sponsor in dealing with the student are part of the foundation of attitudes and work habits that influence a lifetime of work and interpersonal relationships for the student.
The training sponsor, in conjunction with the coordinator, must help develop and foster the work habits and attitudes that a good worker needs.
As a supervisor, the training sponsor has the responsibility to be a constructive counselor to the student-learner and to help the young person adjust to and find satisfaction and reward in work.
Many training sponsors, however, may be unaware of the characteristics and behavior patterns of youth that make their supervision such a challenge.
A training sponsor’s success in supervision will depend on an understanding of what youth are like and application of the general principles of good supervision 98  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION to youth on the job.
The coordinator must assist the training sponsor in developing and adapting the general supervisory techniques that are most productive in dealing with the student.
j.
Student evaluation Monitoring the progress of the student is a responsibility of the training sponsor.
Many sponsors may prove reluctant, however, to be honest and realistic about the student under their supervision when they realise that their evaluation will be considered in assigning an academic grade for the cooperative experience.
Nevertheless, the training sponsor needs to note an honest and forthright assessment of the student’s strengths and weaknesses so that recommendations and improvements can be made.
Ideally, evaluation should be a continuous process, i.e., when the sponsor notes deficiencies, an immediate informal session should be held to communicate the deficiencies to the student.
Likewise, praise should accompany a task well done.
The use of the “evaluation” column on the training plan facilitates continuous assessment, and the coordinator should encourage use of this column by the training sponsor.
On coordination visits during the school grading period, the coordinator and training sponsor should discuss particular strengths and deficiencies of the student.
Strategies for improvement should be formulated, and criteria for further assessment identified.
Notations should be made by the coordinator on the evaluation section of the training plan.
The presence of the student at such a session is advisable.
At the time of the evaluation, a coordination visit should be devoted entirely to the process.
The coordinator will have an opportunity to work with the training sponsor in translating informal assessments into a more formal evaluation.
At the same time, the coordinator can assist the sponsor in improving skills for evaluating student progress.
k. Integration of career and technical student organisations Career and technical student organisations are an integral part of a total career and technical education curriculum.
As such, they are an important component of the cooperative experience.
Most training sponsors are unaware of the existence of student organisations, their co-curricular nature, and the many activities sponsored by them to achieve the objectives of leadership, skill, and citizenship development.
Training sponsors need information about career and technical student organisations, what goals they try to achieve, what kinds of activities students are involved in 99 CO P 318 MODULE 4 through them, and how training sponsors can assist in the career and technical student organisation curriculum component.
Although a discussion of the major goals, objectives, and activities of organisations is one way to convey this information to the training sponsor, a superior method is by inviting the sponsor to participate in the organisation’s activities.
Attending regularly scheduled meetings, being a guest speaker at a local meeting, serving as a judge in local competitive events, or chaperoning an organisation-sponsored trip are examples of activities in which a training sponsor may participate.
Involvement will enhance the sponsor’s understanding of an affiliated organisation and the sponsor’s role in the organisation.
The coordinator, through the planned sponsor development program, promotes such involvement.
l. Career awareness In addition to the obvious anticipated outcomes of the cooperative experience, such as skill development and adjustment to the work environment, students should also become aware of the various careers available in the career family.
Most students begin their cooperative experience believing that there are only a few occupations available to them.
Effort must be given to helping students become acquainted with the many occupations available within a career family.
Although some activities directed toward this goal can be part of classroom instruction, a more desirable way to learn of a career is through first-hand observation and exploration at the organisation where the students are working.
To provide such experiences for each student, the training sponsor and coordinator must plan the appropriate settings and desirable outcomes.
These pre-planned experiences should be included in the training plan and may take various forms, for example, a weekly or daily rotation for several weeks from one job to another for observation purposes or an investigation by means of interviews of the various duties and job responsibilities of persons in different positions within the organisation.
Regardless of the strategy employed, the important concept is that training sponsors be cognizant that career awareness is a desired outcome of the total cooperative method of instruction experience.
Furthermore, the coordinator is responsible for ensuring that efforts are made to provide appropriate career awareness experiences for each student.
100  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION m. Programme evaluation The coordinator should be concerned not only about the evaluation of individual students but also with the overall effectiveness of the total cooperative program.
How is the program contributing to the success of the total career and technical education program in the school?
This questions needs to be addressed.
One of the major components in this assessment is feedback from the people who are closely involved in the program.
In addition to feedback from students and graduates, employers and training sponsors should be given the opportunity to express their views on the strengths and weaknesses of the cooperative program.
Much valuable feedback can be obtained by informal conversations with training sponsors on routine coordination visits.
Likewise, a group meeting with several training sponsors and employers can facilitate an exchange of ideas that will provide worthwhile information for evaluation purposes.
3.4.1 Training Sponsor Manual or Resources A worthwhile strategy to be employed in a sponsor-development program is the development and use of a training sponsor manual.
The manual should be an attractive booklet containing pertinent information needed by the training sponsor.
Information arranged in an attractive format and organised in a way to facilitate ready reference is an asset to the training sponsor and a beneficial addition to your sponsor development program.
A typical manual may include the following items: • a short explanation of the cooperative method of instruction and individual program • a copy of the employer/employee training agreement • a copy of the parent/student agreement, if applicable (an additional agreement, usually, detailing parent/student responsibilities outlined in the training agreement) • an on-the-job orientation checklist • a sample training plan • a curriculum outlining topics to be covered in class • pertinent information about the affiliated career and technical student organisation • a copy of the student evaluation form.
Other helpful information such as-four-step teaching approach, school calendar, labour law information, school and coordinator’s names and telephone numbers.
Also, take note of the following additional ideas for sponsor development.
101 CO P 318 MODULE 4 • Conduct a luncheon/workshop session on techniques of supervision.
• Conduct a session to discuss the learning process in simple terms.
Sponsors should know how students learn in order to train them effectively.
• Send out a newsletter telling about in-school, related instruction.
• Conduct an open house of the related career and technical education department.
• Conduct an appreciation event (e.g., employer/employee banquet with the award of certificates to sponsors).
• Invite sponsors to a meeting of your advisory committee.
• Conduct a session on how to evaluate the student-employee.
• Invite sponsors to attend a career and technical student organisation activity.
• Conduct in-service classes for supervisors.
Employers are appreciative of courses in the latest techniques in the career and technical area.
• Ask sponsors to arrange a field trip for your class.
• Ask sponsors to serve as judges for local/regional events or to chaperone at state career and technical student organisation activities.
• Ask sponsors to be guest speakers in related classes.
• Ask sponsors to allow you to study a particular system within the employing organisation (job analysis).
Ask that they evaluate your procedures, survey instruments, etc.
• Ask sponsors to display materials during career and technical education week.
• Ask sponsors to arrange career awareness sessions for students in related classes.
• Explain procedures for making a final written evaluation of the student-trainee.
• Ask for suggestions concerning future in-service education classes that you might offer at the local high school to help sponsors with their own staff continuing education and improvement.
3.4.2 Orientation Training Checklist • Training sponsor- use one checklist for each student-trainee.
Check each item as it is completed.
Review information with the student-trainee after five days to ensure thorough comprehension.
• Introduce student-trainee to all persons with whom he/she will have contact.
• Give the student-trainee a tour of the training facility.
• Explain the duties of the student-trainee’s first assignment.
102  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION • Inform student-trainee as to who will supervise and give orders to the student-trainee.
• Inform co-workers of their relationship to student-trainee, and solicit their cooperation.
• Inform student-trainee of arrival time, quitting time, check-in, and check-out procedures.
• Inform student-trainee of lunchtime and relief procedures and regulations.
• Inform student-trainee of facilities available such as rest room, lunchroom, telephone, coat rack, etc.
• Inform student-trainee of time-recording procedure, pay schedule, deductions from pay, and computation of wages.
• Inform student-trainee about any information which is to be kept confidential.
• Familiarise student-trainee with employee benefits.
• Inform student-trainee of clauses in a union agreement, if one exists, that pertain to cooperative students.
• Inform student-trainee of promotional possibilities in the firm.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the features of training and visit system.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have been exposed to the concept of training and visit system in cooperative education.
The training and visit system is an attempt to reform and improve on the conventional extension system in many developing countries, which has not made the necessary impact on agricultural productivity.
It is a management procedure involving regular intensive training sessions for VEWs, followed by a scheduled of visit to farmers.
The system emphasises simplicity in organisation, objective and operations.
It has a well-defined organisation, mode of operation and provides continues feedback from the farmers to the extension and research workers.
It also allows for continues adjustments to the farmers needs.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt the following: • training and visit system, designed to improve the organisation of extension service • the merits and demerits of T & V system • features of training and visit system 103 CO P 318 MODULE 4 • training sponsor preparation and orientation training checklist.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What do you understand by training and visit system in cooperative education?
ii.
Discuss the concept of Training and Visit (T & V).
iii.
Enumerate the Merits and demerits of T & V system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Benor, D. & Baxter, M. N. (1984).
Training and Visit System.
(Agricultural Extension).
Washington, D.C. Laogu, E. A.
(2005).
‘Extension Teaching/Learning Process and Methods’.
In: S. F. Adedoyin (Ed.).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.202 -203.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludmu, O.L.
(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan : Asogun Publisher.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2012).
Nigeria and International Cooperative.
NOUN.
Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Onwubuya, E. A.
(2005).
‘Social and Educational Psychology in Extension’.
In: S.F.
Adedoyin.
(Ed.).
Agricultural Extesnion in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.
126-127.
The Rochdale Pioneers Museum (2002).Retrieved from http://www.manchester.com/tourist/rochdale/.
Williams, S. F. T., Fenley, J. M., & Williams, C. E. (1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria, pp.57-58.
Yahaya, M. K. (2003).
Development Communication: Lessons from Change and Social Engineering Projects.
104  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION UNIT 2 CONCEPT AND OVERVIEW OF THE USE OF EXTENSION METHODS IN COOPERATIVE EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 An Overview of the Use of Extension Methods 3.2 Concept of Extension Methods Used in Effective Cooperative Transformation 3.3 Conditions Necessary for Effective Use of Teaching Methods 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the concept and overview of the utilisation of extension methods employed in agricultural extension.
We are now going to look at this concept in detail.
The objectives below specify what you are expected to have learnt after studying this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • apply the concept of extension methods utilised in effecting cooperative transformation • identify the necessary conditions for effective use of teaching methods • explain the overview of the use of extension methods.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 An Overview of the Use of Extension Methods Extension workers are often concerned about what constitutes the most appropriate methods among all the array of approaches available.
It should be noted that there is no single rule-of-thumb that is applicable in all conditions.
The nature of the subject matter and the circumstances of the farmers such as their level of education will help to determine the 105 CO P 318 MODULE 4 type of method to be utilised.
A number of studies have shown the relative importance which extension staff attach to the use of extension methods.
In one of the studies, Pandy (1998) asked a group of 92 staff members of the Western Nigeria Ministry of Agriculture how they distribute their time among the various methods.
In response, 52 of them said they often held extension meetings, 25 said they often carried out demonstration of new farm practices, while 39 reported that they conducted demonstrations occasionally and 28 of them never carried out demonstration.
Twenty one of the respondents often used posters to show new practices, 59 said that farmers called to them to seek advice.
31 often took farmers on tours, while 18 often gave out pamphlets and bulletins.
Similarly, Obibuaku and Hursh (1994) studied the effects of radio, demonstrations, personal contact with extensions staff, films, lectures, newsletters, pamphlets on farm practices, adoption in the East Central State of Nigeria.
The results showed that the radio and agricultural demonstrations were the means most used in reaching the farmers.
The significant of the two methods may be related to the fact that the majority of the farmers were illiterate and thus responded more to those methods which emphasised seeing and hearing in contrast to those methods which emphasised reading.
Also Tenebe and Mundi (2008) carried out a research on comparative study of Direct Extension Teaching methods (DET) and Open and Distance Learning (ODL) on technology adoption rate by cowpea farmers in Bauchi State of Nigeria.
The DET methods used included contact lectures/seminars, workshop, field demonstration and on-farm trials while ODL methods included the use of print materials (pamphlets, posters and bulletins), radio and television.
The study revealed that the use of radio as a method of ODL is more effective than DET method and therefore recommended for successful technology adoption by cowpea farmers in Bauchi State of Nigeria.
The study also attempted to determine the effects of the various methods in helping to bring about improvements on the farm.
From the study, the researchers concluded, the results of this study indicate that in teaching farmers with little or no education, extension workers should be selective in the methods they use.
Very little use can be made of pamphlets, bulletins, circular letters and the like.
However, where the farmers are literate, extension written materials can make valuable contributions because of the specific nature of their message and the fact that they are available for easy reference.
The radio appears to be significant in making illiterate farmers aware of extension programmes; but it is less significant in when deciding on changes in farm practices.
From these and similar studies, it can be seen that extension workers in Nigeria are not making adequate use of extension methods in their work.
For example, 28 out of 92, or 30.43% of the 106  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION extension staff in Western Nigeria never used demonstrations in their teaching.
It is therefore necessary for all extension staff to understand the classification and usefulness of various extension methods.
3.2 The Concept of Extension Methods Extension teaching methods may be defined as devices used to create situations in which new information can pass freely between the extension worker and the farming communities.
It is the function of the extension workers or teachers to use the extension methods which provide opportunities for rural people to learn and which stimulate mental and physical activities among the people.
For cooperative extension workers to be successful, they must be proficient in technical knowledge and educational process and must also know the right attitude towards rural people.
The extension methods employed by the extension workers during the cooperative extension of development programme directly affect the effectiveness of their efforts.
An understanding of the strength and weakness of the various extension methods available to an extension worker is important because the results of the cooperative extension worker’s effort is dependent on the types and intensity of the methods he uses to pass on information to farmers and to persuade them to adopt new farm technologies.
Cooperative Extension education assists farmers to effectively use the resources available to them in solving their farm and domestic problems.
By giving farmers educational and material services, utilising effective extension methods, the extension service stimulates them to make such changes in their farm operations as will result in more efficient production and more profitable marketing of their farm products.
The extension worker should be careful and selective about the methods he uses.
Cooperative extension work requires many methods and tools of teaching.
People are influenced to make changes in behaviour in proportion to the degree of their contact with several different methods.
A good cooperative extension worker must not only have at his/her disposal a variety of teaching methods, but must know also where to use them when to use them and how to use them to achieve best results.
The teaching methods used by the extension workers differ according to farmers’ circumstance and their stance in the various stages of the adoption process.
107 CO P 318 MODULE 4 3.3 Conditions Necessary for Effective use of Teaching Methods in Cooperative The following conditions are necessary for effective utilisation of teaching methods.
1.
The learning objectives- as a precondition, objectives for the use of extension methods must be clearly stated.
An objective is defined as an end towards which teaching is directed.
Any purposeful teaching has specific objectives which must contain four basic elements namely; people to be taught, behavioural changes to be made, subject matter to be taught and life situation in which action is to take place.
2.
The learning situation- this comprises the extension worker who has clear objectives, knows the subject matter to be taught and is able to communicate, freely, with the farmers.
The learning also includes the people who are capable of and interested in learning and the subject matter which must be pertinent to farmers’ needs and which is taught at people’s intellectual level.
In physical terms, the learning situation should be true from outside distraction and should be comfortable.
Teaching equipment should be suitable to the subject matter presented and be available when required.
3.
Use of effective learning experiences- a learning experience is referred to as the mental or physical reaction one makes in a learning situation through seeing, hearing or performing activities during a learning process.
4.
Use of a variety of teaching methods- this is the final condition; provision should be made for the opportunity to utilise a variety of extension methods.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss the conditions necessary for effective use of extension methods.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the importance of extension method to cooperative education; this should further reinforce your understanding of the concepts discussed so far.
5.0 SUMMARY The main points in this unit are as follows: 108  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION • extension methods refer to devices used to create situations in which information can pass freely between the extension worker and the farmer.
• conditions necessary for effective use of extension methods include: Learning situation, learning objectives, learning experiences and variety of teaching methods.
• it is very important for all extension workers to understand the classification and utilization of various extension methods.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and explain four significant conditions for effective utilisation of instructional methods?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Laogu, E. A.
(2005).
‘Extension Teaching/Learning Process and Methods.’ In: S. F. Adedoyin (Ed.).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.202 -203.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludmu, O.L.(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan : Asogun Publisher.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2012).
Nigeria and International Cooperative.
NOUN.
Obibuaku, L. O.
& Hursh, G. D. (1994).
“Farm Practice Adoption in the Eastern States of Nigeria”.
Journal of Agricultural Administration (1), 18-20.
Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Onwubuya, E. A.
(2005).
‘Social and Educational Psychology in Extension’.
In, S.F.
Adedoyin.(Ed.).
Agricultural Extesnion in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.
126-127.
Pandy, R. S. (1998).
Managing Rural Development.
Lessons & Methods from Eastern Africa.
Institute for Development Studies, University of Sussex.
Williams, S. F. T., Fenley, J. M., & Williams, C. E. (1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria, pp.57-58.
Yahaya, M. K. (2003).
Development Communication: Lessons from Change and Social Engineering Projects.
109 CO P 318 MODULE 4 UNIT 3 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION EXTENSION METHODS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Cooperative Education Extension Methods 3.2 Group Methods 3.3 Exhibits are Systematic Displays 3.4 Mass Methods 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will introduce you to the extension methods employed in cooperative agricultural extension.
We are now going to look at this concept in detail.
The objectives below specify what you are expected to have learnt after studying this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state ccooperative education extension methods • explain mass methods and group methods.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Cooperative Education Extension Methods Cooperative education extension methods may be classified into three groups- on the basis of the number of people they are designed to reach; these are- (i) individual methods (ii) group methods and (iii) mass methods.
a.
Individual methods Individual methods are used in extension teaching in recognition of the fact that learning is an individual process and that the personal influence of the cooperative extension worker is an important factor in securing people’s participation in extension activities.
The various methods which come under the 110  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION classification of individual methods include farm and home visits, office calls, telephone calls, personal letters, informal contacts and result demonstrations.
Farm and home visits are essential elements of extension education.
They provide a means of personal communication between the farm family and the extension worker in an environment where they can discuss matters of common interest in privacy and without the distractions and interruptions commonly experienced in group cooperative extension activities.
Societies, Farm and home visits serve the following useful purposes to: 1 acquaint cooperative extension worker with the member/farmer and farm family 2 answer specific requests for help 3 gain firsthand knowledge of problems faced by the member/farmer or villager 4 explain a recommended practice 5 follow up and observe the results of recommended practices 6 plan an activity such as demonstration, or a meeting 7 invite the member/farmer or villager to participate in a planned activity 8 discuss policies and programmes 9 recruit, train or encourage a local volunteer leader b.
Individual instruction Teachers should design instructions according to the needs of individual students.
For example, manuals should be left to the students to work at their own pace.
This is because people differ in intelligence at the rate that they assimilate or comprehend.
You should work from one student to another.
During examinations, questions set should cover the different domains of knowledge to take care of individual differences.
Careful and adequate preparation is the key to a successful visit as with all cooperative extension methods.
Visits are cooperative extensive in terms of time and transportation.
Preparation for a visit will include a review of all the known facts about the organisation and farm, the member/farmer and the family, specific information concerning the problem, purpose or activity involved and materials such as leaflets and samples that may be left with the member/farmer.
Office calls are made by the member/farmer for the purpose of satisfying a felt need.
They are an expression of interest by the farmer in a need which he hopes the extension worker can help him meet.
111 CO P 318 MODULE 4 Office calls provide the cooperative extension worker with knowledge of the needs of the farming community.
Like farm and home visits, they help to build member/farmers’ confidence in the worker and create good public relations.
They are less expensive and time consuming than farm and home visits.
However, the member/farmer may feel less at home in the office and may be sensitive to the attitude of the worker.
He may also be too shy to disclose the real purpose of his visit.
Telephone calls are initiated by either the member/farmer or the cooperative extension worker, they are useful in giving specific information relating to treatment of known diseases, control of insect pests or to answer questions on interesting broadcasts or requests for bulletins and leaflets.
Telephone calls cannot be used where telecommunication system is under-developed.
Personal letters are useful in answering request for information, as follow-up after visits and office calls and in contacting local volunteer leaders.
The use of letters as a teaching method is quite limited in countries lacking an efficient postal service or where many rural residents are illiterate.
Be careful that the information you give in a letter is simple, understandable and complete without being wordy or including unnecessary information.
Remember, the words you put on paper are all he has to go by in determining your meaning.
Informal contacts provide many opportunities for effective extension work.
Every experienced cooperative extension worker has had people stop him on the street or in the village to ask a question.
Often, seeing the cooperative extension worker will remind the villager of a problem about which he would like technical advice.
Market days, picnics, holiday celebrations and religious events bring people together.
Where people gather, they talk about current problems in farming and rural life.
By attending such events, the cooperative extension worker will become better acquainted with his people, learn of their wants, needs and problems and be able to impart information on an informal basis.
Result demonstration is a method by teaching designed to show, by example the practical application of an established fact or group of facts.
‘Result demonstration”- is one which shows after a period of time what happened after a practice is adopted.
As an example, compost is put on a certain field; good seed potatoes are planted/cultivated, in the next field, no compost is used and poor seed potatoes are used.
At harvest time, the potatoes are dug in each field at the same time.
The villagers have watched all during the planting, growing and harvesting season.
They see how good results come from using better practices.
This is a result of 112  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION “demonstration”.
Comparison is the essential ingredient in result demonstration.
c. Demonstration For any skill subject, demonstration by a skilled teacher is essential.
The development of skill requires practice, but a student cannot secure the best result from his practice unless he knows how it is practiced.
That is, he must know how he is to perform it.
This he can effectively achieve by observing a competent teacher demonstrate the skill.
For example, a good teacher of skill subject will show the students how to build the techniques for skill subjects In demonstrating a skill, the teacher has to perform it in stages, but slowly, first and the entire class must see what he does.
He can do this by dividing the class into smaller groups or demonstrate to individual students.
The advantages of result demonstration are as follows.
1 It provides local proof of the desirability of adopting a recommended practice 2 It is an efficient method for introducing a new subject 3 It appeals to the eye and reaches the “show me” individual 4 Provides a good source of information for meetings, news items, pictures, radio talks 5 Furnishes cost data and other basic information 6 A high percentage of people will understand 7 Aids in developing local leadership 8 Establishes confidence in the extension worker and in extension work 9 It teaches needed skill to many people at one time 10 It builds confidence in extension worker if demonstration is skilfully performed 11 Local leaders easily learn simple demonstrations and can repeat them with other groups 12 It promotes personal acquaintance between the demonstrators and the farmers.
Limitations 1 Result demonstration requires a large amount of extension workers time 2 The cost is high per practice changed 3 Good demonstrations are hard to find 4 Few people see the demonstration at a not-convincing stage 113 CO P 318 MODULE 4 5 The teaching value is frequently destroyed by unfavourable weather.
In general, smaller groups are preferred to larger groups.
We also have method demonstration- this is to teach a skill.
It teaches how to do certain work.
It is always interesting to the farmers and especially when the demonstration is concluded by the extension worker, it increases their respect for the worker.
Examples of method demonstration subjects include- (i) seed treatment (ii) pruning, and (iii) spraying.
Things to note in method demonstration are as follows: 1. outline operations in logical steps 2. identify key points 3. carefully select materials and tools 4. arrange for diagrams or other teaching aids 5. rehearse demonstration until perfect 6. make sure all the audience can see and hear him 7. explain purpose and show application to local problem 8. show each operation slowly, step by step 9. emphasise key points 10. invite members of audience to repeat demonstration.
d. Use the following steps for demonstration 1.
Explanation and demonstration by the teacher 2.
Imitation by learner 3.
Evaluation by you and students 4.
Imitation by the students 5.
Re-evaluation by both e. The demonstration method may be used when: a. teaching psychomotor skills b. when the teacher want to appeal to the 5 senses of the students c. when he wants the students to emulate a particular course of action d. when there is need for the students to know the process of an action.
f. Tips before using the demonstration method a.
Ensure that you have all the required materials.
b.
Know how many minutes the demonstration would last.
c. Have a thorough knowledge of the subject matter.
You should not be too fast at each point in time.
d. Ask questions to ensure that the students are following.
Erase any bias that may interfere with the learning process.
114  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION e. Focus on specific topics to avoid building too much into the students.
The students may want to divert your attention, tactfully call them to order.
f. In using this method Ahukannah (2002), stressed that the teacher should exhibit the following qualities: i. confidence and poise ii.
mutual respect iii.
tolerance in controversial situations iv.
humour and Self-abasement when demanded by the situation objectivity.
3.2 Group Methods Group Study/Project Work The teacher should organise the situation in a manner that will make the students work cooperatively with one another.
By encouraging joint effort the students will see the need to cooperate with one another and work to accept group decision.
In addition, this may help the dull students to work harder.
Give them different projects to carry out and let them develop the human relation skills by learning how to accommodate one another.
Group methods take into account the inclination of the individual to respond to the pressures and opinions of groups in which he participates and to listen to the views of others before arriving at a decision about making changes in his farming operations.
Group method include general meetings, group discussion, exhibits, tours and field trips, method demonstrations, extension schools and farmer training centre.
General meetings include all kinds of meetings held by the extension worker except demonstration meetings.
The method of conducting the meetings may be lectures, discussions, showing of slides and motion pictures or any combination of these.
The method of the meeting must be well thought out and the agenda carefully prepared in order to achieve objectives envisaged.
During the meeting, provision should be made for use of models, charts, specimens, pictures etc., to illustrate points.
Towards the end of the meeting, room should be made for questions and answers which would help clarify specific ideas.
To make the meeting successful, the extension worker should enlist the help of local leaders to: 1 agree on the purpose of the meeting and to draw up tentative programme 2 decide on and secure speakers 3 arrange for social and recreational aspects of the meeting 4 agree on the place and time of the meeting 5 select the chairman and advertise the meeting.
115 CO P 318 MODULE 4 Group discussion is a method commonly used in cooperative extension work.
Generally, discussion is the process by which two or more persons pool their knowledge and feelings, and through mutual agreement clarify the issues under consideration.
There are several distinct types of group discussion meetings.
The newest idea is called “brain trust” in which questions are posed and the participating “brains” provide their opinions and views.
Actually this is quite similar to panel and symposium discussions.
The panel is, usually, a rather informal discussion by several “experts” to consider a major topic, while a symposium is characterised by having several speakers, each of whom gives a rather detailed and usually prepared presentation of his views.
Sometimes the symposium speakers are given a chance to answer one or more of the others in a form of rebuttal.
Exhibits and Displays Exhibits are systematic displays of specimens, models, charts, posters, etc.
Their main purpose is to develop the interest of those who see them, influence their attitude, increase their knowledge and stimulate them to action.
Exhibits are considered as some of the best methods of teaching illiterates.
A well planned educational exhibit can present information quickly and convincingly.
Exhibit have imaginative appeal, and can stimulate competitive spirit among participants; this will be, particularly, so when prizes are awarded to those who produce the best shows.
An exhibit can be of any size.
It can be a display of a few potted maize plants with different levels of fertilizer treatments or it can be as big as world agricultural fair.
However, for extension purposes, they should be made simple, and should convey only one idea at a time.
Tours and field trips are methods of extension teaching which appeal to man’s desire to “go places and see things”.
It represents a teaching method whereby a group of people are taken on a study tour to observe the result of improved practices in actual situations.
This means that the group will travel together for a day or more.
Tours are among the best methods of teaching farm people to gain practical knowledge because people learn through seeing things in actual operation.
Tours are most suited for teaching groups such as members of Young Farmers Clubs.
A tour can be made to a research station, demonstration farms and similar places of educational interest.
The following suggestion will help you plan and hold a successful tour or field trip.
1.
Decide exactly what you wish to accomplish 2.
Work out a detailed plan for the tour well in advance 116  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.
Go through a rehearsal or “dry run” of the entire programme well in advance 4.
On the day of the tour, keep the party together and keep them moving briskly from point to point.
Advantages 1.
It teaches needed skill to many people at one time.
2.
Seeing, hearing, discussing and participating stimulate action.
3.
It builds confidence in extension worker if demonstration is skilfully performed.
4.
Local leaders easily learn simple demonstrations and can repeat them with other groups.
5.
It promotes personal acquaintance between the demonstrators and the farmers.
6.
It influences changes in practice with many people at a single meeting.
Limitations 1.
It is frequently difficult to ensure that all members of the group can see clearly.
2.
With certain considerable equipment must be transported to the meeting places.
3.
Requires a certain amount of showmanship not possessed by all extension workers.
Extension schools are designed to give the participants knowledge and skill in some specific line of subject matter such as irrigation methods, dress making or gardening.
Schools involve intensive training over a specific period of time, such as one to four days.
They may require pre- enrolment and an obligation to attend all sections.
Schools offer an opportunity for presentation of much information in a short time to a selected group of people with special interest in the subject.
They must be well organised with specific teaching objectives and employ teaching methods which will hold the interest of participants.
Demonstrations, discussions and the use of visuals add much to their effectiveness.
Periodic and terminal evaluations help to keep the programme realistic and provide guidance in conducting future schools.
Member/Farmer training centre have been used effectively in a number of developing countries to train member/farmers and their wives in concepts and practices of modern societies, agriculture and home making.
Leadership training appears to be the most effective role of member/farmer training centres.
To fulfil this role, training centre 117 CO P 318 MODULE 4 programmes must be integrated with cooperative extension programmes to the extent that: 1. subjects of training contribute to the educational objectives included in the cooperative extension programme 2. participants are selected on the basis of their leadership potential and through recommended leader recruitment processes, and 3. returned participants are utilised in planning and executing cooperative programmes.
3.4 Mass Methods Individual and group methods cannot reach everyone who wants and needs information.
Radio, television, cinema vans and public address systems, newspapers, posters and other printed materials are used to reach large numbers of people quickly.
Radio is one of the fastest, most powerful and in many countries the only way of communicating with the masses of rural people.
It reaches people of all cultural levels who understand the language of transmission.
An advantage of radio programmes is that they can be done almost anywhere through the use of tape recorder.
Radio is useful in reporting spot news, such as announcement of meetings, for warning about insect outbreaks, and especially as a part of campaigns.
Listening habits may vary according to the society involved.
Studies of listening habits will tell the extension worker when his listeners are likely to be men and women and at what hours they listen most.
Take these factors into account when planning your programme.
Television adds a second dimension to radio broadcasting thus increasing the scope of methods available to the extension worker.
He/she can demonstrate as well as talk.
Television programmes require meticulous preparation.
Every piece of equipments must be in place and the dialogue must be well thought out.
In spite of the relatively high cost of receiving sets, television occupies an increasingly important role in developing countries.
Television and radio could be used to vary teaching methods in order to stimulate students’ interest.
As this is being done, the students should be asked to take down notes.
The teacher should try his best to control the atmosphere.
At the end of the lecture, find out how far they have followed the lesson by means of questions and demonstration.
Advantages of radio and television 1.
Radio programmes are especially fitted to handle emergency information.
2.
Reach people who cannot read.
118  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.
Reach people who cannot attend extension meetings.
4.
Build interest in other extension activities.
Limitations 1.
Broadcasting facilities are not everywhere available.
2.
Active involvement of the audience in the teaching process is impossible.
3.
Frequently extension programmes are given poor time for farm listeners.
4.
Direct and immediate feedback from the audience to the teacher is not possible.
5.
Frequently extension programmes loose out in competition with entertainment.
6.
Specific local needs cannot be given adequate attention and there is often cultural gap (e.g.
language, dialect) between the speaker and the audience.
a. Poster A poster is a sheet of paper or cardboard with an illustration and usually a few simple words.
It is designed to catch the attention of the passer by, impress on him a fact or an idea and stimulate him to support an idea, get more information or take some kind of action.
Since a single glance may be all your poster will get, the message must be simple and clear.
Details and wordy sentences have no place.
Here are a few suggestions that will help you design more effective posters.
1.
Decide exactly who your audience is.
Decide exactly what you want to tell them.
Decide what you want them to do.
2.
Put down on a sheet of paper words and rough pictures that express your message simply and clearly.
3.
Try to put your message into a few words- a concise striking slogan.
Visualise or put into picture for the most important central idea in the message.
4.
Cut out your poster in small scale.
Other suggestions include use plain, bold lettering and lines.
Use colour to attract attention and for contrast.
Remember however that too many colours add confusion.
Allow plenty of space.
Do not crowd letters, words or illustrations.
Simple folders, leaflets and pamphlets can be used in many ways in extension programmes.
They may be used singly for example to explain the advantage of societies.
They may be used as reminders of when to societies have goods and services to offers members.
Folders, leaflets and pamphlets may be used in coordination with other visuals in long-range campaigns.
Due to their low cost, they 119 CO P 318 MODULE 4 can be given away at meetings and fairs and offered on radio programmes.
They are useful to supplement large publications when new information is available and reprinting the whole publication is not practical.
Other methods are listed below.
1.
Use of brochures Brochures are little pamphlets written by companies or institutions explaining to people their activities and what they can do.
The teacher can request students to go to these companies and collect their brochures.
These pamphlets can be got from libraries, firms etc.
This will make the student feel more committed to learning.
The teacher should go through the pamphlets with the students and then post same on the bulletin board for other students.
2.
Use audiovisual aids These include demonstration, role-play, field trip, motion picture and television.
Audio- record player, radio, cassette recorder, etc Visual- textbooks, chalkboard, class bulletin board, mounted pictures, graphic materials, etc.
If all these are used or applied, students will become more interested and there will be higher interest in learning at the tertiary level.
3.
Discussion Presenting real life cases and problems will enable the students to see the relevance of learning to everyday activities.
A lot of knowledge should be obtained not only from textbooks but also from happenings around the environment.
Develop creativity in them by asking them to give examples of such happenings.
This would make them to start acquiring materials for use in the long run.
Use practical examples in teaching 4.
Questionnaire Students can be taught how to develop questionnaire and questions for interviews.
Ask students to go to firms, to ask questions of things you want them to know or what they want to know.
The questions have to be drafted before they leave, and whatever they collect from the firm, is termed first hand information.
Give them opportunity to present what they have brought while you guide them.
5.
Role-play It is a method of human interaction that involves realistic behaviour in any imaginary situation.
Students can be asked to role-play, such things that come up in real life or what they have learnt in class.
You have to distribute each person’s function to ensure sound role-play.
This will remain in their minds for a long time.
120  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 6.
Field trips to business offices/pilot projects The teacher has to plan very well before going on a field trip with the students.
In short, objectives must be clearly defined.
The firm must be contacted and must be there to show to the students what they have come for and help to direct them.
At the end of the presentation, the teacher should find out from the students if they have any question for the firm.
This is to prevent students from asking further questions when they come back to the class.
7.
Guest speakers People from different works of life could be invited to speak to the students on different topics.
They should be consulted in advance and should be told the background of the students, the objectives you have in mind i.e.
what you want him to speak on, so that he can plan ahead.
As he speaks, ask them to note important points and questions to be discussed.
8.
Question method Questions can be divided as shown below.
1.
Facts questions that are based on information-presented in a text book, reports, journals or periodicals.
Answering fact questions demands that students study the material and remember the facts presented.
2.
Thoughtful, or discussion questions that require the students to reason or brainstorm.
It is not the type that will recall answers.
Rather, it often starts with why, explain or how do you account for..?
3.
Application questions that require the students to apply the original situations, rules, principles presented in the textbook.
They may use a combination of the 2 classes of questions or 3 as the case may be.
Practical tips for instructors/facilitators/teachers 1.
Avoid reading your lesson note or lecture always.
2.
Avoid extending the lecture beyond the attention span of the students.
3.
Avoid assuming that students have understood all you have said.
4.
Design your lesson/lecture to meet specific objectives.
5.
Know your material and organise them properly.
6.
Limit your teaching to the ability level of the students.
7.
Occasionally, direct the instruction to students as individuals, and as a group.
8.
Train your students to take note during instruction; emphasise the strong points for them to note.
9.
Use attention-getting devices such as listening, discussion, questioning, to mention a few, during the lesson.
121 CO P 318 MODULE 4 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List and explain two extension methods used in cooperative education.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the communication processes within cooperative systems.
5.0 SUMMARY In summary, this unit examines various teaching methods and strategies such as demonstration, field trip, discussions, individual paced instruction and small group instruction among others.
It is worthwhile to know in great details what each of them meant and what they are used for and when to use in relation to communication process and system members and the society at large.
The level of information received and process served as a catalyst for improved knowledge.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss communication processes within cooperative systems.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ahukannah, L.I.
(2002).
‘Teaching Methodology in Vocational/Technical Education.’ Paper Presented at a Workshop Organised for Lecturers of Polytechnics in the South- East Zone at the Federal Polytechnic, Nekede, Owerri, 2nd – 6th, September.
Benor, D. & Baxter, M.N.
(1984).
Training and Visit system.
(Agricultural Extension).
Washington, D.C. pp.3-18.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludmu, O.L.
(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan : Asogun Publisher.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2012).
Nigeria and International Cooperative.
NOUN.
Njoku, C.U.
(2002).
‘Teaching Methods in Technical and Vocational Education: A Focus on the New Curriculum’.
Paper Presented at the Workshop Organised on the Implementation of the New Curriculum for Mechanical Trade Teachers of Technical Colleges in the South-East Zone at the Staff Development Centre, Federal Polytechnic, Nekede, Owerri.
3rd – 7th June.
122  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION Obibuaku, L. O.
& Hursh, G. D. (1994).
“Farm Practice Adoption in the Eastern States of Nigeria”.
Journal of Agricultural Administration (1), 18-20.
Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Onwubuya, E. A.
(2005).
‘Social and Educational Psychology in Extension’.
In: S.F.
Adedoyin.(Ed.).
Agricultural Extesnion in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.
126-127.
Yahaya, M. K. (2003).
Development Communication: Lessons from Change and Social Engineering Projects.
pp.
198 – 200.
123 CO P 318 MODULE 4 UNIT 4 COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION PROCESS IN COOPERATIVE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Communication Processes within Cooperative Systems 3.2 Information Needs of Members (Farmers) of Cooperative 3.3 Market Information Needs of Cooperative Members/Farmers 3.4 Problems of Cooperative Information Dissemination 3.5 Computer Application and Cooperative Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we examined the extension methods used in cooperative studies and practice for educating members and the society at large.
The level of information received and process serve as a catalyst for improved knowledge.
In this unit, we are entering into a new field of communication and information process in cooperative education.
Our focus will be on the communication processes within cooperative system, information needs of members/farmers of cooperative, market information needs of cooperative members/farmers and the problems of cooperative information dissemination.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • demonstrate communication processes within cooperative systems • explain information needs of members/farmers of cooperative • state market information needs of cooperative members/farmers • list the problems of cooperative information dissemination • discuss the use of computer application to cooperative education.
124  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Communication Processes within Cooperative Systems Most of this communication has taken the form of verbal explanations and practical demonstrations, but some information took a more durable form as soon as systems of writing were developed.
The concept that the broader function of cooperative work is to help people to solve their own problems through the application of scientific knowledge is now generally accepted.
Two particular issues help to define the type of communication systems in cooperative education- how communication takes place, and why it takes place.
How communication takes place in cooperative system- paternalism versus participation Early books on communication often describe a model of communication that involved the transmission of messages from "senders" to "receivers".
As part of this model, senders are ,usually, people in authority, such as government planners, researchers, and cooperative executive, member and staff, while receivers are usually members/farmers who are relatively poor and uneducated.
Although this model might include something called "feedback", it is clear that the senders are in control of the communication process.
The transmission model of communication is closely related to the idea that cooperative workers are the link (i.e.
message carriers) between researchers (senders) and farmers (receivers).
A cooperative programme based on this model has been described as "paternalistic"; in other words, the actors in the communication process have a parent/child or teacher/student relationship.
In many countries, paternalistic cooperative is, gradually, being replaced by more participatory approaches, in which the knowledge and opinions of members/farmers is considered to be just as important as that of researchers or government officials.
Participatory approaches involve information-sharing and joint decision-making.
The terms "interactive" and "bottom-up" have been used to describe these approaches.
The development of participatory cooperative education requires a re- examination of the communication process.
At the present time, no single description has replaced the transmission model that is referred to above, but two ideas are becoming widely accepted.
Communication in the context of participatory cooperative cannot usefully be described in a linear manner with distinct groups of senders and receivers.
Instead, cooperative activities take place within a knowledge system consisting of many actors who play different roles at different times.
125 CO P 318 MODULE 4 Although some actors in the knowledge system have more authority than others, communication usually involves a negotiation rather than a transmission.
What takes place is a dialogue, with actors collaborating in the construction of shared meanings rather than simply exchanging information.
The related, but separate field of agricultural communication has emerged to contribute to in-depth examinations of the communication processes among various actors within and external to the agricultural system.
This field would refer to the participatory extension or cooperative model as a form of public relations rooted two- way symmetrical communication based on mutual respect, understanding, and influence between an organisation and its stakeholders (publics).
Four paradigms of cooperative Any particular cooperative system can be described both in terms of both how communication takes place and why it takes place.
It is not the case that paternalistic systems are always persuasive, nor is it the case that participatory projects are, necessarily, educational.
Instead, there are four possible combinations, each of which represent a different extension paradigm; let us consider this below.
a.
Technology transfer (persuasive+paternalistic).
This paradigm was prevalent in colonial times, and reappeared in the 1970s and 1980s when the training and visit system was established across Asia.
Technology transfer involves a top to bottom approach that delivers specific recommendations to farmers about the practices they should adopt.
b.
Advisory work (persuasive+participatory)- this paradigm can be seen today where government organisations or private consulting companies respond to members/farmers enquiries with technical prescriptions.
It also takes the form of projects managed by donor agencies and NGOs that use participatory approaches to promote pre-determined packages of technology.
c. Human resource development (educational+paternalistic)- this paradigm dominated the earliest days of extension in Europe and North America, when universities gave training to rural people who were too poor to attend full-time courses.
It continues today in the outreach activities of colleges around the world.
Top- down teaching methods are employed, but students are expected to make their own decisions about how to use the knowledge they acquire.
d. Facilitation for empowerment (educational+participatory)- this paradigm involves methods such as experiential learning and member/farmer-to-member/farmer exchanges.
Knowledge is gained through interactive processes and the participants are 126  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION encouraged to make their own decisions.
The best known examples in Asia are projects that use Member/Farmer Field Schools (MFFS) or Participatory Technology Development (PTD).
3.2 Information Needs of Members (Farmers) of Cooperative No one can, categorically, claim to know all the information needs of members/farmers, especially, in an information dependent sector like agriculture, where there are new and rather complex problems facing members/farmers every day.
It is safe to assert that the information needs of Nigerian small scale farmers revolve around the resolution of problems such as pest hazards, weed control, moisture insufficiency, soil fertility, farm credit, labor shortage, soil erosion and so forth.
The information needs may be grouped under five headings- agricultural inputs; cooperative extension education; agricultural and cooperative technology; agricultural and cooperative credit; and marketing.
An examination of the factors influencing the adoption and continued use of these inputs will show that information dissemination is a very important factor.
It is a factor that requires more attention than it now gets.
Cooperative extension education- the general lack of awareness among small scale farmers can be attributed to their high level of illiteracy.
This contributes to the low level of adoption of agricultural production technology.
Extension is a type of education which is functional rather than formal.
It is better provided by cooperative workers whose main task is to convey information in a meaningful form to members/farmers.
One of the ways they do this is by training a group of model members/farmers with the hope that such members/farmers come in contact with other members/farmers.
Agricultural cooperative technology- this, for the small scale farmer, must help minimise the loss of farm chores.
It should be labor-saving, labor-enhancing and labor-enlarging.
The member/farmer needs information on production technology that involves cultivating, fertilizing, pest control, weeding and harvesting.
This sort of information is at the moment being diffused by cooperative extension workers, other members/farmers, government parastatal and agricultural equipment dealers.
Agricultural cooperative credit- agricultural cooperative credit encompasses all loans and advances granted borrowers to finance and service production activities relating to agriculture, fisheries and forestry and also for processing, marketing, storage and distribution of products 127 CO P 318 MODULE 4 resulting from these activities.
Small scale members/farmers are among the potential beneficiaries of agricultural credit in Nigeria but because of their low level of literacy they are mostly unaware of existing loan facilities.
To reap the benefit of credit, farmers need information relating to sources of loan such as names of lenders, location and types of existing credit sources.
They need information on the terms of loans such as the interest rates, loan able amount and mode of repayment.
Information regarding agricultural credit gets to small scale members/farmers usually through channels such as relations, friends, neighbors, government officials, commercial and credit banks.
Grassroots’ organs such as village heads and local government officials are used to diffuse such information because of their personal touch with small scale farmers.
Cooperative Extension agents need to intensify their efforts in educating members/farmers to increase their level of awareness.
Marketing- all business activities involved in the movement of commodities from production to consumption is marketing.
The market information needs are those that enable him make rational and relevant decisions.
Market information services have the function of collecting and processing market data systematically and continuously, and of making it available to market participants in a form relevant to their decision making.
3.3 Market Information Needs of Cooperative Members/Farmers Market information needs of cooperative members/farmers include the following.
a.
Information on product planning- this is information on what crop and variety to grow at a given season with marketability of such a crop as an important deciding factor.
Information on current prices Information on forecast of market trends.
This type of information assists farmers in planning their market products.
b.
Information on sales timing- this assists members/farmers in ensuring that they do not cause a market glut.
It enables them to stagger harvesting and quantity for marketing.
Information on improved marketing practices.
It includes information on improved harvesting methods.
This information is disseminated by field level cooperative extension workers by demonstration on farmer's fields, at local and wholesale markets.
c. Information on group marketing- this enables small scale to have organised sales of marketable surplus and bulk transport of produce.
In Nigeria, agricultural market information to small 128  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION scale farmers and cooperative patronage is provided by the Ministry of Agriculture through the field level cooperative extension workers and by the broadcasting media.
A lot still has to be done in this area.
Some of those in charge of market information are not trained for the job.
d. Agricultural information dissemination- within the past two decades there has been a burst of research activities in the area of agriculture in Nigerian universities and agricultural research centre located around the country.
Far reaching innovations that are capable of boosting small scale agricultural production and Nigeria's economic development have been discovered.
The yam mini-set technique, protein rich soya-bean production and utilisation techniques, production and use of animal vaccines and drugs and labor saving devices are some of the many improved agricultural innovations not properly diffused.
Prominent among the agricultural centers are the International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA), the National Root Crops Research Institute, the National Veterinary Research Institute and the three universities of agriculture.
Unfortunately, most of these innovations do not reach the farmer's field.
This is because the medium for information dissemination in use are not quite effective.
3.4 Problems of Cooperative Information Dissemination There are some limiting factors and apparent constraints in cooperative information dissemination in Nigeria, including status differences between extension agents and their clients.
One of the obvious constraints in the use of the broadcasting media in Nigeria is poor reception quality and the area covered.
The messages carried are not tailored to the information needs of rural populations.
Even when the information is relevant, it is seldom aired at the proper time and so does not get to the targeted audience.
Another major constraint is the use of print media: Leaflets and newsletters as message carriers are of limited use in reaching illiterate farmers.
Technical language used in communicating information is incomprehensible to the members/farmers.
Yet another constraint to agricultural information dissemination is the inadequacy of existing extension programs.
Some of these programs are conceived without well thought out plans and are prepared in a hurry without the members/farmers whose attitudes are to be changed making any input.
Such agricultural information packages can neither sustain the farmers' interest nor effect the desired attitudinal change.
Members/Farmers' interests are disregarded even more as most of the 129 CO P 318 MODULE 4 agricultural innovations are written and broadcast in English instead of the local language.
When local language is used, emphasis is often on the three major Nigerian languages Hausa, Ibo and Yoruba.
These programs are broadcast when farmers are far away in the fields or too tired to listen after the day's toil.
A majority of the farmers do not own radio sets.
Well-intentioned agricultural programs can be marred by poor implementation and too much bureaucracy.
For example, the Cooperative Extension Centre of the University of Agriculture, Makurdi, has a competent corps of subject specialists without adequate funding, facilities and logistic support like visual aids, equipment, transportation and adequate communication channels.
As a result, the centre has not been able to achieve the expected impact on the immediate university community.
The present ratio of 1 extension worker to 3,000 farmers is inadequate for effective agricultural information diffusion.
The problem is compounded by the paucity of women as extension agents, especially, in a society where cultural and religious taboos make it impossible for male extension workers to reach women farmers who outnumber male small scale farmers.
Many people in cooperatives are ill-prepared for cooperative and cooperative communication job.
The emphasis in their training is more on technical proficiency rather than on rhetorical and persuasive skills.
Cooperative member trained in this way, is unlikely to make an impact on a conservative member/farmer who is not likely to put his farm inputs to risk by trying the improved technique.
There is real need for cooperative agents training to be relevant to their jobs at the grassroots.
3.5 Computer Application and Cooperative Education Computers are general purpose machine, commonly consisting of digital circuitry, that accepts (inputs), stores, manipulates, and generates (outputs) data as numbers, text, graphics, voice, video files, or electrical signals, in accordance with instructions called a program.
Application may refer to verbal or written request.
Therefore, computer application is simply another word for a computer program or executable file.
The most important benefit of computers is their practicability.
A single machine allows students to calculate, to write essays and to search for information while listening to music.
For example, Office package includes a spreadsheet program, a word processor and a presentation program.
It includes a grammar and spelling check, which simplifies edition.
At the same time, the student can listen to music, watch a video, record a CD, or chat with friends.
In short, any computer shares the characteristics of a radio, a television, a telephone, a notebook, and a 130  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION calculator together with tools for organisation, for multimedia presentations and for grammatical corrections.
Another benefit of computers is the assistance they provide to students.
For example, with the help of a computer, files can be easily organised and adequately separated in folders according to subject.
In addition, they can be retrieved by using the computer's search tool.
Another example of how they are helpful is the capacity to store a large amount of information.
By using the internet, a student can download a great number of files of different sizes which can be saved on the computer's hard disk.
E-books, audio books, movies and programs on school subjects can be downloaded and stored for the student’s benefit.
There are so many benefits of computer application in cooperative education.
Computer application in cooperative education cuts across the following areas.
• Research and training • Word processing, graphic design and illustration • Information processing • Game design, creation, and development • Scientific analysis- in project management • Training for office systems technology • Cooperative quantitative techniques and problem solving • Various kinds of communication techniques • Development of spread sheets • Segmentation of demographics • E-business and internet • Examples of areas of computer application Application Use Standard Office Applications - Main Examples Word E.g.
microsoft word- write letters, reports etc.
processing Spreadsheets E.g.
microsoft excel- analyse financial information; calculations; create forecasting models etc Database E.g.
Oracle, Microsoft SQL server, access- managing software data in many forms, from basic lists (e.g.
customer contacts through to complex material (e.g.
catalogue) Presentation E.g.
Microsoft Powerpoint- make presentations, either software directly using a computer screen or data projector Publish in digital format via email or over the internet Desktop E.g.
adobe indesign, quark express, microsoft publisher- publishing produce newsletters, magazines and other complex documents.
131 CO P 318 MODULE 4 Graphics E.g.
Adobe photoshop and illustrator; macromedia software freehand and fireworks; create and edit images such as logos, drawings or pictures for use in DTP, web sites or other publications Specialist Applications - Examples Accounting E.g.
Sage, Oracle- manage an organisation's accounts and auditing including revenues/sales, purchases, bank accounts etc.
A package wide range of systems is available ranging from basic packages suitable for small businesses through to sophisticated ones aimed at multinational companies.
Computer Computer Aided Design (CAD) is the use of computers Aided Design to assist the design process.
Specialised CAD programs exist for many types of design: architectural, engineering electronics, roadways Customer and Software that allows businesses to better understand their members customers by collecting and analysing data on them such Relations as their product preferences, buying habits etc.
Often Management linked to software applications that run call centers and (CMRM) loyalty cards for example.
Other ways that computer application can be useful to cooperative education are as follows.
1.
Interactive whiteboards- the digital whiteboard is an electronic interactive version of the standard dry-erase board, capable of presenting dynamic lessons and connecting to the internet and the computer.
It can be a powerful tool to bring interactivity into the classroom.
Interactive activities can offer numerous cognitive benefits to the students, since they supplement the typical didactic approach of pure observations with the added component of hands-on "doing".
These activities can help with visualisation of abstract concepts and can provide an added cognitive dimension by allowing students to view ideas through motion and music.
Furthermore, they are just pure fun and a good way to break up the monotony of a typical lecture.
Thus, it is constructive to incorporate interactivity to reinforce and enrich the curriculum.
2.
Statistical analysis- learner of cooperative studies should learn to use computers to perform statistical analysis.
Computers are important in psychological research, particularly because contemporary psychological research is so, statistically, intensive.
Computers can be used in conjunction with specialty software (such as SPSS and SAS) for processing and analysing large data sets.
Psychological research, in many cases, is focused on studying large populations over long periods of time.
However, 132  COP 318 COOPERATIVE EDUCATION AND EXTENSION this can be scaled down for high school students who are attempting to finish smaller research projects that also require the analysis of large data sets.
Computers and software technology can be used to help student’s process data in a speedy and constructive way and can facilitate the learning of social science research techniques and methodologies for future career development.
3.
Architectural modelling- computer software such as 3D studio max can be used at the high school level for projects in architectural modeling.
It is a professional software package with a lot of easily accessible options, and students can really explore their creativity through various design projects.
They can model buildings, design parks or create the interfaces for their own video games.
They can even use it to create different animations.
This kind of computer software can be used across the curriculum, in art class, in shop class and even in science class, where students can use it to model the human body.
The digital and interactive components are sure to create a new level of comprehension for the subject being studied.
4.
Mathematical software- computers, together with specialty software such as mathematical or MatLab can be used, effectively, to enhance mathematics instruction at the high school level.
That kind of software is particularly excellent not just because of its vast functionality but also because of the store of knowledge that the community supporting it possesses.
Students who embark on a study of mathematics with the use of these computer applications can easily gain proficiency in the subject; also, they are motivated to further their exploration of mathematics and connect with other students and mathematicians using these tools for their studies and research.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Mention the information needs of members (farmers) of cooperative.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has exposed you to the information and communication process of cooperative education.
You are to note the various concepts treated here.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has actually explored communication processes within cooperative systems.
The unit also considered areas of computer application to cooperative education.
133 CO P 318 MODULE 4 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss the communication processes within cooperative systems.
ii.
Enumerate market information needs of cooperative members (farmers).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Agbo F.U.
(1999).
Elements of Agriculture for Cooperative Colleges, Polytechnic and Universities.
Nigeria: Raden Publication, pp.
19- 28.
Benor, D. & Baxter, M.N.
(1984).
Training and Visit system.
(Agricultural Extension).
Washington, D.C. pp.3-18.
Laogu, E. A.
(2005).
‘Extension Teaching/Learning Process and Methods’.
In: S. F. Adedoyin (Ed.).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Agricultural Extension Society of Nigeria, pp.202 -203.
Lawal, K.A.A.
& Oludmu, O.L.
(2012).
Management in Focus: Principles and Practices.
Ibadan : Asogun Publisher.
Lawal, K.A.A.
(2009).
“Analysis of Manager’s Role on Performance of Cooperative Societies in Ojoo Local Government Area of Lagos State”.
(Unpublished M.Sc Thesis).
Dept.
of Agribusiness and Farm Management.
Ago-Iwoye, Ogun State: Olabisi Onabanjo University.
Obibuaku, L. O.
& Hursh, G. D. (1994).
“Farm Practice Adoption in the Eastern States of Nigeria”.
Journal of Agricultural Administration (1), 18-20.
Oludimu, O.L.
& Adedoyin, S.F.
(1996).
Running a More Successful Cooperative.
Ijebu-Ode: Triumph Book Publisher.
Williams, S. F. T., Fenley, J. M., & Williams, C. E. (1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria, pp.57-58.
Yahaya, M. K. (2003).
Development Communication: Lessons from Change and Social Engineering Projects.
134
