ENT 201 MODULE 1 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE :ENT 201 COURSE TITLE: MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 1ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS COURSE GUIDE ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS Course Writer/Developer Dr. Oluwagbohunmi, D. Ogunbona Course Coordinator Ishola, T. Oladele National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2ENT 201 MODULE 1 National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN All Rights Reserved 3ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS CONTENTS PAGE Introduction........................................................................ 1 Course Objectives............................................................... 2 Working through this Course.............................................. 2 Course Evaluation............................................................... 2 Study Units ........................................................................ 3 Introduction A robust economic growth can be achieved if well-focused poverty alleviation programmes are put in place.
These programmes must be articulated in such a way that people would have access to factors of production and credit.
The latent capacity of the poor for entrepreneurship would be enhanced by the provision of micro-finance services, which will enable them to engage in economic activities and be self sufficient.
It will also lead to increase in employment opportunities in the economy.
Over 65% of the economically active population that are precluded from formal financial services provided by the conventional banks could benefit from the programme.
Furthermore, the policy on microfinance will make it possible for the informal sector to be brought under the supervision of the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN), thus making it possible for the achievement of monetary stability and the expansion of financial infrastructure in the country to meet the financial requirement of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs).
A vibrant micro finance sub- sector would evolve and it would be integrated into the main stream of the national financial system and provide the stimulus for growth and development.
It would also harmonise operating standards and provide a strategic platform for the evolution of microfinance institution, promote appropriate regulation, supervision and adoption of best practice.
The first effort to promote micro enterprises started in the early 1950s with the establishment of the Colonial Development Loans Board by the Colonial Administration.
This was later replaced by the Revolving Loan Fund for Industry which came as part of the technical assistance from the U.K for the Small-Scale Industries Credit Scheme (SSICS).
State and Federal Governments also contribute to the purse of the SSICS for on-lending to small entrepreneurs.
Several Polices have been put in place since 1980s.
Some of them are discussed in the study guide.
The government also instituted some organisations to oversee the implementation of these policies in order to achieve the desired result.
The potential beneficiaries are expected to fulfill some obligations some 4ENT 201 MODULE 1 of which are accurate record keeping, efficient management of the business and optimum utilisation of the resources.
This Course Guide gives you an idea of the different topics you are to cover and the time to be spent on each topic.
There are Self Assessment Questions (SAQs), which you will answer in order to test our ability to remember or assimilate.
There are Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs), which the student is expected to answer.
A careful study of the manual will lead you to the answers.
There will be regular tutorial classes that are linked to the course and you are advised to attend the sessions.
Course Objectives During this course, you will learn the various definitions of SMEs and why they need Micro credit.
Effort will also be made to list and explain the activities of the various Institutions which are empowered to implement government policies linked with the development of the SMEs.
You will also learn about the essence of proper record keeping and resource management.
Working through this Course For you to successfully complete this course, you are expected to read each study unit, reference books and other resources that are relevant.
The SAQs are to enhance your understanding of the topic; they are not to be submitted.
The TMA is to be answered immediately after each unit is completed and sent to the course facilitator for assessment.
This course is a 2- credit course.
You are therefore expected to spend a minimum of two hours every week studying.
You are expected to complete the entire course outline within a period of 18-25 weeks.
5ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS Course Evaluation As earlier stated, every unit of this course has an assignment attached to it.
You are required to keep an assignment file.
After every unit the assignment should be done.
At the end of the course, the evaluation shall be as follows: Assignments 30% Examination 70% Total 100%.
At the end, the best 10 TMAs will be selected to make up 30%.
The examination at the end of the course shall cover all the aspects of the course.
Study Units The units have been designed to cover the various policies formulated to enhance effective performance of the SMEs.
The various institutions that are empowered with the implementation of the policies are also discussed.
In order to have full benefit of the course, some additional topics are added.
The topics discussed are based on this information.
Module 1 Unit 1 Micro Financing Unit 2 Traditional Micro Finance Practice in Nigeria Unit 3 Sources of Funds (Part 1) 6ENT 201 MODULE 1 Unit 4 Sources of Funds: Partnership and Cooperative Society Unit 5 Non-governmental Organisation in Microfinance Module 2 Unit 1 Government Policies Unit 2 Micro Finance Institutions Part I Unit 3 Micro Finance Institutions Part II Unit 4 How to Keep and Use Business Records Unit 5 Marketing – How to Sell Your Products Module 3 Unit 1 Marketing: Promotion Part I Unit 2 Management Cash Unit 3 Entrepreneur and Entrepreneurship Unit 4 Definitions of Business Types Unit 5 General Management Practices in Small Scale Business Module 4 Unit 1 Contemporary Management Practices in Small Business I Unit 2 Contemporary Management Practices in Small Business II Unit 3 Cause of Failure of Small Scale Business Unit 4 Possible Projects 7ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS MAIN COURSE Course Code ENT 201 Course Title Micro Credit Policies and Institutions Course Writer/Developer Dr. Oluwagbohunmi, D. Ogunbona Course Coordinator Ishola, T. Oladele National Open University of Nigeria 8ENT 201 MODULE 1 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street, Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2009 ISBN All Rights Reserved 9ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ………………………………………………........ 1 Unit 1 Micro Financing …………………………….... 1 Unit 2 Traditional Micro Finance Practice in Nigeria.
10 Unit 3 Sources of Funds (Part 1)…………………..…15 Unit 4 Sources of Funds: Partnership and Cooperative Society………………………...….
22 Unit 5 Non-Governmental Organization in Microfinance…………………………………... 31 Module 2 ………………………………………………........ 36 Unit 1 Government Policies ………………………..... 36 Unit 2 Micro Finance Institutions Part I ……….. …… 47 Unit 3 Micro Finance Institutions Part II ……..……… 56 Unit 4 How to Keep and Use Business Records………70 Unit 5 Marketing – How to Sell Your Products……… 80 Module 3 ………………………………………………........ 88 Unit 1 Marketing: Promotion Part I ………………….
88 Unit 2 Management Cash …………………………….
95 Unit 3 Entrepreneur and Entrepreneurship ………….. 102 Unit 4 Definitions of Business Types ……………….. 112 Unit 5 General Management Practices in Small Scale Business………………………………… 126 Module 4 ………………………………………………......... 138 Unit 1 Contemporary Management Practices in Small Business I ……………………………… 138 Unit 2 Contemporary Management Practices in Small Business II …………………………….. 147 Unit 3 Cause of Failure of Small Scale Business …… 155 Unit 4 Possible Projects …………………………….. 165 10ENT 201 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 Unit 1 Micro Financing Unit 2 Traditional Micro Finance Practice in Nigeria Unit 3 Sources of Funds (Part 1) Unit 4 Sources of Funds: Partnership and Cooperative Society Unit 5 Non-governmental Organisation in Microfinance UNIT 1 MICRO FINANCING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Micro Financing 3.2 Micro Credit 3.2.1 Features of Micro Credit or Micro finance Institution 3.2.2 The Beneficiaries 3.2.3 Smallness of the Loan or Credit Facility 3.2.4 Adoption of credit plus Approach 3.2.5 Focus on Rural Women 3.2.6 Group Delivery Methodology 3.2.7 Pre-Loan Training Programmes 3.3 Elements of Micro Finance 3.3.1 Activities towards the Poor 3.4 The Benefits of micro Credit or Micro Financing 3.5 Reasons for Micro Financing 3.6 Benefits of Loan to the Beneficiary and others 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Mrs. Adeawo, a petty trader in Agbala town started her mat weaving business, using a family savings of N30 in 1988.
She could not get money from the bank because she was poor and could not present the required document as well collateral as a tender at any commercial bank or any formal financial institution.
She operated the business for 12years without much success until she was introduced to a bank that was giving out loan to petty traders.
She collected N75, 000 which was a huge sum of money to her.
She used the money to boost the growth of her 11ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS business.
She was able to repay the loan at the appropriate time.
The business grew and increased beyond her little town to other States of the federation.
In many developing countries, Nigeria inclusive, women constitute a major percentage of micro entrepreneurs in the informal sector.
Many of them are illiterate, and live in the rural setting.
They set up their business, living from hand to mouth and never been able to move above the poverty line due to lack of credit or house or land or collateral to secure loan from commercial institutions.
About 85 percent of people in developing countries derive their incomes from the informal sector, thus the need for good financial sector, infrastructure and national strategies to reduce poverty by a half.
They only access loan from money-lenders who are extortionists charging high rates of interest which reduce the profit that would have accrued to the entrepreneur.
It is therefore important to put in place policies and institutions that will promote micro finance or micro credit services to the poor or small scale entrepreneurs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The aim of this unit is to enable the student understand the meaning of and the need for micro credit or micro financing.
Specifically, the objectives are that the student should be able to: • Recall the definition of micro financing • Recount the benefits of micro credit to the beneficiaries 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Micro Financing 3.1.1 Definition of Terms It is necessary to define some of the terms which are used in this unit.
ENTREPRENEUR: An entrepreneur is a sole trader.
He can also be referred to as a business man.
He is the owner of the business which may be a retail business, a micro business, small scale business or medium or large scale business.
He decides the type of business he wants to engage in.
If the business succeeds, he owns all the profit, if it fails, he bears all the losses.
He uses his money to buy the machines, tools, equipments and employs labor as well as buys materials for production.
12ENT 201 MODULE 1 COLLATERAL: It is the property pledged as a guarantee for the repayment of a loan.
It could be a landed property, a car, a stipulated amount to be deposited in the bank as a guarantee against the loan to be advanced.
Collateral is usually a request of the commercial bank.
LOAN: It is an amount of money lent to a customer by a bank.
This amount attracts a cost or a charge which is referred to as interest rate.
INFORMAL SECTOR: It refers to the sector of the economy that is not categorized under the range of operation of the organised economic activities.
This sector is categorised by the International Labour Organisation (ILO) in 1990 into three broad groups: (a) owner-employers of micro enterprises, which require the services of a few paid workers, with or without apprentices; (b) Own account workers who own and operate one-person business, working alone or with the help of family members and apprentices who are usually unpaid; and (c) Dependent workers paid or unpaid.
This includes wage earners in micro enterprises, unpaid family workers apprentices, contract labor, home workers and paid domestic workers.
3.2 Micro Credit Micro credit or micro financing is the means of providing the economically active poor and low income households with financial services such as credit or loan to help them engage in income generating activities or help them to expand their small business as experienced in the story earlier recounted.
They also provide services such as savings, micro leasing, micro insurance and payment transfers.
The implementation of the additional services will be enhanced by the newly introduced Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs).
Traditionally, especially in village setting, workmen such as bricklayers, well diggers etc lease various implement such as hand pans, shovels, cutlass in order to carry out their daily activities.
3.2.1 Features of Micro Credit or Micro Finance Institutions The organisations that are solely involved in micro credit or micro financing have certain distinguishing features which differentiate them from the commercial banks.
These are: • the smallness of loans advanced (to the debtors).
• the smallness of savings collected (from the depositors).
13ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • the absence of asset-based collateral (that is, landed property to stand as a guarantee to secure loan).
• the simplicity of operations (the beneficiaries are not expected to have extensive accounting procedures in place).
3.2.2 The Beneficiaries The beneficiaries are mostly small or micro business owners who are mostly in the informal sector.
They could be in business such as shoe mending, retail selling, pepper/tomato selling, agro-allied food production and farming.
They are generally classified as the poor or small business owners.
Most of the beneficiaries have little or no education and lack modern skills.
They also have little knowledge about record keeping, planning, cash management and other modern management techniques.
3.2.3 Smallness of the Loan or Credit Facility The financial need of micro enterprises is very low.
A loan of as small as N10, 000 can change the business volume and profitability of a micro enterprise.
In spite of the fact that the loan is small, each beneficiary must have proper record with the MFI.
This will make the cost of processing the loan to be high.
In order to solve this problem, group delivery methodology is used for both the savings and loan operation.
3.2.4 Adoption of Credit plus Approach Micro Finance Institutions look beyond credit provision.
They also take care of the total well being of the people.
So they train them in the area of health care, skill enhancement, technological transfer, reproductive health etc.
3.2.5 Focus on Rural Women They concentrate mainly on rural women who are mostly farmers and petty traders.
3.2.6 Group Delivery Methodology Beneficiaries are encouraged to form a group or a cooperative society which could be based on type of business activities e.g.
Pepper sellers’ association.
The usage of the loan, monitoring of the savings and repayment of loan are done at group meetings.
However, the individual is held responsible for the utilization and repayment of the loan.
It is also possible for a group to take a loan together for joint business.
14ENT 201 MODULE 1 Group delivery methodology has some advantages.
These are: • Reduction of the Cost of Lending: The repayment is done at the meeting rather than on individual basis.
• It Aids Credit Discipline and High Number of Repayment: The group exacts pressure on its members to pay up so that they would not be disqualified from having access to further loan.
• Solidarity among Members: There will be cordial relationship between members • Absence of Collateral Requirement: The loanees are not required to present any guarantee towards the loan.
They are given on trust.
• Saving Components: Loanees are encouraged to make regular deposit with the institution or credit group.
Some group expects them to make some savings before credit can be collected.
• Loan Structure: The amount of money saved can be considered as a security for the loan.
Member can borrow up to three times the amount saved.
This amount is referred to as the Maximum Credit Limit.
No withdrawal is allowed until the loan is repaid since the deposit is taken as the security for the loan.
The excess money deposited after the loan would have been repaid, accrues to the depositor.
• Interest Rates The interest charged on the loan is usually between 6.5% and 8 %, although some Non-governmental Institutions charges as high as 36 % per annum.
3.2.7 Pre- Loan Training Programmes Pre-loan training programmes re conducted for members.
Training such as record/book keeping, cash management, marketing skills and techniques are organised for members.
15ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.3 Elements of Micro Finance 3.3.1 Activities towards the Poor • The poor needs a safe place to keep his money and as such he will readily save money with the Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs).
• The poor also desired to have access to credit whenever it is required.
• The poor needs to have a capital base of his business.
This will reduce his economic vulnerability.
He can use the savings when business falls.
The money also becomes useful when the need arises for some social obligation such as burial ceremonies, children education.
• The procedure for savings, loan and withdrawal is simple and convenient.
• The interest rate paid on the savings is high.
• Micro finance institutions help to develop the savings and thrift ability of the poor.
• They enhance capital accumulation and capital building among the poor.
• The poor is able to build capital for his own businesses through the savings initiative of the Micro Finance Institutions.
• Improve self esteem of the poor.
3.4 The Benefits of Micro Credit or Micro Financing • It is the source of capital for local private sector development.
Most of practitioners in this sector are low income earners and would need assistance in order to expand their businesses.
The Taiwanese economic growth was propelled by a vibrant and buoyant private sector.
There are thousands of private industries in Taiwan, which explains her tremendous growth.
• It provides capital requirement for small and medium enterprises development • It enhances the growth of micro enterprises.
Most micro enterprises are the suppliers of inputs, spare parts and other services to the large scale business.
So it provides expansion of suppliers of inputs and services needed by the large scale business • It creates new consumers and markets for business of all sizes because it creates increased wealth for low income individuals • It supports home improvement, home building in slumps and villages through special savings and loans.
Villagers are able to build their houses and living apartments that are neat and decent, thus improving their standards of living.
3.5 Reasons for Micro financing 16ENT 201 MODULE 1 Mrs Abeni was a stock fish seller at Agege market.
She started the business by collecting the stock fish on credit from the wholesalers.
She had a box in which she keeps the profit.
She has a husband who is a transporter, so she needs to assist her husband in educating the children.
At the beginning of each school year, she will spend all her profit to buy books, uniform and stationery for the children.
This will bring down the business.
She will have to start again.
This means that her business succeeds or thrives only after the children are settled at school.
Baba Ade is a welder.
He fabricates hand-net, which is required by fish farmers.
This additional item opens another market opportunity for him.
This will result in the expansion of his business and profit; but he has no money to buy iron rod, nets and the machine that he needs for the business.
Tola is a trained Vulcaniser.
He wants to work in order to earn a living but he has no workshop although he has the required machine.
He got a location along Garki road, but was told to pay N350, 000.
Alabi runs a business center.
He has IBM typewriter.
The number of customers that come to his shop has reduced to the level that he can no longer earn enough money to cater for himself.
This is because most of his customers prefer to type their document on the computer.
He went to a computer training school but was told to pay N94, 000 before he could be trained.
Adeoye is a computer repairer, but he got fed up with the job and wanted to become a poultry farmer.
He went to a Management consultant who asked him to pay N25, 000 in order for him to acquire the knowledge he would need to raise poultry birds.
The different stories indicate the need for micro credit.
These are: • The need for the fund to start a business.
For example, Abeni had no money, and as such her business scale was small so also her profit.
• Need for machinery, inputs, tools and equipment.
For example; Baba Ade had no money to buy the machine and other inputs he needs to make the hand net.
• Office space/location for business.
For example Tola had no money to rent a space to be used as his workshop.
17ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Capacity building/Training.
For example: Alabi a typist needs to be trained to use the computer.
He needs further training or retraining.
• Skill acquisition.
For example: Adeoye needs to acquire a new skill in order to be able to carry out the new business he wants to start.
3.6 Benefits of Loan to the Beneficiary and Others The benefit depends on the need of the businessman: • Expansion of business Abeni was able to expand her business.
She was able to educate her children, build a house and her standard of living improved.
She was able to stay healthy because she has money to eat balanced and adequate diet.
• Acquisition of machine, tools, and equipment Baba Ade got assistance to buy the machine, tools and equipment as well as the required inputs to make the hand net.
The hand net was formerly imported by the fish farmer.
• Savings of foreign exchange The local production of the hand net that was formerly imported resulted in the savings of foreign exchange.
• Employment generation and Income generation Baba Ade could not cope with the level of production so he had to employ more workers.
He created employment and guaranteed income which his workers need to maintain their families.
• Increased activities of other workers The use of local product for the production of the hand net also increased the activity of the net weaver in Jankara.
So Baba Ade’s activity has led to increased activity of other people (multiplier effect).
• Additional skill acquisition Adeoye acquired additional skill.
He was able to raise birds.
SELF ASSIGNMENT EXERCISE 1) List the benefits of micro credits to the beneficiaries.
2) Define micro credit financing.
3) What are the features of micro financing?
18ENT 201 MODULE 1 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, the micro credit is expected to extend to those in the informal sector to enable them contribute their quota to the economy by being actively involved in the productive and service sectors.
The benefit that accrues to them will further expand economic activity and thereby accelerate growth.
5.0 SUMMARY Micro credit is a form of assistance extended to those in the informal sector that is, business men who run micro enterprises.
It does not require the beneficiary to present any detailed accounting records or collateral.
It is meant for the poor who do not have the accounting skills or have the money to employ the services of an accountant.
Some benefits accrue to the beneficiaries and the economy at large.
The money can be used for various activities that will lead to the expansion of the business improvement in the standard of living and income/employment generation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write short notes on the following: 1.
Why did Abeni need micro credit?
2.
What did Baba Ade Need?
3.
What are the benefits of micro credit to the beneficiaries?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ehigiamusoe, G (1998).
Understanding NGOS.
Benin City: LAPO Development Center.
UNIT 2 TRADITIONAL MICRO FINANCE PRACTICE IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 19ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Traditional Micro Finance Practice in Nigeria 3.1.1 Characteristics of Traditional Micro Finance Practice 3.1.2 Savings Components 3.1.3 Group Components 3.1.4 Informality 3.1.5 Low Rates of Interest 3.2 Operations of Esusu 3.3 Requirement to be a Beneficiary 3.4 Advantages of ‘Ajo’ 3.5 Disadvantages of ‘Ajo’ 3.6 Limitation of Traditional Micro Finance Practice 3.7 Advantages 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Micro credit of micro finance is not a new package of financial services to the Nigeria people.
There have been traditional groups or set who work together for the members’ benefit.
Some of these groups provide credit or savings services to their members.
They have different methods of operating in different communities.
It is known as ‘Adashe’ in the North, ‘Esusu’ or ‘Ajo’ in the south.
Another variant is ‘safe group’.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The aim is to explain the existence of traditional microfinance in Nigeria before the advent of the modern Micro Finance Loan Scheme (MFLS).
Specifically, the learner should be able to explain the characteristics of the Traditional Micro Finance (TMF) and the advantages and limitations.
In most cases, it is a daily or weekly collection and the collector is iterant, that is, he moves about to collect the money from the members.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Traditional Micro Finance Practice in Nigeria 3.1.1 Characteristics of Traditional Micro Finance (TMF) 20ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.1.2 Savings Component Savings is a very important aspect of the scheme.
In Esusu’, members agree on a specific amount to be contributed or saved at specific period.
Members are given loans from the pool.
The loan can be a multiple of the amount saved by the member.
The credit a member is entitled to, that is, the credit limit is determined by the amount of money saved.
Interest charged on the loan is very low.
The ‘safe group’ is a bit different in the sense that each member collects the amount of money saved at the end of a specified period usually a year.
The saved money would be refunded to individual members.
3.1.3 Group Methodology Groups are formed by persons on the basis of family ties, occupation, professions or residential area or market place, e.g.
farmers’ association, hair dressers’ group.
Some of these groups are involved in other activities apart from credit services.
These activities include religious, cultural, and social activities.
3.1.4 Informality It is an informal group, in both its operations and organization.
The groups are usually not registered under any statutory instruments.
Leadership structure and function are not very clearly defined.
Most of the laws and transactions are based on unwritten code.
There are no written laws that are followed or that guide their activities or operation.
It is peer pressure and communal norms that are applied in order to check fraudulent practices.
Loans are granted without formal operational procedures and the cost of transaction is therefore reduced.
3.1.5 Low Rates of Interest Indigenous savings and credit group charge lower rates of interest on credit facilities.
Money lenders charge as high as between 240% and 360%, while the credit group charges between 36 and 60% per annum.
The low interest rate is explained by the following reasons • Savers are usually the borrowers – Fund for loan is sourced from the savings of the members who are paid little or no interest.
There is therefore no cost tagged to the fund.
This is because interest paid on loan is seen as a cost.
21ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Low cost of operation – The mode of operation which is uniform and of limited scope leads to low cost of operation.
The officials perform their duties without being paid and no money is paid for office space and staff as known.
3.2 Operations of Esusu It is a contribution made by a person to an itinerancy collector or banker.
The contribution which is usually a fixed amount is made either on daily or weekly basis depending on the agreement.
'Ajo' encourages the development of the habit of savings.
The savings made can be collected at the end of the month or at a mutually agreed time.
At times, the depositor can make an appeal to collect her money earlier if an urgent need arises, sometimes, when additional money for business is required, you can also borrow from the 'Ajo' collector.
This is also a source of money for business.
Please be warned: Some 'Ajo' collector can make away with the contribution, so be careful how you contribute.
ESUSU It is a system whereby every member contributes some money periodically.
It is common among women especially in the rural area; in spite of the level of illiteracy among them.
Each member must love or share a common interest.
They could belong to the same social and economic group e.g.
same age group, occupational group, wives of an extended family.
They pay a certain amount of money which is collected by one member of the meeting.
A minimum amount of money is stipulated to be saved by each member but a member can save more than the minimum.
Three main officials are involved in the organization ‘Olori-egbe’ (the president) is elected by virtue of age, or because of his social status, or ability to manage people or ability to carry people along (Charisma).
The success of the people depends on the charisma of the President.
The ‘Akapo’ (the treasurer) is the next official to the ‘Olori-egbe’.
She is elected on the basis of the opinion of the members.
She’s considered to be thrifty and trusted with money.
Next to the ‘Akapo’ is the ‘Asipa’ (Secretary or organizer).
Her function is to inform members of any social function and remind them of the meeting days.
She organises visit to function and gift to be given to members on occasion such as memorial ceremony, burial, wedding ceremony etc.
It is rotational since it involves so much time and dedication.
22ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.3 Requirement to Be a Beneficiary • You must register and get a card for a fee usually a small amount.
• Daily or weekly contribution must be made.
• You must agree on the modality for payment.
Once you are a member and your contribution is regular, you are entitled to your savings and you can apply for a loan.
The terms of repayment are usually not too stringent.
You would need a guarantor who in most cases would be a member of the group.
3.4 Advantages of 'Ajo' • Encourages savings • It is a ready source of credit for business • It is a ready source of monthly income for the contributors • It is a source of money for sudden or unexpected expenses 3.5 Disadvantages of 'Ajo' • The collector sometimes runs away with the contributors' money 3.6 Limitation of Traditional Micro Finance Practice Lack of Proper Record Keeping - Informality is a key feature of indigenous savings and credit schemes.
Proper records are not usually kept.
Accounting procedures are not put in place.
Even where records are kept, there are no provisions for scrutiny.
It is therefore difficult for them to keep a good track of the loan and saving rate.
The groups therefore have short life span as the members scatter.
As a result of lack of proper record, mistrust and infighting ensue.
Limited Number of Membership - The expansion of members is limited because of the informality of organisational structure, and procedures.
Services are limited to small number of contribution.
They have no plant to expand their scope.
Absence of Legal Recognition – Existing financial laws and regulation do not accord indigenous credit groups any recognition.
Largely due to their limited scope of operations, these credit groups do not consider it necessary to press for recognition.
They hardly enter into contractual agreements with other institutions.
They are deprived of adequate funds from the capital market.
The disbursement of loans to borrowers is done at contributor’s risk.
23ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.7 Advantages - Provision of fund for the rural women - Development of savings habit in the rural area.
- Expansion of business activities among members.
- Development of organisational skills among members.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) Explain the organisational structure of the traditional microfinance group.
2) Define Cooperative Association 3) What are the benefits of ‘Ajo’ 4.0 CONCLUSION The savings and credit scheme has been existing before the advent of the MFLS.
They have leaders who organise how money is given out for loan, for the benefits of the beneficiaries.
5.0 SUMMARY The savings and credit scheme is an advantage leading to the expansion of business activities among the beneficiaries.
It is a simple and informal organisation but it impact among the members is immense.
It becomes possible for these people to have access to fund for business expansion, and social activities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List the advantages of traditional microfinance scheme 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ogunleye B (1991).
Lend Me a Hand.
Redd Burna.
Olatunbosun D (1975).
Nigeria Neglected Rural Majority.
London: Oxford University Press.
UNIT 3 SOURCES OF FUNDS (PART 1) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 24ENT 201 MODULE 1 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sources of Funds 3.1.1 Different Sources of Funds 3.2 Personal Savings or Owner’s Equity 3.2.1 Benefits of Owner’s Equity 3.2.2 Disadvantages of Owner’s Equity 3.3 Loan from Family Members 3.4 Deposits from Customers 3.5 Hire Purchase Finance 3.5.1 Benefit of Hire Purchase 3.5.2 Disadvantages of Hire Purchase 3.6 Cash from the Business 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Adeyori has a very good plan.
He wants his children to be educated in the best secondary school in town and to attend one of the best universities.
He needs money to get this done.
He started a business which was not expanding because his capital base is small.
Would he be able to fulfill his dream?
He needs financial assistance from friends, family members, association, government etc to be able to expand his business.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The aim of the unit is to identify the different sources of funds for the business.
At the end of the course, student should be able to: • Identify the different sources of fund • Explain the different sources of fund 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sources of Funds I wonder if you had ever borrowed money from a commercial bank.
If yes, did you find it easy, quick and inexpensive?
Did you have to pay a 25ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS high price called interest for borrowing the money?
I’m also sure you were expected to bring some security or collateral, something valuable before you were considered for the loan.
How long did it take?
Did it entail a long period of waiting, phoning and visiting the bank?
How was the repayment schedule?
Was it favourable?
Was the paying back not an ordeal?
The repayment schedule is not flexible and neither is the interest rate constant.
Isn’t it?
Brighten up; there are other ways of sourcing funds for the business.
Let us take a look at the various options.
3.1.1 Different Sources of Funds All business firms need money for the financing of their plans.
Each would own some combinations of cash, equipment, building and other properties referred to as assets.
The businessman needs to have an estimate of his financial needs both for buying assets and variable inputs before starting the business.
He would need to answer the following questions in order to arrive at a realistic capital requirement.
i Why do I need this capital?
ii How much do I need to spend on the project?
iii When do I need the money?
iv How long do I need the money?
v Where can I obtain the money?
vi How can I repay the money?
When a firm starts business, it requires funds to buy assets.
Such funds could be from the owner, the business and loans.
There are several types and sources of capital available to the businessmen.
Some are • Long-term capital • Medium capital • Short-term capital When you are in business you need to know where and how to get the required funds for operating the business.
You must have the required capital before you start running the business.
The most important sources of funds are: • Grant or borrowing from the family members or friends • Getting money from the business (if it is an existing business) • Loans (borrowing from Cooperative Association- Ajo or daily contribution/Esusu contributions 26ENT 201 MODULE 1 • Banks such as: Community banks Commercial banks Specialized banks Government agencies such as National Directorate of Employment (NDE) State Ministry of Commerce & Industry • Non governmental organisations • Others Deposits from customers Profit of the business itself Hire purchase finance Personal savings 3.2 Personal Savings or Owner’s Equity No king would go to war without adequate planning, so no businessman would start a business without some personal savings no matter how small it is.
The savings may be inadequate for the proposed business, so there may be the need for the business man to source for money.
This is because the cost of the fixed assets, labor as well as inputs may be larger than the personal savings.
The businessman may have to resort to assistance from friends and relatives.
Personal savings can be referred to as equity or the private money you put into your business.
Owner’s equity is called risk capital because as the owner, you risk your money on the business.
If the business fails, the owner will lose the money.
If you invest your money in your business, the business becomes less risky because in case of a failure, you will not have to pay back any loan.
The loss is limited to the owner’s equity.
There would be less pressure on the business than if the money had been borrowed.
If it were borrowed you would have had to make repayment and pay interest.
Investing your own money in your business is a risk but it shows that you believe in your own business idea and that you have been prudent with what you have.
This makes it easy for others to lend you money.
The equity is evidence that you have enough faith in your business to risk your own savings on it.
Very often, most lenders insist that you invest some of your own money in the business before they make theirs available.
Therefore, to reduce the risk in your business, it is good to have some money to invest in it as owner’s equity or personal contribution.
3.2.1 Benefits of Owner's Equity 27ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS It is advantageous to the business man to contribute to his business • The business becomes less risky • He is prudent with the use of the fund • He follows the most cost effective method of running the business.
He tries to buy the raw material and other inputs from very inexpensive sources and employs labour that is relatively cheap but efficient.
3.3.2 Disadvantages of Owner's Equity • He may not be able to start the business as quick as he would have wanted • The business would be too small because of lack of fund for a large time • The business would not be expanded as fast as possible because of lack of fund 3.3Loan From Family Members An adage says ‘Heaven helps those who help themselves’.
Family members would be willing to help a member that has saved some money towards a project.
In most cases it could be a gift, even if it is not a gift, it does not attract an interest.
It could be in kind or cash.
It could probably be a machine that is required by the business man or provision of an office space or some money or house or land for farming activities.
3.4Depositors From Customers Some firms make it compulsory for those buying goods from them to deposit some amount of money before they can collect goods from them.
Others charge registration fee.
These monies can be used to run the business.
28ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.5 Hire Purchase Finance This is a medium term finance where the buyer is given an asset after he has paid a deposit; the balance is paid on installment at agreed date and amounts.
The asset could be an equipment, vehicle, and machine.
However, the supplier will hold on to the title of the asset while the buyer will take possession of the asset.
This position holds until the buyer has completed his payment.
If he defaults, that is, if he can not pay the outstanding balance, the seller can take possession of the asset.
3.5.1 Benefit of Hire Purchase • The business man will have equipment, machine and other assets he can not save enough money to buy.
• He would be able to start his business without waiting until his savings are enough to start the business or buy the assets.
• He would be able to expand his business faster than the sole reliance on his savings would allow.
3.5.2 Disadvantages of Hire Purchase • He would lose his money, that is, the money he had paid to the seller if he cannot pay the outstanding balance • The business will collapse when the asset is taken from him as a result of a default.
• The business is risky; this is because he must pay back with interest.
• There is a lot of pressure on the business.
He wants to make enough profit so that he can meet the repayment and interest schedule.
3.6 Cash From The Business The source of money for an existing business could be the business itself cash could be taken from one use to the other.
Machines or other assets can be sold and the money used for an important project of the business.
Some of the items which are assets of the business that can be changed to money are listed below: • Stocks of materials • Stocks of goods ready for sale • Goods in the process of being made • Equipment and tools • Motor vehicles 29ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Buildings These assets can be converted into cash by: Assets Conversion to Cash Material stocks i Turn into goods and sell the goods ii The estimated quantity of stock required for production can be kept while the excess is sold Work in progress The job will be completed half way and sold.
No effort must be made to collect the money of the sold item so that the fund can be used as required Finished stocks Finished product would be sold as a source of fund, the price being reduced if required.
Money owed by customer Effort should be made to collect the cash from the customers.
Credit can be extended to customers, but there must be a limit or a period of grace; otherwise non-payment of fund will affect cash flow.
This will present some problems to the business man.
Machine and equipment The business man can identify under- used or obsolete machine and sell or lease them out.
Building The office plan and space can be revisited and space utilisation can be maximised.
The excess space can be rented out; if possible it can be sold Ploughed back profit Businesses make profit.
This profit can be retained in the business and used for its expansion.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) What is owner's equity?
2) What are the benefits of owner's equity?
30ENT 201 MODULE 1 3) List the sources of funds 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, equity participation shows that a businessman has faith in his business and that makes it easier for him to have financial assistance from individuals and corporate organisations.
This will enhance commencement and expansion of business venture.
The business man can also source for fund from friends, the business itself 5.0 SUMMARY There are many sources of funds available to the business man.
He can save, collect loan or grant from family members or buy the asset on hire purchase.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the benefits of owner's equity?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Lawal, A.A, et al, (2000).
Entrepreneurship Development in Small Scale Business.
Labson Resource Nig.
Ltd. Robinson, SP (1982)..The Management of Human Resources.
Englewood H.J: Prentice-Hall Werther, W.B and Davies K. (1989).
Human Resources and Personnel Management.
New York: Mc Graw-Hall.
31ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS UNIT 4 SOURCES OF FUNDS: PARTNERSHIP AND COOPERATIVE SOCIETY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Partnership 3.1.1 Advantages of Partnership 3.1.2 Disadvantages of Partnership 3.2 Loans from Cooperative Associations 3.3 Cooperative Association 3.3.1 Short History 3.3.2 Role of Cooperative Association 3.3.3 Cooperative Principles 3.4 Cooperatives in Nigeria 3.5 Requirement for Membership 3.6 Advantages of Cooperative Society 3.7 Disadvantages of Cooperative Society 3.8 Cooperatives Banks 3.8.1 Cooperative Banking in Nigeria 3.9 The National Association of Cooperative Credit Unions of Nigeria (NACCUN) 3.10 Cooperative Financing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous Unit, we explained how money can be sourced using owner’s equity, grant or loan from friends and family members and hire purchase.
In this unit, we will look at sourcing of fund for business from Partnership, Cooperative Association and Non-governmental Organisations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The aim of this unit is to expose the students to the other sources of fund apart from those discussed in unit 2.
Specifically, the objective is that at the end of this unit student would be able to explain the advantages of 32ENT 201 MODULE 1 sourcing for fund from Cooperative Associations and Non-governmental Organisations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Partnership A businessman can source for fund by going into partnership with a person who is interested in investing in his business, or from Cooperative Association or from Non-governmental Organisations.
If you do not have enough money to invest in the business you can look for a partner who is interested in investing in the business.
He may not be involved in the day to day running of the business.
He would only make his money available for use.
The partner should not invest more than 50% of the total money required; otherwise he would have the right to decision making which you the originator of the business would lose 3.1.1 Advantages of Partnership • More funds than would have been provided by the sole owner would be available for business use.
• The scope of the business would be larger • The expertise of the partner in terms of advice, skill, and knowledge would be available to the business.
• The goodwill of the partner would be extended to the business.
The partner may know a lot of people or marketers that will make the marketing of the product easy.
• In case of business failure, the risk will be shared.
3.1.2 Disadvantages of Partnership • The sole owner will lose his right to make decisions • If one of the owners dies, it may lead to the end of the business • There may be rivalry, if the profit sharing formula is not well spelt out.
3.2 Loans from Cooperative Association To get a loan means that someone lends you money.
This loan must be paid back with interest, which is the cost of taking the loan.
The loan can be paid back either at once or on installments depending on the agreement reached with the lender.
If money is borrowed to start or run a business, there is always a lot pressure on the business and the owner than when the owner uses his money.
This is because you must make 33ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS enough profit to pay back the loan and the interest.
It could be difficult for a small business especially if the owner is not financially prudent.
You can get loans from several sources depending on what you want to use the money for.
The discussion will be centered on the Cooperative Association and Non-governmental Organisation.
3.3 Cooperative Association Cooperative principles and structures have been applied to create access to affordable credit facilities for persons of limited means.
Cooperative Associations consist of people who have common objectives.
They are mostly people of limited means, who voluntarily come together on the basis of equality and equity for the enhancement of their well being.
3.3.1 Short History Robert Owen and Dr. Williams King laid the foundation of modern Cooperatives.
They opposed the exploitation of workers and introduced policies encouraging workers to own their factories.
Owen fought for better working conditions for workers and stopped child labour.
In 1844, 28 artisans started a consumer shop of their own as a group in Rockdale town in Lancashire, England.
The success of the Rockdale pioneer as they are called led to the spread of the movement.
3.3.2 Role of Cooperative Association • They come together in order to eliminate middle man who exploit buyers or sellers and money lenders who charge high interest • They do not aim to maximize profit like the private business man • They emphasize meeting the need of the members effectively and efficiently.
3.3.3 Cooperative Principles Six principles of Cooperative Enterprises were approved at the congress of International Cooperative Alliance in Vienna in 1996.
Several reviews have taken place since then.
These principles are important to the Cooperative Enterprise.
34ENT 201 MODULE 1 • Membership of a Cooperative Society shall be voluntary and available to all without any form of restriction or any form of social, political or religion discrimination • Cooperative Societies are democratic organisations.
Officials must be elected or appointed in a manner acceptable to them.
Each member is entitled to rights of voting.
Decision taking must be participatory and administrative roles shall be conducted in a democratic manner.
• Share capital shall only receive a strictly limited rate of interest, if any • The economic benefit that accrues to the society belongs to the members and would be distributed in such a way that nobody is made better off while the other loses.
This is achieved based on the agreement reached by the members as follows • Provision for the development of the business of the cooperative • Provision of common services • Distribution of the profit among the members in proportion to their transactions with the society • The society will educate their members on the principles and the economic and democratic techniques of Cooperation.
• All Cooperative Organisations shall cooperate with all other societies whether locally, nationally or internationally in order to achieve the best interest of the members.
3.4 Cooperatives in Nigeria The Cooperative movement was introduced to Nigeria in 1926 by the colonial officials.
This was to enhance agricultural production.
This is not strange to Nigeria because Ajo, Esusu or Adashi had been in existence in most communities before then.
The Cooperative Ordinance (law) was enacted in July 1935.
Ibadan Cooperative Produce and Marketing Society Limited became the first Cooperative Society to be registered in 1936.
The number has increased immensely since then to thousands of group.
There are several types: Thrift and Credit Society, Producers Cooperative Society or Consumer Cooperative Society.
3.5 Requirement For Membership Some of these requirements are: 35ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Payment of share capital which qualifies one to become a member.
The amount and number of shares is set by the Association • Monthly, weekly or bi-weekly minimum contribution or savings • Compulsory attendance at meetings • Other payments for membership card, levies etc After becoming a member of the Cooperative Society for a period of six month and if the record of attendance and contribution is good, it is possible to apply for a loan.
Most Cooperative loans are in multiple of two or three of the contribution of the member.
If the member has saved a total of N20, 000, he can apply for a loan worth between N40, 000 and N60, 000 depending on the policy of the society.
The interest rate is low, mostly between 1% and 2% while the repayment period is usually between six to twelve months.
A lot of business have benefited from the Society.
3.6 Advantages of Cooperative Society • It makes money available for business ventures or micro business ventures • It leads to the increase in business activities in the country especially in the rural sector or among the poor.
• It leads to increase in Gross National Product • The interests of the poor or those within the poverty bracket are taken care of.
3.7 Disadvantages of Cooperative Society • There has been cases of financial mismanagement and outright embezzlement of the fund • Embezzlement of the funds leads to loss of contribution of the members; thus further impoverishing the poor • Undemocratic practices to the extent that some members are cheated and the principles of Cooperation are not followed.
• Favoritism, tribalism make the officials to give loan to those that do not deserve it and side track those that are qualified.
3.8 Cooperative Banks A Cooperative bank is a central cooperative unit in the business of financing.
It provides opportunities for cooperators and cooperative societies for savings mobilization and credit facilities.
Their operational procedures and requirements are expected to be sensitive to peculiar 36ENT 201 MODULE 1 financial needs of cooperative societies.
The capital for such banks are sourced and managed by the cooperators and the cooperative societies.
Cooperative banking was initiated in Germany in the 19th century.
It was pioneered by Raiffeisen and Schulze – Delitzsch.
Raiffeisen worked with debt-ridden peasant farmers while Schulze – Delitzsch worked with the urban poor who were mostly traders and artisans.
The banks run by Raiffeisen were rural based and most of the customers were rural based organization.
It provided credit facilities to farmers for productive purposes.
The success of these experiments led to the establishment of several Peoples’ Banks and Agricultural Banks.
Cooperative Banks played significant roles in the acceleration of the development of the German economy during the period of industrialization.
In France, Peoples’ bank (Banques Populaires ) have since 1878 been a catalyst to economic growth by providing financial services to the SMEs.
It also plays such a vital role in Britain.
India is a country that has given a prominent role to the application of cooperative principles in financing.
She has several specialized Cooperative Banks which focus on Small scale industrial development in all the sectors including consumer financing.
3.8.1 Cooperative Banking in Nigeria The first Cooperative bank in Nigeria was the Cooperative bank Limited.
It was registered in 1953 as a central financing society.
This was facilitated by a grant of N2million given to her by the government of the then Western Region of Nigeria.
It was the major source of affordable loan to cooperators and their societies.
It obtained the license to operate as a commercial bank in 1962.The major consideration for this shift in legal status was to enable the bank to have access to public savings and a greater volume of business transactions.
The Cooperative Bank of Eastern Region was established through the instrumentality of the Cooperative Union of Eastern Nigeria Limited.
The bank was a financing unit of the cooperative movement in the region.
The bank began operations with a capital of 590 pounds augmented by a grant of £10,000 from the Eastern Region government.
It also obtained a license to go commercial in 1962.
It was not until 1973 that a commercial bank was established in the Northern Region.
It was initially called North Central Cooperative Bank Limited but was changed to Kaduna Cooperative Bank Limited.
It was licensed to operate commercial banking as well as provide services to cooperative institutions.
It later became the Universal Bank Limited while the Cooperative Bank of Eastern Nigeria transformed into the Cooperative and Commerce Bank Limited, which became distressed in the mid 37ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 1990.The acquisition of commercial bank status by the Cooperative Banks constrained their impact as channels of microfinance services in Nigeria.
They adopted traditional banking practices, which inhibit the access of persons with limited funds and collateral to credit services.
They neglected the farmers and other informal sector practitioners.
Business with cooperative credit societies and unions especially in the rural areas was regarded as unprofitable, as a result of which the credit union lost a reliable source of loan-able funds.
The Nigerian Agricultural and Cooperative Bank were established in 1973 in order to take care of these lapses.
3.9 The National Association of Cooperative Credit Unions of Nigeria (NACCUN) NACCUN is an offshoot of the Nigerian Cooperative League established in 1970 as the apex for Cooperative Thrift and Credit Societies and Unions in Nigeria.
It was registered in 1978.
It also represents the Nigerian Thrift and Credit Cooperative units in International Organizations such as Africa Cooperative Savings and Credit Association (ACOSCA) and the World Council of Credit Union.
The objectives of the Union include the following: • Mobilisation of funds for loans to its affiliates that are Cooperative Thrift and Credit Societies in Nigeria • Promotion of Cooperative Thrift and Credit Societies in Nigeria • Provision of technical and operational support to Cooperative Thrift and Credit Societies in Nigeria • Training and personnel development services Cooperative Thrift and Credit Societies in Nigeria • Coordination of activities of State financing Cooperative apexes 3.10 Cooperative Financing: An Assessment The establishment of the Peoples’ Bank, Community banks as well as the increasing number of Non- Governmental Organisation who are into micro financing is an indication that the Cooperators has lost faith in the Cooperative movement as a viable microfinance structure.
It is actually regarded as a confirmation of the failure of cooperative financing.
Many Cooperators in rural areas claim that cooperative financing both in volume of activities and impact has declined.
Several explanations have been put forward.
These include the following: • Officialdom: The introduction of Cooperative movement to Nigeria was not people driven.
It was not at the request of the people.
The socio-economic condition, which prompted the Rochdale Pioneers to 38ENT 201 MODULE 1 act for themselves, was absent.
The need for modern Cooperative enterprises never came from the people.
Farmer had already organized themselves into associations such as Ibadan Agricultural Society (1904) and Agege Planters’ Union (1907).
The introduction of the movement was solely the initiative of the Colonial masters.
The aim was to enhance efficiency in the production and their exploitation of the producers.
The Cooperative movement was placed under the exclusive control of the Colonial officers in order to achieve their aim.
The Cooperative Societies Ordinance (1935) and the Cooperative Regulations (1936) gave wide ranging powers to the Registrar of Cooperative Societies, who was a Colonial government official.
He had the power to promote Cooperatives societies, to register, inspect arbitrate, elect officials, audit appropriation of operational surpluses as well as the dissolution of cooperative societies.
Most of the business decisions were also taken by him.
It is interesting to note that the various present Cooperative Societies’ laws in various States of Nigeria are not significantly different from the Cooperative Societies Ordinance of 1935.
Cooperatives Societies are treated as appendages or parastatals of government.
The desire of the officials rather than those of the Cooperators are carried out.
This is against the Cooperative ethics of democratic control and the policy of non- interference by government.
IT is a common practice for government officials to be appointed as the Sole Administrators of Cooperative Apexes and Central Financing Agencies.
This resulted in the stifling of the initiatives of the Cooperators.
This is further compounded by the fact that the Societies depend on government for financial support.
Later, the State and Regional governments capitalized the Cooperative Banks and the Central Financing Agencies.
It was therefore easy for political leaders and government officials to alter the mandate and status of these banks and agencies without recourse to the Cooperators.
As the resources of governments decline especially in the 1980s, the fortunes of the Cooperative movement also dwindled.
The then proposed Bendel State Bank project could not come to fruition because the government could not finance.
However, the traditional banking practices of commercial banks are not sensitive to the features and needs of small businesses of Cooperators especially farmers.
Periodic credit guidelines drawn up by the Central Bank and which these transformed Cooperatives banks must adhere to ignore the need of Cooperative Societies.
39ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS These banks demanded for collateral and treated rural banking as being unprofitable.
Cooperators and Cooperative Societies can not compete with the private sector for the services of these banks; the government has evolved a rural based, poor people friendly bank in the name of Nigerian Agricultural, Cooperative and Rural Development Bank SELF ASSIGNMENT EXERCISE Define Cooperative Association What are the benefits of ‘Ajo’ 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, the economic capacity of the rural poor, the low income earner can be enhanced by the activities of the Cooperative Societies.
The activities of this Society also lead to national economic growth and a ready source of fund to the business man.
5.0 SUMMARY Partnership and Cooperative Societies are other sources of getting financial assistance for the purpose of establishing or expanding a business venture.
They both have advantages and disadvantages.
Care should be taken either to invite a partner or become a member of Cooperative Societies.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the advantages of Cooperative Societies 2.
Partnership is a dependable source of fund and it guarantees permanence of business.
Discuss 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING .
Macmillian Press Oyedipe, F.P.A (1996).The Outstanding Success of Cooperative Movement.
Ilorin: Dabot Publication 40ENT 201 MODULE 1 5: NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Non-Governmental Organisation 3.1.1 Features of Non-Governmental Organisation 3.1.2 Peculiar Characteristics of their Beneficiaries 3.1.3 Smallness of the Loan or Credit Facility 3.1.4 Adoption of Credit plus Approach 3.1.5 Focus on Rural Women 3.1.6 Group Delivery Methodology 3.2 Advantages of Group Methodology 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Non-governmental Organisations (NGOs) are some of the Institutions which are involved in Micro financing.
NGOS are corporate bodies that are concerned with addressing needs and problems or are interested in promoting a cause or an ideal.
They provide solutions to problems of people in communities, or a group of people in the community.
The problems could range from poverty alleviation, provision of credit and farming inputs to civic education, sustainability and protection of the environment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The aim of the unit is to explain the role of the NGOs in micro credit financing.
Specifically at the end of the unit, the learner should be able to: • Define an NGO, • Explain features and • Role of micro credit financing 41ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Non-Governmental Organisation 3.1.1 Features of Non-governmental Organisation NGOs have some features that are peculiar to them.
They are discussed below: 3.1.2 Peculiar Characteristic of their Beneficiaries NGOs Venture into Micro Financing NGOs venture into micro financing stems out of the desire to provide credit to a large portion or percentage of economically active population who are excluded from benefiting from the financial services of the banks or financial institutions of the formal sector.
The beneficiaries are mostly small or micro business owners who are mostly in the informal sector.
They could be in businesses such as shoe mending, retail selling, pepper/tomato selling, agro-allied food production and farming.
They are generally classified as the poor or small business owners.
Most of the micro enterprises are owned and run by the sole proprietor or entrepreneur.
He provides the fund for the business.
Most of the beneficiaries have little or no education and lack modern skills.
They also have little knowledge about record keeping, planning, cash management and other modern management techniques.
Women constitute a higher percentage of the beneficiaries.
These women are the vulnerable group who can not afford the collateral requested by the formal banks.
They are mostly rural dwellers who have suffered the neglect of government in terms of Infrastructural and financial services.
Even when credit facilities are made available to them, it is moistly diverted by the smart and better educated urban dwellers.
Most banks also consider rural banking as unprofitable.
The overall development strategies give little attention to the rural areas and the rural dwellers.
The NGOs, therefore sought to redress this rural neglect.
3.1.3 Smallness of the Loan or Credit Facility The financial need of the micro enterprise is very low.
A loan of as small as N10, 000 can change the business volume and profitability of a 42ENT 201 MODULE 1 micro enterprise.
In spite of the fact that the loan is small, each beneficiary must have proper record with the NGO.
This will make the cost of processing the loan to be high.
In order to solve this problem, group delivery methodology is used for both the savings and loan operation.
3.1.4 Adoption of Credit Plus Approach NGOs look beyond credit provision.
They also take care of the total well being of the people.
So they train them in the area of health care, skill enhancement, technological transfer, reproductive health, skill acquisition etc.
3.1.5 Focus on Rural Women They concentrate on rural women who are mostly farmers, and petty traders.
Some of the NGOs have their head office in the urban centers but maintain operational branches in the rural communities so as to be close to their people.
3.2 Group Delivery Methodology Beneficiaries are encouraged to form a group or a cooperative society.
Pre-loan training programmes are conducted for members.
Training such as book-keeping, cash management, marketing skills and techniques would be organized for members.
The usage of the loan, monitoring of the savings and repayment of loan are done at group meetings.
However, the individual is held responsible for the utilization and repayment of the loan.
It is also possible for a group to take a loan together for joint business.
3.2.1 Advantages of Group Methodology Group delivery methodology has some advantages.
These are: • Reduction of the cost of landing.
The repayment is done at the meeting rather than with the individual loanee • Aids credit discipline and high member of repayment - The group exacts pressures on its members to pay up so that they would not be disqualified from having access to further loan.
• Solidarity among borrowers – There will be cordial relationship between members.
Absence of Collateral Requirement – The loanees are not required to present any guarantee towards the loan.
They are given on trust.
• They develop the savings and thrift ability of the poor.
43ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS Loanees are encouraged to make regular deposit with the institution or credit group.
Some groups expect them to make some savings before credit can be collected.
The amount of money saved can be considered as a withdrawal security for the loan.
Members can borrow up to 3 times amount he has saved; amount he can loan is referred to as the maximum credit limit.
He would be allowed until the loan is repaid.
The excess money deposited after the loan would have been repaid accrues to the depositor.
• Low Interest Rates The charge interest on the loan of lent to the people.
It is expected that it will be below the price charged by the commercial banks.
They record a high rate of repayment.
• The activity of NGO increases the well-being of the poor.
Beneficiaries are able to expand their business as a result of the credit facility afforded them by the group.
This will increase their profit level as well as the disposable income; thus increasing the consumption level and the standard of living of both the women and their children.
• They enhance capital accumulation and capital building among the poor.
The poor are able and build capital for their own business through the savings initiative of the NGO • Improved self esteem of the poor Income generation among the poor They bridge the gap that is created by the demands of the formal financial institutions that, cannot meet the credit need of the poor.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What are the characteristics of NGO?
2.
List the benefits.
4.0 CONCLUSION NGOs have contributed to the development of the vulnerable group.
Most rural dwellers have embarked on micro businesses as a result of their activities 5.0 SUMMARY The NGOs have been able to bridge the gap created by the inability of the convectional banks to assist the vulnerable group.
This has created some jobs and led to the improvement of the standards of living of these groups of people.
44ENT 201 MODULE 1 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the characteristics of an NGO 2.
Define an NGO 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ehigiamusoe, G (1998).
Understanding NGOs.
Benin City: LAPO Development Center.
45ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS MODULE 2 Unit 1 Government Policies Unit 2 Traditional Micro Finance Practice in Nigeria Unit 3 Sources of Funds (Part 1) Unit 4 Sources of Funds: Partnership and Cooperative Society Unit 5 Non-Governmental Organization in Microfinance UNIT 1 GOVERNMENT POLICIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Government Policies 3.1.1 Definition of Policy 3.1.2 Need for Micro Finance Policy 3.2 Different Government Policies 3.2.1 The First Effort to Promote Micro Enterprises 3.2.2 Small Scale Industries Credit Scheme (SSICS) 3.2.3 Small and Medium Enterprises Loan Scheme (SMELS) 3.2.4 Employment Creation Loan Schemes 3.2.5 Agricultural Sector Employment Programme 3.2.6 Mature People’s Scheme 3.2.7 Agricultural Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme (ACGS) 3.2.7.1 Feature of the Scheme 3.2.8 Entrepreneurship Development Programme (EDP) 3.2.9 Second National Fadama Development Project (NFDPII) 3.2.9.1 Pre-requisites for Participation 3.2.9.2 Benefits to Fadama Users 3.2.9.3 Project Implementation Strategy 3.2.10 Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency of Nigeria (SMEDAN) 3.2.11 Multi Partner Matching Funds Scheme (MPMF) 3.2.12 The Promise Keepers’ Scheme 3.3 Advantages of the Various Policies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 46ENT 201 MODULE 1 1.0 INTRODUCTION As a father or a mother, you have set rules that you follow and also expect your children to do likewise.
Some people do not buy “aso-ebi”.
Some do not attend night parties or eat outside the home.
These set of actions can be referred to as policies.
They have been well-articulated and thought out by the individual, who is aware of the consequences.
A nation also has such plan of action geared towards achieving some specific objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objective of this unit is to explain the various policies that have been put in place by the government in order to address the issue of non- availability of credit to the informal sector or the SMEs.
Specifically, the learner is expected to be able to define policy and explain the various policies put in place by the government.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Government Policies 3.1.1 Definition of Policy A policy is a statement or plan of action put in place in order to achieve specific objective.
It could be target specific or a plan meant to benefit the whole economy.
Government, having identified lack of capital as an important reason for both the failure and low number of Micro or Small Scale Enterprises, put in place several programmes and policies to address the situation.
3.1.2 Need for Micro Finance Policy A robust economic growth can be achieved if a well focused poverty alleviation programmes are put in place.
These programmes must be articulated in such a way that people would have access to factors of production and credit.
The latent capacity of the poor for entrepreneurship could be enhanced by the provision of micro finance services, which will enable them to engage in economic activities and be self sufficient.
It will also lead to increase in employment opportunities in the economy.
Over 65% of the economically active population that are precluded from formal financial services provided by the conventional banks could benefit from the programme.
Furthermore, the policy on microfinance 47ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS will make it possible for the informal sector to be brought under the supervision of the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN), thus making it possible for the achievement of monetary stability and the expansion of financial infrastructure in the country to meet the financial requirement of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs).
A vibrant microfinance sub- sector would evolve and it would be integrated into the main stream of the national financial system and provide the stimulus for growth and development.
It would also harmonize operating standards and provide a strategic platform for the evolution of microfinance institution promote appropriate regulation, supervision and adoption of best practice.
3.2 Different Government Policies 3.2.1 The First Effort to Promote Micro Enterprises The first effort to promote micro enterprises started in the early 1950s with the establishment of the Colonial Development Loans Board by the Colonial Administration.
This was later replaced by the Revolving Loan Fund for Industry which came as space of the technical assistance from U.K for the Small-Scale Industries Credit Scheme (SSICS).
State and Federal Governments also contribute to the purse of the SSICS for on-lending to small entrepreneurs.
The government first spilt out policies that will enhance the development of Small Scale Enterprises (SSE).
In the Second National Development Plan (1974), the government stated some policies that will initiate credit scheme for the SSE.
The States incorporated the Small Scale Industries Credit Scheme (SCICS) in their second National Development Plan (1975).
In other to further enhance the growth of SMES, government promulgated the Nigerian Enterprise Promotion Act and later the Nigerian Enterprises Promotion Decree (NEPD in 1977).
This policy exclusively reserved indigenous equity participation of between 40% and 60% for Nigerian.
That is, Nigerians should own up to between 40% and 60% of the share or capital in a company.
In 1980, the Federal Government released a policy paper titled “Nigerian Industrial Policy and Strategy Guidelines to Investors”.
The policy aims at opening up the rural areas in the country and creates remunerative employment for the people.
The Industrial Development Centers (IDCs) are the major Institution (outlets) for the achievement of the government survival.
Several Polices have been put in place since 1980s.
Some of them are discussed below.
48ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.2.2 Small Scale Industries Credit Scheme (SSICS) This scheme was initiated to provide financial support to viable Small- Scale Enterprises (SSE).
The main objective was to empower SSE to produce or process inputs for larger industrial enterprises.
The major features of the SSICS are: • Funds for the scheme were provided by both the state and federal governments.
• The rates of interest were lower than the rates in the financial market.
• The beneficiary would not start to pay back the loan until after two years, that is, a moratorium period of two years.
3.2.3 Small and Medium Enterprises Loan Scheme (SMELS) The objective of this scheme is expansion and productivity enhancement as well as capital acquisition.
It also aims at the sustainability of the enterprise, that is, it provides fund to make the company produce at a sustainable level.
The scheme had the following features: • The fund was provided by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
The fund was handled by the Federal government.
• The Small and Medium Enterprise Unit of the Central Bank of Nigeria handled the administrative procedure.
• The raw material for production should be locally sourced; that is, it must not be an imported raw material.
• Beneficiaries must contribute 45% of the total cost of the project.
• The credit facility would last for 10 years.
3.2.4 Employment Creation Loan Schemes This scheme was put in place in order to reduce the effect of the Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP).
The aim of the scheme was to create jobs for a large army of the unemployed people especially the youth.
The beneficiaries were to access loans guaranteed by the federal government from some banks.
The amount of the loan is between N5, 000 and N50, 000.
It was called Job Creation Loan Guarantee Scheme.
It was administered by the National Directorate of Employment (NDE).
The beneficiaries were requested to – 49ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • use as security, the original copy of their academic certificates.
This would be deposited with the HDE • give the NDE a detailed feasibility study report in the project to the bank for approval; • present two acceptable guarantors; • the interest rate is as low as 13%.
The NDE also have schemes such as National Open Apprenticeship Scheme (NOAS) and the Basic Business Training Scheme under the NOAS, interested youth apply to the NDE for the Apprenticeship Scheme.
The youth is assigned to a practicing artisan or technician to acquire knowledge and expertise in the vocational skill of his choice.
He is paid some stipend and given some money and machine at the end of the training.
3.2.5 Agricultural Sector Employment Programme The aim of the programme is to provide employment for school leavers.
Those interested are given relevant training in their area of choice and provided with land and loan to start the farming business.
Each state has an NDE Agricultural Programme Committee which is in charge of the programme.
3.2.6 Mature People’s Scheme This scheme is for retired persons or those about to retire.
The aim of this scheme is to provide employment for the retirees after they have disengaged from regular work.
The features include: • The beneficiaries submit proposals which are scrutinized for viability.
• Beneficiaries are to present items such as landed property or any other security to cover up to 50% of the loan size.
• Beneficiaries are to employ at least a graduate of higher institution of learning.
• The interest rate is as low as 9% per annum.
3.2.7 Agricultural Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme (ACGS) By 1977, government aimed at sufficiency in the production of food and agricultural raw materials.
In order to achieve this, it was important to encourage the smallholder farmers.
The farmers would need some 50ENT 201 MODULE 1 money in order to accrue this.
The government therefore established the ACGS by decrees.
The aim of the government was to guarantee loans granted for agricultural purposes by any bank.
The guarantee covers both the principal and the interest.
The agricultural activities covered include cultivation of food crops such as cereals, tubers, beans, groundnuts, bananas, pineapples, plantain, vegetable and fruits of all kinds.
Others are cash crops such as cotton, rubber, palm oil, tea, coffee.
Those who are interested in animal husbandry such as poultry, piggery, cattle and fish farming could also benefit.
3.2.7.1 Feature of the Scheme • Beneficiaries apply to Conventional Banks.
Prospective Beneficiaries would apply in triplicate a loan under the scheme to a conventional bank.
The bank would forward a copy to the Central Bank.
• Demand for security: The bank would request the prospective beneficiary to provide security which could be any of the following: - A more able property of the people requesting for a loan (he is referred to as a loanee) - A life insurance policy, a promissory note - Registered place of land, landed property - Stocks and shares of the loanee • Mode of Disbursement: The process period is to be a maximum of sixty days.
The fund for the purchase of items such as livestock, plant, machinery and any other farming equipment would be disbursed to the supplier.
• Sanction against Loan Diversion: It is a criminal offense to use the loan for another project.
The punishment is a repayment of the amount of money got as loan and/or imprisonment for a maximum period of five years.
• Regulated Interest Rate: The interest rate was fixed and stipulated in the decree.
It was 5% and 6% for individual farmer and cooperative societies respectively.
• Extent of guarantee.
In case of a default, the guarantor and the security of the loanee would be reverted to in order to recover the loan.
The outstanding amount could be recovered from the Board of the Fund.
The Board could pay up to 100% of the outstanding amount.
• Operational Structure: There is a Board which is made up of six members, four would be appointed by the Federal government and remaining two by the Central Bank.
51ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Management of the Scheme: The Central Bank is responsible for the day to day running of the scheme while the implementing agents were the Commercial Agricultural Banks and Cooperative Banks.
3.2.8 Enterpreneurship Development Programme (EDP) This is another Scheme under Small Scale Industrial Programme.
This is organized by the NDE with the aim of developing enterpreneurial skills among Nigeria.
Those who apply for loan or any other service under the Small Scale Industrial Scheme are exposed to intensive training.
The courses cover business identification, market research, feasibility studies, record keeping, loan assessment, business management, marketing etc.
3.2.9 Second National Fadama Development Project (NFDPII) The NFDO.II was conceptualized by the World Bank/Federal Government with the active involvement of the state and local governments.
The objective of the project is to accelerate the development and growth of dry season farming and agro-allied processing and marketing activities.
The finance is sourced from a $100 million World Bank Credit with the three tier of governments paying some counterpart funding which is a pre-condition set by the World Bank for effective take-off of the project.
It is also aimed at increasing the incomes of those who depend directly or indirectly on Fadama resources, that is, farmers, pasture men, fisher folks, hunters, gatherers, and service producers, through empowering communities to take charge of their own development agenda.
The group also includes the vulnerable groups like widows elderly, ethnic minority, orphans.
It is expected that at the end of the duration, 50% of the beneficiaries would have their real incomes increased by 20% of the baseline income.
3.2.9.1 Pre-requisites for Participation - Most of the rural dwellers are potential Fadama Resource Users (FRU) - A potential Fadama user would be involved in farming activities, agro-allied processing and agro service providers which includes vulnerable groups like widows, elderly, and orphans.
- A potential Fadama User would belong to a Fadama User Group (FUG) which would be a minimum of 5 members.
52ENT 201 MODULE 1 - Five user groups would organize themselves into a Fadama Community Association (FCA) - Each member would be engaged in a project - Each FCAs would articulate, plan and cost a project which is called the Local Development Plans (LDPs).
- The FUG and FCA must be registered as Cooperative Associations.
- Facilitators at SFDO will assist the FUG and FCA to develop the LDPs.
- The FUG and FCA must be linked up with the State Fadama Development Office (SFDO), which in most cases is resident in the Agricultural Development Authority Complex (ADA) - FUG and FCA would open an account and would save 40% of the cost of the project; the remaining 60% would be given by the World Bank through the SFDO.
3.2.9.2 Benefits to Fadama Users • Financial Assistance The Local Development Plan inoculated by the FCA, would be financed by the fund in the pool.
• Provision of input, equipment Vital production input and equipment would be provided by the World Bank • Training FUG members would be exposed to better training in the handling and management of their assets • Provision of processing and storage facilities These facilities would be provided in order to minimize post harvest losses and to create value added to outputs.
• Provision of Infrastructure Infrastructure such as good access to farm roads, water supply system including irrigation and power support system generator, water pumps would be provided.
• Means of transportation Transport vehicles would be provided for easy haulage of farm produce to markets.
3.2.9.3 Project Implementation Strategy The project has six years tenure effective from January 2004 to December 2009.
The NFDP.II is based on a Community Demand Driven (CDD), approach whereby all users of FADAMA resources will be encouraged to develop participatory and socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable Local Development Plans (LDPs).
53ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS A Local Development Desk (LDD) would be established at the headquarters of the participating Local Government Council, Manned by two trained Local Government Personnel: an Agricultural Officer and a Monitoring and Evaluation Officer.
The LFD would be over-seen by a constituted local Fadama Development Committee (LFDC) comprising of: 1.
The Chairperson of the Local Government Council as Chairman 2.
A Traditional Community person as Deputy Chairman 3.
FCA representations 4.
Others (Private Sector, NGO and Local Women’s Groups) The LFDC is responsible for monitoring community mobilization offer and making sure that the needs and priorities of FUG and FCA are reflected in the Plans (LDPs) Direct purchase of the required item is done through the SFDO.
Cash is rarely given to the beneficiaries.
3.2.10 Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency of Nigeria (SMEDAN) 3.2.11 Multi Partner Matching Funds Scheme (MPMF) This scheme was instituted by the National Poverty Eradication Programme (NAPEP).
The fund available for loan is sourced from banks and the purse of the state’s government.
The monies collected under MPFS are kept with the banks.
The banks will pass the monies to Micro Finance Institutions and Cooperative societies from which it will be accessed by the potential beneficiaries.
Once the beneficiaries are identified and selected, the NAPEP partners with the National Directorate of Employment and Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency (SMEDAN) train the beneficiaries on how to set up their businesses, basic accounting procedures, record keeping etc.
Eight states are benefiting from this scheme.
These are Bayelsa, Rivers, Kaduna, Osun, Edo, Ogun, Kogi and Akwa Ibom.
Other states will be involved in due course.
A total of N4.32 billion has been pooled and it is expected that it will create about 113,000 jobs.
3.2.12 The Promise Keepers’ Scheme This scheme was instituted by the National Poverty Eradication Programme (NAPEP).
It is executed in collaboration with religious organizations.
The various organizations are expected to identify the poor ones among them.
They are categorized according to their needs.
54ENT 201 MODULE 1 The needs are monetized and members who are willing to sponsor the needy are identified within the organization.
The needs could vary from skill acquisition to financial or managerial skill to technological skill acquisition.
The groups are monitored by both the members of NAPEP and the religious organization.
This makes the beneficiary faithful to the use of the fund.
The repayment rate is expected to be high since the monitoring is close.
3.3 Advantages of the Various Policies Policies are geared to the achievement of specific macro economic objectives.
Government wants to achieve self sufficiency, mostly in food production and a very low rate of unemployment as well as inflation rate.
In a developing economy like Nigeria, where savings, and therefore, loanable fund and capital are scarce, there is the need for the government to provide a means of sourcing credit for the majority of the people who are mostly poor rural dwellers.
This credit if truly accessed and utilized by the poor would lead to economic growth as well as development.
The standard of living of the poor would improve.
This will have impact on the quality of life of the children and the community at large.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the Schemes under the NDE.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, government has put in place several policies to enhance the performance of the Small and Micro enterprises by making Micro Credit as well as make other facilities and services available to them.
Some Institutions were empowered to manage the scheme.
These will be discussed in the next unit.
5.0 SUMMARY The government, in an effort to achieve expansion and productivity enhancement has put in place some policies, which focused on the provision of micro credit to the poor, training in basic business skills, and the provision of tools, equipment and machinery.
The beneficiaries are however expected to contribute a certain percentage of the loan applied for.
They are also expected to present guarantors or collateral of some sort.
These schemes are designed to be poor- centered; those who have been side tracked by the conventional banks.
55ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why did government set up Micro Credit Scheme?
2.
What are the factors of Agricultural credit Guarantee Fund Scheme (ACGS).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Loucks, K. (1990) Training Entrepreneurs for Small Business Creation.
Geneva: International Labor Office.
Rudelius W, Erickson W.B and Bokula W.J (1976).
An Introduction to Contemporary Business.
New York: Karcourt Jovanovith.
Handerson C, (1986).
The Successful Entrepreneur Strategies New York: Mac Graw Hill Inc. Pearse II, J.A and Robinson R.B, (1986).
Entrepreneur Behavior.
Academy of Management Proceedings.
56ENT 201 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS (PART 1) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Micro Finance Institutions 3.1.1 Industrial development Centers (IDCs) 3.1.2 National Directorate of Employment (NDE) 3.1.3 The Federal Institute of Industrial Research (FIIRO) 3.1.4 The Nigeria Association of Small Scale Industrialist (NASSI) 3.1.5 Nigeria Association of Chambers of Commerce Industry, Mines and Agriculture (NACCIMA) 3.1.6 Nigeria Opportunities Industrialist Centre (NOIC) 3.1.7 The Nigeria Export-Import Bank (NEXIM) 3.18 THE Natural Development and Conversation Scheme (NRDCS) 3.19 The Nigerian Association of Women Entrepreneurships (NAWE) 3.1.10 The Nigeria Store Products research institute 3.1.11 Standard organization of Nigeria (SON) 3.2 Advantages of these Institutions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Some institutions are not particularly involved in micro credit financing.
Some of them provide counseling, training and consultancy services for entrepreneurs.
Some of these agencies which are spread throughout the country are discussed below.
2.0 OBJECTIVE The objective of this unit is to discuss some agencies that provide professional advice to the SMEs.
At the end of the study, the student should be able to list the agencies and explain their activitie.
57ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Micro Finance Institutions 3.1.1 Industrial Development Centers (IDCs) The IDCs was set up in 1980 with the aim of providing technical support for industrialists.
The services are performed free of charge.
The activities are as follows: • Technical appraisal of loan application and preparation of feasibility studies • Training of entrepreneurs and staff including managerial training • Application of the output of industrial research in the design of products for small-scale industries • Provision of extension services to owners and managers of Small Scale Enterprises (SSEs) • To help SSEs in bulk purchases of raw materials • To assist the SSEs in plant installation and servicing The IDC in order to achieve the above renders the following services for the rapid development of SMEs • Selection of viable small scale industries for prospective entrepreneurs • Selection of proper manufacturing process along with machinery and equipment for the product lines • Installation of machinery and equipment • Quality control and improvement of the end-product • Repairs and maintenance of machinery and equipment • Manufacturing of spare parts and components • Training of small industry technician and artisans in the use of the new technology • Improvement of product design and manufacture of prototypes • Adaptation of technology and process that will improve production for the SMEs • Appraisal of loan application of small scale industrialists for grant of loan under the Small-Scale Industries Scheme (SSIS) • Assist in training of SMEs in book-keeping, accounting and cost analysis, production planning and control • Counselling for credit arrangement 58ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.1.2 National Directorate Of Employment (NDE) The NDE is set up to perform the following functions • To help the participant translate his business ideas into viable commercial ventures • Organization of pre-loan courses for prospective loanees • Development of business for SMEs • Creation of enabling environment and opportunities for beneficiaries and those wishing to start their businesses • Provision of funds for emerging entrepreneurs to start their businesses • Reorientation of graduates/school leavers to be self-employed • Introduction of information technology to the fresh school leavers • Creation of different schemes – National Open Apprenticeship and Basic Business Training Schemes to enable the NDE achieve its objectives 3.1.3 The Federal Institute of Industrial Research (FIIRO) FIIRO was established in 1956 with the aim of quickening the pace of industrial development.
It is to carry out the following: • Research and development into the usefulness of local raw materials for industrial purposes • Improve on local technology and adaptation of imported ones • Routine technical and consultancy services to industries, government establishments, and private organization and individuals.
• Design and development of production processes and the fabrication of equipment for mechanizing the production processes 3.1.4 The Nigeria Association of Small Scale Industrialists (NASSI) The NASSI is established to carry out the following activities: • To establish and maintain an association for the exchange of ideas and techniques on issues relevant to the development of SMEs.
• To promote technical and management training programmes by organizing seminars, workshops, trade fairs and other public enlightenment programmes.
• To source and facilitate credits for SMEs • To source and provide information on relevant technologies for increased and improved quality among the SMEs.
• To organize for the export of products for members 59ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • To establish contact with government and governmental institutions and other non-or governmental organization for the advancement and promotion of SMEs.
• To contact, consult, confer and cooperate foreign agencies, Institute and organisations.
3.1.5 Nigeria Association of Chambers of Commerce, Industry, Mines and Agriculture (NACCIMA) Undertakes the: • Collection and dissemination of vital business information; • Monitoring the performance of the economy and making representation to Government and its agencies with regard to the effects of various economic, fiscal monetary measures; • Identification of obstacle to the establishment and profitable operation of commercial industrial and other enterprises, especially, those arising from government policies or the administration of such policies and the exertion for the removal of such obstacle; • Organizing seminars and workshops on various aspects of the economy, business and management; • Promoting commercial, industrial and, in general, economic operation between Nigeria and other countries; • Assisting to protect Nigeria’s image and business interest abroad by meditating in commercial disputes 3.1.6 Nigeria Opportunities Industrialist Centre (NOIC) Nigeria Opportunities Industrialist Centre (NOIC) Gbagada, Lagos was established: • To contribute to National effort in transforming unemployed youths into productive members of Nigeria labour force.
• To provide vocational and agricultural skills, training for school leavers especially those without certificate who usually fall outside formal educational institutions and who are consequently unemployed • To train in shorter time than the traditional institutions do, with emphasis on 70% practical and 30% theory.
• To provide training, job placement and follow up at cost and time effective manner.
• To adapt the training programmes to meet the challenges of changing technological advance and current need.
• To develop in the trainee a positive attitude to self and work.
60ENT 201 MODULE 1 • To provide a regular source of dependable highly motivated skilled workers for industry and business; and • To encourage entrepreneurship and self-employment among youths by providing them with the skills necessary to start small business Apart from those primary objectives, the centre also has specific objectives for Small Scale Enterprise Development (SED) like: • To encourage self employment among young school leavers (unemployed graduates and unemployed people).
• To encourage setting up of cottage industries in the rural areas and reduce urban drift.
• To support the effort of government to alleviate poverty among the Nigerian populace.
• To satisfy the yearning of aspiration of unemployed and underemployed people of different educational background • To provide means of life sustenance for maximum number of people at the least possible cost.
• To reduce the youth restiveness in the urban cities and oil-producing areas of the country.
3.1.7 The Nigeria Export-Import Bank (NEXIM) NIGERIA EXPORT-IMPORT BANK (NEXIM) was established: • To encourage exporters to diversify their export markets without fear or risk inherent in dealing with new buyers; • To attract new enterprises into business; and, • To encourage exporters to extend credit terms to the buyers in order to enhance their competitiveness in the international markets These it does by: • Providing credit in local currency to its clients in support of exports.
• Maintaining foreign exchange revolving fund for lending to exporters who need to import foreign input to facilitate export production.
• Providing export credit guarantee and export credit insurance facilities to its clients etc.
3.1.8 The Natural Development and Conservation Scheme (NRDCS) This deals with the harnessing of the agricultural, water, solid mineral resources, conservation of land space (beaches, reclaimed land etc) 61ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS particularly for the convenient and effective utilization by small-scale operators and the immediate community.
3.1.9 The Nigerian Association of Women Entrepreneurs (NAWE) An economic, governmental organization, established to: • Serve as a centre for Nigerian women entrepreneurs for the promotion of their interests; • Serve as a forum where Nigerian Women Entrepreneurs exchange ideas, discuss their problems, design and form strategies regarding their business.
• Initiates, encourages and promotes training for the members to enable the development of individual talents which will also contribute to overall economic development of the country.
• Assist Nigerian rural traditional women entrepreneur to organize themselves and improve their working methods • Organize and participate in local and international trade fairs to promote an export oriented economy.
• Co-ordinates their activities with Government initiative on resources creation and capital formation 3.1.10 The Nigerian Store Product Research Institute The Nigerian Store Product Research Institute was established and mandated to carry out research into bulk storage problem of export commodities and local food crops and in particular conduct research into: • Improvement and maintenance of the quality of bulk commodity crops including cocoa, groundnuts, palm produce (kernel and oil); • Improvement and maintenance of the quality of local food crops including cereals, grains pulses, tubers and any other commodity under bulk storage; • Special studies such as product pest fumigation and residue and mycotoxin surveys; • Provision of advice and training of extension workers in problems associated with stored products and materials in storage structures, new insecticides, new items of equipment and techniques; and, • Any other related matters as may be determined from time to time by the Institute.
3.1.11 Standard Organization of Nigeria (SON) 62ENT 201 MODULE 1 SON is resolved to be a reference point in matters of standardization, quality and technological competence required for the launching of Nigerian products: • To provide industries with up-to-date information on standardization, its benefits and encourage participation of the organized private sector in standardization and review.
• To ensure improved competitiveness of Nigerian goods at home and abroad encouraging quality assurance practices.
• Provide information, advice and assistance to industries on quality management for improved cost effectiveness.
• To ensure adequate technical support required for competitiveness in global trade and proper economic growth.
• To motivate workforce through steady investment in human resources development for acquisition of skills in tune with technological advancement.
• To collaborate with regional and international organizations in the areas of meteorology, Standards, Testing and Quality Assurance (MSTQ) for enhancement of skills and encouragement of free trade building of capabilities.
3.2 Advantages of these Institutions to the SMEs The beneficiaries derive a lot of benefits by patronizing these organizations: • Information - They have ready opportunities for information, which would have cost them a lot of money to source from the private sector.
The information guides them in the course of planning and preparing the feasibility for the project of choice.
They get information on the market situation and potential customers outside the country.
• Skill Acquisition - Some of these Institutions offer skill acquisition at very cheap rates.
Some organize seminars and workshops for would-be investors free of charge in order to acquaint them with new technological training and information.
• Training and Capacity Building - Some of the Organizations organize training for the SMEs practioners.
This will enhance their performance.
• Exhibition and Trade Fair Shows - Some of the organizations organize trade fairs and exhibition both within and outside the country and encourage the SMEs to participate.
This will lead 63ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS to the expansion of their market share and creation of awareness of their products • Sourcing of Credit - Most of the organizations assist the members in sourcing for credits.
They act as guarantors where required and in some cases provide the required collateral.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) What are the advantages of the Institutions?
2) List some of the functions of SON 4.0 CONCLUSION Government has put in several Institutions to service the SMEs and as a medium for the implementation of her policies.
These Institutions impact positive effect on the performance of the SMEs.
5.0 SUMMARY There are various organizations set up by government to service the SMEs.
The main objective of the government is to empower the informal sector practitioners.
This will effect positively on the economy leading to economic growth.
The Institutions provided both financial and none financial services.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the advantages of the Institutions to the SMEs.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Loucks, K. (1990).
Training Entrepreneurs for Small Business Creation Geneva: International Labor Office.
Rudelius W, Erickson W.B and Bokula W.J (1976).
An Introduction to Contemporary Business.
New York: Karcourt Jovanovith.
Handerson C, (1986).
The Successful Entrepreneur Strategies New York: Mac Graw Hill Inc. Pearse II, J.A and Robinson R.B, (1986).
Entrepreneur Behavior.
Academy of Management Proceedings.
64ENT 201 MODULE 1 65ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS UNIT 3 MICRO FINANCE INSTITUTIONS PART II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Micro Finance Institutions 3.1.1 Family Economic Advancement Programme (FEAP) 3.1.2 Features of FEAP 3.1.3 Bias for Production Funding 3.1.4 Policy Formulation 3.1.5 Use of Cooperative Societies 3.1.6 Loans Tied to Projects 3.1.7 Collaboration with Banks 3.1.8 Savings Requirement 3.1.9 Subsidized Interest Rates 3.1.10 Multi Authority Segment 3.1.11 Technical Advisory Committee 3.1.12 State Coordinating Committee 3.1.13 Local Government Area Coordinating Committee 3.1.14 Ward Coordinating Committee 3.2 People’s Bank of Nigeria Limited (PBN) 3.3 Features of People’s Bank of Nigeria Limited 3.4 Reasons for the Bank Failure 3.4.1 Improper Targeting Mechanism 3.4.2 Centralization of Operations 3.4.3 Lack of Expertise 3.5 Community Bank (CBs) 3.6 Nigerian Agricultural Cooperative and Rural Development Bank (NACRDB) 3.7 Community Banks (CBs) 3.8 Objectives of the Community Banking System 3.9 Factors for the Decline 3.10 Micro Finance Banks (MFB) 3.10.1 The Objectives of the MFBs 3.10.2 Advantages of MFBs 3.10.3 Other Supporting Institutional Arrangements 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 66ENT 201 MODULE 1 1.0 INTRODUCTION Financial Institutions are bodies set up by the government to oversee the implementation of some policies.
There are many institutions that are saddled with the responsibility of seeing that the objectives of the government are executed.
Some institutions are set up to achieve the micro financing of the small scale industries.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objectives of this unit are to explain the activities of the different institutions set up to see to the implementation of the micro finance policies of government.
At the end of the study, the student should be able to list the different institutions that are involved in micro financing.
The student should also be able to explain the functions of the institutions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Micro Finance Institutions Government involvement in micro financing in Nigeria began with agricultural financing.
The Nigerian Agricultural and Cooperative Bank (NACB) was the former Nigerian Agricultural Bank.
It was established to give credit to small farm owners and the informal sector that do not have access to credit and Government, by providing affordable credit that was considered desirable.
Some other institutions like the Peoples Banks of Nigeria, Community Banks, the ambitious Family Economic Advancement Programme (FEAP) and other government and quasi- government were established in order to achieve poverty reduction among the poor.
However, for maximum impact, the various government-led micro finance institutions were restructured and merged which resulted in the formation of Nigerian Agricultural Cooperative and Rural Development Bank, Small and Medium Enterprise Industry Development Agency.
3.1.1 Family Economic Advancement Programme (FEAP) Other Institutions such as Family Economic Advancement Produce (FEAP), the People’s Bank of Nigeria Limited and Community Bank were established to achieve a change in the transformation of the socio- economic status of the poor through the provision of micro-credit services.
67ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS The FEAP was established in August 12, 1997 by the late General Sani Abacha Administration.
The objectives of FEAP were: • Provision of micro credit for the establishment of cottage enterprises.
• Training of the business operators • Encouragement of the design and manufacture of plants, machinery.
• Formation of cooperative societies • Utilization of local resources through improved production, storage, preservation, packaging and marketing • Involvement of private sector, states and local government participation in both the funding and implementation.
• Reduction of rural-urban migration 3.1.2 Features of FEAP FEAP has its features, structure and process of operation.
3.1.3 Bias for Production Funding The programme recognised the fact that SMEs form the bedrock of economic progress in most economies.
The promotion of cottage industries was therefore central to the operation of the FEAP.
Farming and processing of agricultural products and mineral raw materials were given priority.
It was envisaged at the inception that between 40 and 60 percent of the loanable fund would be devoted to farming and agro- processing activities.
3.1.4 Policy Formulation FEAP was also mandated to formulate policies in line with the following in order to boost agricultural production: • Land acquisition, utilization and social equity • Mobilization of women for agricultural development • Appropriate farming tools, inputs and techniques.
3.1.5Use of Cooperative Societies FEAP adopted the group methodology.
Intended beneficiaries were expected to belong to a Cooperative group registered with the State Cooperative Department and recognized by the FEAP.
The regulations and laws guiding the establishment of Cooperative societies were not adhered to.
68ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.1.6Loans Tied to Projects Projects financing was central to FEAP activities.
The loans advanced to the groups were tied to projects, even the machinery was provided by nominated fabricators or suppliers.
This is to prevent diversion of funds.
3.1.7 Collaboration with Banks FEAP used conventional banks as the channel of disbursement of loans and its collection.
The banks were also expected to contribute counterpart funding as the project progress.
The banks were chosen based on the following criteria • Adequate capital base • Competent management • Sound asset quality • Availability of expertise in the areas of micro finance • Adequate bank network The banks were to appraise the feasibility report and give advice on the status for approval, although the National Board of FEAP has the final authority to approve projects.
3.1.8 Savings Requirement Beneficiaries were expected to make a deposit of 10% of the requested amount in the bank 3.1.9Subsidised Interest Rates The interest rate was 10%, which was lower than the market rate of over 100%.
3.1.10 Multi Authority Segment The structure of FAEP was a multi authority system.
The grand patron was at the apex.
This was followed by the Board of nineteen member from various government departments, institutions and associations 3.1.11 Technical Advisory Committee 69ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS This committee was chaired by the representative of the Ministry of Science and Technology.
The other members were made up of representatives from Government institutions which have expertise in the areas of interest of FEAP.
3.1.12 State Coordinating Committee This Committee was made up of nineteen members, which included officials of the participating banks.
The chairman was appointed by the State Governor.
The wife of the State Governor was the State coordinator.
The State Coordinating Committee was responsible for the co-ordination of FEAP activities at the State Level.
3.1.13 Local Government Area Coordinating Committee The Local government Area Coordinating Committee was headed by the Local Government Chairman.
The members were made up of the Supervisory Councilors, wife of the Chairman, all district and community leaders, two representatives of relevant Non-governmental Organisations and the representative of the participating bank.
3.1.14 Ward Coordinating Committee The ward Coordinating Committee consisted of village heads in the ward with the Councilor representing the ward Chairman.
3.2 Peoples’ Bank of Nigeria Limited (PBN) The PBN was established in 1986 as an economic strategy for sustainable growth as an aftermath of the increased poverty level that arose as a result of the Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP).
The goal of the PBN was to create easy access to affordable credit for the poor, that is, those that are economically active but could not take part in business activity because they can not take loan from formal financial sector.
The targets are petty traders, farmers, and artisans.
The initial maximum loan was N5, 000.
The beneficiaries were to form credit groups.
They were to meet regularly and loan repayments were made at the group meetings.
The repayments were in small amount.
These loans were guaranteed by the community leaders.
The PBN has been merged with the Nigerian Agricultural Cooperative Bank to form Nigeria Agricultural Rural Development Bank.
70ENT 201 MODULE 1 In 1986, the Federal Government adopted the Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP), as an economic strategy for sustainable growth.
The effect on the people, especially, the poor, was instant and harsh.
The level of poverty rose sharply.
The then federal government realized the need to stimulate the potentials of the people.
It was reasoned that putting affordable credit in the hands of the poor was a proper strategy.
It can therefore be said that the remote prompting factor for the establishment of the People’s Bank of Nigeria Limited was the introduction of the Structural Adjustment Programme.
The bank was to a large extent, perceived by the people as a component of SAP relief package.
However, the immediate factor for the setting up of the bank was the action of Mrs. Maria Sokenu, the founding National project Coordinator and later Managing director.
Prior to the establishment of the bank, Mrs. Sokenu who had a distinguished career in formal banking visited the famous Grameen Bank of Bangladesh.
The outcome of that visit was the idea of a bank fashioned along the structure and operational strategy of Grameen Bank.
The goal of the People’s Bank of Nigeria was to create easy and affordable credit for the poor, for a large segment of economically active Nigerians excluded from the services of formal financial sector.
The bank was established in 1989 under a special decree as a financing institution for the very poor.
During the pilot stage, which lasted for twelve months, a National Project Coordinator, assisted by Zonal Coordinators coordinated the activities of the bank.
Until its current restructuring, a board of Directors determined the policy direction of the bank and was under the supervision of the Federal Ministry of Finance.
3.3 Features of People’s Bank of Nigeria Limited Peoples’ Bank of Nigeria Limited derived its features in respect of structure and operations from the Grameen bank Approach.
However, the extent to which the bank has achieved replication of Grameen Bank Approach (GBA) is a subject of contention.
First was its exclusive focus on the poor.
The bank was essentially a poverty alleviation institution.
The target of her services consisted of petty traders, farmers and artisans.
Initially, the maximum loan size was N5, 000.
Poor people were encouraged to borrow from the bank.
Again, the bank adopted the group-based lending methodology.
Intending beneficiaries were required to form credit groups, which in the tradition of Grameen Bank Approach were called centres.
The groups were required to meet regularly.
Disbursement and repayment of loans were supposed to be made at group meetings.
71ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS Another feature of the Peoples’ Bank of Nigeria was the repayment schedule by installments.
Borrowers were required to make small repayments at regular intervals.
Amount per installment and frequency of payment were to be sensitive to the cash flow patterns of borrowers.
Involvement of the community at inception was encouraged by community leaders who supported loan applications, as guarantors.
Later, local Credit committees were formed to facilitate proper loan utilization and high repayment performance.
The invitation of the people to avail themselves of the opportunity of credit facilities from Peoples’ Bank of Nigeria was met initially with skepticism.
The intention of government was viewed with suspect, while the viability of a government-led micro lending project was doubted.
However, patronage gradually improved.
By 1993, the fortune of the bank greatly declined.
The bank found it difficult to meet its obligations to both borrowers and depositors.
Repayment performance was so low, that radical restructuring became imperative in late 1996.
This hindered the bank from the path of growth and good performance.
3.4 Reasons for the Bank Failure It should be noted that most microfinance institutions established in the 1980’s experienced what can be referred to as “first shock”.
“First Shock” is a performance crisis often experienced after a promising take off.
Several factors have been presented as responsible for PBN’s first shock.
First is the inadequate preparation prior to take-off of the bank.
It was probably assumed that if the idea of poverty lending worked well in Bangladesh, it could as well perform satisfactorily in Nigeria.
Pressure to reach as many Nigerians as possible underscored the need for careful feasibility study and analysis.
The pilot implementation period was twelve months before the project was expanded to PGN.
3.4.1 Improper Targeting Mechanism Another flaw which affected the entire country was the improper targeting mechanism.
The requirement for exclusive focus on the poor is the existence of systematic targeting mechanisms.
Eligibility criteria were not properly identified and applied.
No specific socio-economic indicators were used.
It was simply a case of “come all ye that are poor and take loans”.
In practice, the non-poor accessed credit facilities in the name of the poor, which they hardly repaid.
72ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.4.2 Centralisation of Operations Centralisation of operations was another contributing factor.
For the purpose of control, decision- making process and operations were highly centralised.
Vital decisions and actions on savings mobilisation were taken at the Bank’s Head Office.
This did not only slow down operations, it constrained effective monitoring.
3.4.3 Lack of Expertise Micro-lending requires experience and expertise.
These were in short supply in Nigeria at the time of formation of the bank.
Admittedly, the pioneer staff of the bank demonstrated high level of commitment to the goal of the bank.
However, mere zeal was not enough.
3.5 Nigerian Agricultural Cooperative and Rural Development Bank (NACRDB) This is the outcome of the merging of the Nigerian Agricultural and Cooperative Bank Limited (NACB) and the Peoples’ Bank of Nigeria Limited (PBN).
The PBN was fashioned to operate like the Grammen Bank of Bangladesh.
The bank was to make it easy for the poor to have access to money.
The bank was established in 1989 under a special decree.
The NACB was to grant loan to individual farmers, cooperative societies provided the bank approved the project as being viable and that there is adequate security or collateral to cover the loans.
The bank began lending in 1973.
Like the PBN, it was owned by the Federal government and the Central Bank.
The bank focused on agricultural financing for activities such as food crops, plantation development, livestock, storage, and marketing facilities.
The Bank required securities such as bond, shares, insurance policies and fixed asset which include landed property.
However, the two banks have been merged to form the NACRDB which is concerned with the development of micro enterprise, especially the informal sector.
It allows the informal sector practitioners access to loan without collateral.
However, such a loan is based at below N250, 000.
Payment for loan assessment: 73ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Potential loanee must be a customer of the bank • He must run an account for a minimum period of 2 months before he can be allowed to apply for a loan • He would obtain a form, and comply with the instruction • He can apply for up to N100,000, if he has saved up to N10,000 and more than N100,000 but less than N250,000, if he has up to N50,000 in the account.
• There is no collateral required but must show the bank his business outfit.
• He must be a person of high integrity within the community, that is, an evidence of reliability that he would pay back the loan.
• He must keep proper records • The bank also gives loans that are up to millions of Naira, which is above the micro credit level and different pre-requisite are required.
• Inspection of the business location will be carried out in order to access its viability and give necessary advice.
3.6 Community Banks (CBs) The introduction of CBs in 1990 was another step in the efforts of the government to meet the credits needs of the rural dwellers as well as the micro and medium scale enterprises.
The CBs are owned by the Community where they are located.
They provide banking facilities in rural areas to improve the business and economic status of the rural people and rural areas.
It is a place where you can save and borrow money to operate your business.
When you open and operate an account with the bank for sometime, you can apply for a loan.
To get a loan from a Community Bank, you must: • Open an account and operate it for at least 6 months • Submit an application for loan • Complete the loan application form • Pay back the loan within one year • Provide two guarantors who must be (a) Community leaders (b) Member of your trade or occupation association 3.7 Objectives of the Community Banking System It was set up to achieve the following among others: 74ENT 201 MODULE 1 • The promotion of rural development by providing credit and deposit services to community members.
• Increase and enhance the development of economic activities of the informal sector, that is, the small or micro producers in the economy.
• Development of banking habit among the rural dwellers’.
• The promotion of rural development by providing financial and banking services (credit and deposit services), as well as other facilities to communities who hitherto were inadequately supplied with such facilities.
• The rapid enhancement of the development of productive activities in both rural and urban areas, and hence the improvement of the economic status of small producers in the informal sector of the national economy.
• The promotion of the emergence of an effective and integrated national financial system that responds to the needs of the whole economy, especially at the grass root community level.
• The inculcation of discipline in banking habits among the masses of low-income workers in Nigeria, especially those in the rural areas.
• The fostering of the spirit of the community ownership and use of economic assets and the maintenance of such facilities and organizations on a suitable basis.
The enthusiasm over community banks among Nigerians was very high at the inception of the ideas.
The urban elites took the lead in mobilizing their people to form community banks.
Barely seven months after the opening of the first community bank, there were 1,055 applications for the establishment of community banks processed while 10 banks had their doors opened for business operations.
The responsibility for registration and coordination of the activities of the community bank was given to the national Board for Community Banks.
The ray of hope offered by the rapid growth in the number and volume of business of community banks suffered some set back within the first six years of operation.
Several of the banks were laden with large non-performing loan portfolios, while others were unable to meet their obligations to depositors and savers by October 30, 1997.
Licences of 282 out of 1368 existing community banks were then withdrawn on the order of the Central Banks of Nigeria 3.8 Factors Responsible for the Decline 75ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS The unsatisfactory performances of some community banks have been attributed to several factors.
These factors are both internal and external.
First, was the inadequate involvement of the local communities.
The urban elites who facilitated the establishment of the banks, failed in most cases to involve the local communities.
The elites saw the idea of community banking as an opportunity to own financial institutions.
Contrary to the fundamental concept of community banking, few elites capitalized these banks, and seized control.
Obviously, the local people did not see these community banks as theirs, but rather as belonging to few of their prominent sons and daughters residing in far way cities.
The stakes of the local people in the banks were low, and they equally did not bother about the success or failure of the financial institutions.
In addition, the absentee owners did not fully appreciate the peculiar features of community banking system; the features which set them apart from conventional financial institutions.
In some cases, savings mobilized by these banks were placed in deposit accounts with urban- based banks, rather than financing profitable local productive activities.
The glamour and exclusionary features of conventional banks soon found their ways into the operations of the community banks.
The banks became increasingly irrelevant to their immediate local environment.
The most devastating factor was the distress which swept through the banking sector in the mid 1990’s.
Several millions of naira the community banks placed with urban distressed banks were lost.
The people lost confidence in the banking sector and community banks were affected because of their lean capital base.
Another factor was lack of appropriately trained manpower in microfinance.
The bulk of the pioneer staff of the community banks was drawn from the formal banking sectors.
There was a dearth of workers knowledgeable in the art of micro-lending.
Community banking was carried out with the mind-set of conventional banking.
Innovation, which is the hallmark of micro-lending, was largely ignored.
In some cases, retrenched and dismissed staff of commercial banks, were entrusted with the management of some community banks.
Loss of earlier better paid jobs adversely affected the morale of managers.
Added was the fact that most board members saw the banks as mere extension of their personal estates.
Most tended to be meddling with the management process to the frustration of the managers.
The rapid growth in number and spread of community banks across the country tasked the monitoring facilities and system.
Unethical practices were not promptly uncovered and addressed by the supervisory authorities.
76ENT 201 MODULE 1 Inadequate capital base was another limiting factor.
The initial authorized start-up capital was N250, 000.
This was inadequate.
Calls on community banks to shove up their capital base were not enthusiastically implemented.
3.9 Micro Finance Banks (MFBs) The MFB is set up in order to make financial services available on a sustainable basis to the economically active poor, low income earners and the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) through privately owned banks.
This is to create a vibrant microfinance sub- sector that provides the necessary stimulus for rational growth and economic development.
The MFBs are institutions that are established to provide financial services to the poor.
There are two categories of the bank: • MFBs licensed to operate as unit banks and within a Local Government area.
They are to deposit N20 million in the central Bank of Nigeria as capital requirement.
• MFBs licensed to operate state-wide.
They are to provide N1 billion as capital requirement.
These banks can be established by individuals, groups of individuals, community development associations, private companies or foreign investors.
3.10 The Objective of the MFBs The objectives of the MFBs are to: • provide diversified, dependable and timely financial services to the economically active poor • mobilize savings for financial intermediation • create employment opportunities • involve the poor in the socio-economic development of the country • provide veritable avenues for the administration of the micro-credit programmes of government and high rate worth individuals • render payment services such as salaries, gratuities and pension on behalf of various tiers of government.
3.11 Advantages of MFBs 77ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS The following advantages can be derived as a result of the establishment of MFBs: • Individuals can buy shares and own a MFB • Individuals can save money and other valuables in the bank • Individuals can borrow from MFB to invest in the micro, small or medium enterprises • MFB can render cash transfer services.
3.11.1 Other Supporting Institutional Arrangements These supporting institutional arrangements would ensure that MFBs succeed in its operations: • Independently managed Micro finance Development Fund would be put in place to provide wholesale funds, refinancing facilities and other services to support the financial activities of MFBs and microfinance institutions.
• Certification Programme for Staff and Management of MFBs, to provide adequate knowledge on microfinance practice, enhance operational activities and ensure that right persons manage the MFB.
• Rating agencies to provide institutional assessment of MFBs and other institutions.
• Credit bureau to provide credit information on microfinance clients in support of the credit and other decision making processes of the MFBs.
• Creation of Apex Association of the MFBs to ensure compliance with standards and best practices.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) What are the advantages of MFBs 2) What are the objectives of Community bank?
4.0 CONCLUSION The government set up different types of institutions, which aim at alleviating the level and depth of poverty.
Some of these institutions are to assist the poor and SMES in accessing micro credit.
78ENT 201 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMMARY Micro financing has been found to be a sure source of finance to the SMEs.
This is because they cannot provide the collateral or / and the rigorous paperwork demanded by the convectional banks, Government has therefore put in place several relevant financial and non- financial institutions to address the issue.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What reasons led to the failure of FEAP?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Godwin, E. (2000).
Poverty and Microfinance in Nigeria.
Ob-zed Printers Nigeria.
Neck, P.A & Nelson, R.E., (1987).
Small Enterprise Development Policies and Programmes.
Geneva: ILO.
Onuoha, E. (1986).
Principles of Cooperative Enterprise.
Express Publishing Company Ltd 79ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS UNIT 4 HOW TO KEEP AND USE BUSINESS RECORDS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Record Keeping 3.2 Good Record 3.3 Advantages of Record Keeping 3.3.1 Cash and Credit Sales Availability 3.3.2 Your Record Shows You How Your Business is Doing 3.3.3 Your Records Help You to Plan for the Future 3.3.4 Who Keeps the Records?
3.4 Types of Records to be kept 3.4.1 Receipt Book 3.4.2 Invoice 3.4.3 Waybill or Delivery Note 3.4.4 Daily Cash Record 3.4.5 Customers Account 3.4.5.1 Advantages 3.4.6 Unpaid Suppliers Invoice 3.4.7 Record Book 3.5 How to Fill the Record Book 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It may be a fact the MFBs and the Non–governmental Organisations do not request for collateral and rigorous paper work before loans are granted to members.
However, they do have some records in order to keep track of their costs and revenue.
2.0OBJECTIVES The objective of this unit is to explain how records are kept and the various uses of the records.
80ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Record Keeping Record Keeping means you have to write down: • how much money your business receives, and • how much money your business Spends.
When you Sell your products or provide service, money comes in to your business.
When you pay for goods or service such as raw materials, labour, electricity, rent, telephone etc, money goes out of your business.
To keep good records, you need to write down all your business transactions in an organized way.
You need something to show that you received or paid out money such as: • Invoices, receipts, way bill etc.
you get from your customers when you buy raw materials, pay rent, salary or wages, electricity and so on.
• Copies of receipts, invoices, and way bill you give to your customers when they buy from you.
It is therefore important for you to write down in a small exercise book the information you need such as: • when the transaction happened.
• who was involved in the transaction.
• details of the transaction.
• the amount of money involved in the transaction.
3.2 Good Record The main requirements for a good record keeping are that: • It must be accurate • It must be consistent • It must be reliable • It must be easy to understand 3.3 Advantages of Record Keeping 81ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS By keeping good and accurate business records you can easily solve problems in your business such as: 3.3.1 Cash and Credit Sales Availability • The records show you how much money your business should have.
• It helps you to make sure your money is not stolen.
• It shows you who owes you money and how much.
• The record tells you how much cash you have on hand and in the bank.
3.3.2 Your Record Shows You How Your Business Is Doing.
• It helps you to find out problems before it is too late You can use the records to know your • Income and expenses • The profit or loss you are making • Your monthly payroll (wage and salaries) You can also use the records to know if: • Costs are too high • Sales are falling The records you keep show others how your business is doing.
• It shows them whether your sales and profits are increasing.
• You and others will know whether your costs and expenses are decreasing.
• You need proper records when you pay your taxes or apply for a loan.
• It shows others that everything is in order and that you are in Control of your business.
3.3.3 Your Records Help You to Plan for the Future • Records show you how well your business did in the past and how well it is doing now.
• When you know your business strength and weaknesses, you can properly plan for the future.
3.3.4 Who Keeps the Records?
82ENT 201 MODULE 1 Once you start your business, you have to decide who will keep and maintain the records.
• If you have the time and interest, you can keep the records yourself.
• When the volume of your business increases, you can employ a clerk to keep the records.
• Sometimes your wife or children can assist you to keep the records and do simple calculations.
3.4 Types of Records to Be Kept The records you keep depend on the type of business and the volume of activities.
However, for our purpose, the following records are adequate.
3.4.1 Receipt Book If your business produces and sells a few expensive products such as furniture or provide services such as vehicle repairs, use a Receipt Book.
An example of a Receipt Book is given below: TOLA ENTERPRISES (Manufacturer of Quality Furniture) Office/Workshop: No.
30, Adio Street, Idiaba, Ogun State CASH RECEIPT No.
0001 Date: ______________19_______ Received From_______________________________________________________ the sum of__________________________________________________________ _____________________________________ Naira ____________________Kobo Being payment for ___________________________________________________ ___________________________________________________________________ Cash payment =N= ________________________ Cheque No.
__________ =N= : K __________________ Manager’s signature 3.4.2 Invoice 83ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS The customer may sometimes request for an Invoice before or after purchasing the product or service.
The invoice shows the Quantity of good sold the Description of what is sold and the Price of each product.
However, it is not a substitute for the receipt.
It is issued together with the receipt to show the type and price of products sold.
The following is an example of An Invoice.
TOLA ENTERPRISES (Manufacturer of Quality Furniture) Office/Workshop: No.
30, Adio Street, Idiaba, Ogun State Invoice No: 0001 ________________________________ Date: ________ 19 _____ ________________________________ ________________________________ Quantity Description of Goods Rate Amount N K N K THANK YOU GOODS BOUGHT ARE NOT RETURNABLE Total N ___________________ Amount in words ________________________________________________ _______________________________________________________________ 3.4.3 Waybill or Delivery Note The Waybill or Delivery note is issued to the buyer when he wants to collect the products he has purchased such as furniture or when you want to deliver the products to him.
An example of a waybill or delivery note is given below.
It also contains information such as Customers Name, Delivery Address, 84ENT 201 MODULE 1 Vehicle No, Quantity paid for, dispatched and delivered and the condition of the goods when they were received.
TOLA ENTERPRISES (Manufacturer of Quality Furniture) Office/Workshop: No.
30, Adio Street, Idiaba, Ogun State Invoice No: 0001 WAYBILL/DELIVERY NOTE Date: ________ 19 ___ ____________________________________________ ORDER INVOICE No.
_______ Customers Name ___________________________ Date ___________ Delivery Address___________________________ No.
& Date ______ Vehicle No.
_______________________________ ITEM No.
QUANTITY DESCRIPTION QUANTITY Total Received Goods in Good Condition ______________ _______________________________________ DELIVERED BY RECEIVED & CHECKED BY CUSTOMER 3.4.4 Daily Cash Record Whether you use a receipt book or daily cash record you must keep the RECEIPTS you get for all the cash that comes in or goes out of your business such as: • receipts issued for sale of products or service • receipts for buying raw materials or good to resell • receipt or invoices for rent, payment for services, electricity, water, telephone and all other costs to your business.
85ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS DAILY CASH RECORD No Details Quantity Rate Total N 1.
Starting Money 100.00 2.
Brake fluid 1 120.00 120.00 3.
Oil filter 3 180.00 540.00 4.
Washers 15 3.00 45.00 5.
Oil 1 210.00 210.00 6.
Fuel filter 1 45.00 45.00 7.
Clutch Kit 1 70.00 70.00 8.
Door handle (super) 4 65.00 260.00 9.
Bolts & Nuts 10 15.00 150.00 10 504 1 480.00 480.00 Total - - 2020.00 3.4.5 Customers Account If you sell or provide service on credit, you must write it down in a customers account book.
It is not advisable to sell on credit.
Some customers do not pay on time.
Some customers do not pay at all.
However, credit can also increase your sales because good customers will continue to buy from you.
Therefore, you may give credit to reliable customers.
When you want to keep the customers record, you can use: • a book with a page for each customer; or • a separate book for each customer if they buy a lot from you; or • separate cards for each customer.
A written record enables you to avoid arguments with your customer and to follow up those who do not pay their money on time.
3.4.5.1 Advantages The record helps you know: • how much each customer owes • which customers pay their accounts on time • which customers owe money to your business 86ENT 201 MODULE 1 An example of Customers Account Record CUSTOMERS ACCOUNT RECORD Name: Address: Telephone No: Date Details Quantity Credit Amount Balance Sales Paid N N N 9/1/96 Oil filter at 2 360.00 360.00 N180 each 3/4/96 504 Head 2 220.00 220.00 lamp at N110 each 6/6/96 10 washers 10 150.00 450.00 at N15 15 bolts 21/10/96 Payment 15 300.00 1030.00 0.00 3.4.6 Unpaid Suppliers Invoice When you owe other businesses some money, always keep the receipts, invoices or delivery note of everything you buy on credit.
It is a good idea to keep them in a file for easy reference.
3.4.7 Record Book The Record Book is the heart of your record – keeping.
When the business is closed at the end of the day, fill in the Record Book by using: • the copies of the receipts you write (from receipt book or sales invoice); or • the summary of the Daily Cash record • the receipts, invoices and other vouchers you get from your customers.
In summary, you should write down in the RECORD BOOK all: • Money that you receive from sales and other sources and where it came from.
Get the information from the receipt book or Daily Cash Record.
87ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Money that you paid out of your business and what it was used for.
You get the information from the receipts when you pay for something.
3.5 How to Fill the Record Book You can buy a big note book and draw the same columns as in the example below: CASH BOOK Date Details Receipt Cash Sales Costs Voucher In Out Bal No.
¼ Brought 0281 1000 Forward 11/4 Bought Nails 0282 50 950 50 11/4 Sales 0283 2000 2950 2000 11/4 Sales 0284 250 3200 250 12/4 Bought Plywood 0285 1200 2000 1200 12/4 Bought Foam 0286 500 1500 500 18/4 Sales 0287 275 1775 275 19/4 Sales 0288 545 2320 545 19/4 Bought Timber 320 2000 320 23/4 Paid Wages 250 1750 250 27/4 Paid Owner 500 1250 500 Salary Total 3070 2820 1250 3070 2820 Date: Write the date of the transaction Details: Describe the transaction Receipt/Voucher No: Write a receipt or voucher no for each transaction Cash: Write the cash that came in or goes out.
The Balance is the amount you should have on hand.
Sales: Write all your sales in this column Costs:Write all your costs in this column SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) Draw a cash receipt 2) Why is it not advisable to sell on credit?
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, it is necessary to keep proper records in order to keep track of business activities so as to be able to detect when the business is 88ENT 201 MODULE 1 sick, know the sales, debts and the costs involved as well as render necessary financial information.
5.0 SUMMARY At the end of the month, you should summarize your record book by adding the totals for cash that came in, cash that goes out and cash balance.
This will tell you the cash you have on hand.
By adding the Sale and Costs column, you will know how you have spent your money and what you have spent it for.
The record book can be used to control your business by: • knowing your sales • knowing your cash balance • analyzing your costs.
All these will enable you to know how your business is doing and to plan for the future.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write a short note on customers account 2.
List the different types of record that can be kept by a businessman 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Siebert, J.C, {1989).
Concept of Marketing Management.
New York.
Englewood Cliffs Publication.
89ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS UNIT 5: MARKETING– HOW TO SELL YOUR PRODUCTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Marketing 3.1.1 Getting to know the Customers 3.2 Know your Market 3.3 Who the Competitors Are 3.4 Satisfaction of your Customers 3.4.1 Product 3.4.2 Price 3.4.3 Costs 3.4.4 Know your Competitors Prices 3.4.5 Make your Prices Attractive 3.4.6 Discount 3.4.7 Place 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is good and profitable to venture into production, but the exercise is not complete if the products are not sold.
It is therefore important for the businessman to locate the appropriate market for his products.
Mr. Adio produced Tuwo but he kept it in the pot expecting that people will come looking for him without making any effort to sensitise the people about the availability of the product.
Tuwo, being a perishable good, turned soar before the following day.
He had to throw away the product.
He lost as a result of his inaction.
He failed to let people know that he had prepared a meal that could satisfy their need.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objective of this unit is to explain the meaning of marketing and its importance to business activities.
90ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Marketing Marketing is everything you do to find out who your Customers are and what they need and want.
It is how to satisfy them while you are making profit by: • providing the products or service they need • setting the prices they are willing to pay • getting your products or service to them • informing and attracting them to buy your products or services.
Marketing is the difficult but most important part of managing a business.
It does not matter how good your product or service is.
If you do not market it in the right way, no one will buy it.
Your market is the customers, people or other businesses, who want your products or services and are able and willing to pay for them.
Therefore the word market means a place or opportunity or medium where people meet to buy and sell goods or services.
It could be via the internet, in the aeroplane, on the telephone or in a physical place.
It also means: • the customers you have now • the customers you hope to get in the future • the customers you have lost but hope to get back 3.1.1 Getting to know the Customers It is important to know your customers and what they need and want.
When you understand their needs, you decide what products to make or service to render to satisfy their needs.
By following the steps below, you will understand your market and increase your sales 3.2 Know Your Market In order to know your market you must know: • who the customers are • the products or services they want • Why they want them • where the customers are located?
• when do they buy?
91ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • how often and how much do they buy?
• what prices are they willing to pay?
3.
3 Who the Competitors Are The Competitors are businesses selling products and services similar to your own.
Ask yourself the following questions: • who are my competitors?
• How many are they?
• where are they located?
• how good are my competitors?
If you can find good answers to the above questions, then you will know: • what products or services to sell.
• how to get your products to your customer • how to inform customers and make them to buy • what price to charge for your product and service You can also find out more about your market by: • Talking to your customers and asking them: - why they buy from you - If they are satisfied with your products and the way you treat them - If there are other things they would like to buy from you • Listening to what other people say about your business • Finding out why some customers do not buy from you • Finding out what your competitors are doing about their: - products or service i.e.
quality, design, packaging etc.
- what prices they charge - why customers buy from your competitors.
• Reading newspapers and magazines about new products or services • Listening to radio and watching television to get information about new products and services.
92ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.4 Satisfaction of your Customers The customer is the most important person for your business.
Satisfied customers will always come back and buy more from your business.
The more satisfied customers you have, the more your sales and profit you make.
To satisfy your customers, improve your sale and make a profit, you need to understand the four P’s of marketing: Product • What product or service your customers want Price • What price your customers are willing and able to pay Place • What place your business should be located so that you can reach your customers Promotion • What promotion you can use to inform and attract them to buy your products or services.
All the four P’s are very important.
You must use each of them to satisfy your customers and increase your sales and profit.
When your customers are satisfied, they will always come back to buy more from you.
They will tell other people to buy from you.
3.4.1 Product To be successful in business, you must have the products or services your customers want.
To do this, you should know that: • Customers buy goods and services to satisfy different needs.
Therefore, you should find out what customers need and then provide the products or services to satisfy those needs.
• Customers need change.
When their needs change, do your market research to change your product.
93ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Provide what your customers want.
- Do not just sell the same products as other businesses.
- Try to improve on the products you already make and sell.
• Keep your eyes and ears open for new ideas.
3.4.2 Price WHAT PRICES DO I CHARGE?
Your business may have very good products or services, but if your prices are wrong, you will not sell much.
In general, your prices must be: • Low enough to attract customers to buy • High enough to give your business a profit 1.
Know your costs 2.
Know how much customers are willing to pay 3.
Know your competitors prices 4.
Know how to make your prices attractive.
3.4.3 Costs You must know how much it costs you for things such as material, labour, rent, and electricity to make a product or service.
To make a profit, your price must be higher than your total costs for the product.
Examples (a) Profit Price - Cost = Profit/Loss N30 - N25 = + N5 (Profit) • A price higher than the total cost gives you a profit • + N5 means a N5 profit (b) Loss Price - Cost = Profit/Loss N25 - N30 = - N5 (Loss) • A price lower than the total cost gives you a loss • - N5 means a loss.
(c) No Profit Price - Cost = Profit/Loss N30 - N30 = N0 • A price which is the same as total cost gives no profit • =N=0 means no profit, no loss.
94ENT 201 MODULE 1 Willingness of Customers to Pay Customers must be able and willing to pay your prices.
If your price is too high you will sell very little or nothing at all.
If the price your customers are willing to pay is lower than your costs, try to cut your costs.
3.4.4 Know your Competitors Prices Find out how much your competitors charge for the same or similar products or services as your own.
• If your prices are lower than your competitors own prices, you may attract more customers to buy from you.
• If your prices are higher than your competitors prices, your customers may buy from your competitors.
• You may charge a lower price if: - your product or service is new and people do not yet know about it.
- If you want to attract new customers • You may charge a higher price if: - your customers feel your product or service is better than that of your competitors.
- If you provide extra and better services.
• Always remember that to make a profit, your prices must always be higher than your costs.
3.4.5 Make your Prices Attractive There are many ways to make your prices more attractive to your customers.
When you begin to sell a new product or service, you want to attract customers to buy it.
You can set a low introductory price that gives you only a small profit for the first time you sell the product.
If your customers like the product, you can slowly increase the price so that it gives you a higher profit.
3.4.6 Discount A discount means a lower price.
• You can get a discount from a supplier.
• You can give a discount to a customer • If a customer buys a large quantity you can give a quantity discount.
95ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • If a customer pays cash, you can give a cash discount.
3.4.7 Place Place means the location where your business is.
Location is important for retailers and service operators who need to be where their customers are.
Your business may have good products at prices that customers are willing to pay, but sales may still be low.
The reason may be that your customers do not know where you are and where to buy your products or services.
• Location is where your business is.
• Distribution means different ways of getting your products or services to your customers.
It is very important for manufacturers such as furniture making, foundry/metalwork etc.
• For manufacturers, it is not important to be near their customers.
• What is important is: • Cheap rent or land • Good and easy supply of raw materials • Good roads, electricity etc.
• Cheap labour availability • Retailers and service operators need to be where their customers are.
• The best places are where many people pass by and where many people live.
• Direct distribution is most useful for your business if you make fairly expensive products such as furniture and have a few customers.
• Wholesale and Retail Distribution are useful if you make a large quantity of standard, low priced products and have many customers in your area.
Before you change your distribution channel, think about: • Your products • Your customers • Your business • Your sales, costs and profit SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE 1) Define marketing 2) Who are the competitors?
96ENT 201 MODULE 1 4.0 CONCLUSION The role of marketing in a business venture cannot be over emphasised.
Having a thorough understanding of the marketing terrain would help a business grow.
5.0 SUMMARY A good businessman would not only be interested in his venture but would understand his competitors as well as his customers and would do all they can to satisfy them and outwit his competitors.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What factors must be considered before prices are fixed?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Siebert, J.C, {1989).
Concept of Marketing Management.
Englewood, New York: Cliffs Publication.
MODULE 3 97ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS Unit 1 Marketing: Promotion Part II Unit 2 Management Cash Unit 3 Entrepreneur and Entrepreneurship Unit 4 Definitions of Business Types - Unit 5 General Management Practices in Small Scale Business UNIT 1 MARKETING: PROMOTION PART II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Promotion 3.2 Advertising 3.3 Photographs 3.4 Rubber Stamp 3.5 Radio, Newspapers Advertisement 3.6 Sales Promotion 3.6.1 Display 3.7 Demonstration 3.8 Publicity 3.9 Be a Successful Salesperson 3.10 Packaging 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION We learnt about the definition of marketing, satisfaction of customers, the need to know our competitors and the pricing system in the past units.
In this unit, we are going to discuss how to promote our products in order to expand the market share and make more profit.
There are a lot of promotional sales currently going on in the country.
Some companies promise to finance projects to the tune of N15million, some promise to give cars and other items.
Their aim is to expand their market share thereby increasing their profits.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 98ENT 201 MODULE 1 The objective of this unit is to explain the various ways of promoting a business venture in order to increase the market share and profit.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Promotion Promotion means informing and attracting customers to buy your product or services.
• Your business may be in a good place.
You may have good products that customers are willing to pay for.
• Your sales may still be low.
Why?
May be people do not know about your business.
This is called promotion.
• Do not sit down and wait for customers to come to you.
Do promotion, sell more and increase your profit by: Advertising – make customers interested in your products or services.
Sales promotion – getting customers to buy more from you.
Publicity - doing promotional activities Improving your own skill as a salesperson.
3.2 Advertising You can use advertising to make customers more interested in buying your products or services.
Some useful ways to do advertising are • Signs Boards • Business cards, letter heads etc.
• Posters and hand outs • Photograph • Newspaper • Radio • Announcement in Mosques or Church • Masquerade, Dancers etc.
Below are some ways of advertising your products without spending a lot of money.
• Sign Board 99ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS SUPREME FURNITURE GOOD YEAR TULA - SALOON METAL WORK SPECIALISTS *** **** IN HOUSEHOLD HAIR CUT PRICE LIST FURNITURE ONLY - Frames N……… N20.00 Doors N…….
Iron Gate N…… Use sign boards, posters and hand outs to advertise your products.
You can use cheap paper or Chalk and a Chalk board.
Write on the boards yourself or tell someone to do it for you.
Make the sign boards big enough so that people can see it.
Give handbills to people who may be interested in your products or service.
You can distribute it in your area, in your association, your mosque, your church and schools through your children and their friends.
Business Cards, Letter heads etc.
TOLA ENTERPRISES (Manufacturer of Quality Furniture) Mr. S.A. ADIO Chairman/Managing Director Office/Workshop Home Address ________________ _______________ 30, Sapon Street 36, Idiaba Road Matori, Ogun State Ifo, Ogun State.
Use a business card and letterhead to tell your customers • the name of your business • the type of business you do • who you are • where they can reach you i.e., your office/workshop and home address.
100ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.3 Photographs Keep a small book of photographs to show customers the products you can make but which do not have in stock.
3.4 Rubber Stamp You can use a rubber stamp to make your own business cards and letterheads.
3.5 Radio and Newspaper Advertisement When you advertise on Radio, or Newspapers etc, remember that your customers want to know among other things: • the name of your business • the location of your business • what products or services you provide • how good your products or services are • your prices • where they can buy your products • why they should buy your products • when your business is open.
3.6 Sales Promotion Use sales promotion to make customers buy more when they come to your business.
This can be done by having good displays, giving demonstrations to show how the product works and selling products that goes together.
3.6.1 Display This is the way you arrange your products.
Display is important for all businesses.
Good display makes it easy for customers to see your products.
You should therefore keep your business: • well organised • clear, well lit and good looking • attractive, with your products well displayed • show the prices clearly 3.7 Demonstration This is the way you show your customers how the products works.
If you demonstrate very well, they may like to buy from you.
101ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.8 Publicity This is free promotion usually by word of mouth.
It means that your satisfied customers will tell other people what they think about you, your business and what you sell.
The word travels from one person to another.
Make sure it is a good word so it gives your business a very good reputation.
3.9 Be a Successfully Salesperson To improve your skills as a salesperson and increase your sales and profit, you need to: • know your customers and their need • Some customers can never make up their mind • Some customers are always in a hurry • Some customers never have enough money • Know how to treat your customers • Greet your customers well • Be polite and friendly • Dress well.
Look neat and clean • Offer to help customers • Do not talk too much • Listen to what your customers say and ask questions to know what they need • Be patient • Always be honest and trustworthy • Never argue with your customer • Thank your customers for buying from you.
• Know your products and how to sell them because your customers may ask many questions about your products or service.
• Be sure you know the answer.
3.10 Packaging From the marketing point of view, the package is part of the product.
It is therefore an important part of product planning.
There are many reasons why packaging is very important.
Some of these reasons are: 102ENT 201 MODULE 1 • To meet the social and cultural needs of the people in your community by adapting the products to meet social trends and fashion.
• To make the appearance of the product more attractive.
• To make the product more convenient to use.
Indeed, it has become a rule that the package you use for your product should meet the convenience of your customers.
You must ensure that the package makes the product easier to use, that it is easy to open, that it is strong enough, that it is of practical size and that the instructions can be easily understood.
Bad packaging causes dissatisfied customers.
The following six P’s will assist you to remember how to package your products.
These are: Presentation Presentation is concerned with the appearance of the product.
The general rule is that the product should be eye–catching and very attractive to your customers.
Preservation Preservation means how you package your product in order to prolong its life.
Some preservation methods used include canning, plastic nylon – wrappers, chemical preservatives, deep – freezing.
This applies particularly to food products.
Promotion Promotion means that the package should help to sell the product.
The package must be such that the customer can easily identify your product from that of your competitors.
Proportion Proportion concerns the size of the package.
In determining this, you will consider the quantity and the price you want to sell the product.
Protection Protection means that the package will be strong enough to protect its contents or last for a very long time.
Portability 103ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS Portability means that the product must be very compact, easy to transport from one place to another and be easy to stack.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define promotion 4.0 CONCLUSION When you are planning to make or introduce a new product to the market, think of whether you have technical and marketing experience for the product.
If your answer is YES, then consider the kind of packaging to use.
If No, you may have to seek advice from a competent person.
5.0 SUMMARY It is important to promote a product in order to attract as many consumers as possible.
This may involve some expenses but it is a necessary venture.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List all the Ps of promotion.
Discuss any two.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Lawal A.A. et al [1998].
Entrepreneurship Development in Small Scale Business.
Adeola Printing Press Nigeria.
104ENT 201 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 MANAGEMENT OF CASH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Management of Cash 3.1.1 Definition of Cash 3.1.2 Cash Operating Cycle 3.1.3 A Cash Flow Plan 3.4.1 How to Make a Cash Flow Plan 3.2 Step to Follow in Marketing the Plan 3.3 Business and Family 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Mr. Adio made a lot of money as a result of the sales promotion exercise he did.
Unfortunately for him, he squandered the money on night parties, ‘spraying’ money as if it was rain water.
He bought ‘aso-ebi’ for his wives and new set of cars for his girl friends.
He ended up poorer than he was before the sales promotion because he lacked the knowledge about cash management.
He should have separated the money meant for business from the one for pleasure and other obligations.
But regrettably, he never did.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objective of this unit is to explain how a cash flow plan is drawn and to acquire the understanding of separating the family from the business.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Management of Cash 3.1.1 Definition of Cash Cash is the life blood of any organisation.
It is the money that is made available for business use.
Lack of cash or money can ruin a business so also is the mismanagement of fund.
105ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS For the maximum use of cash, you have to determine when cash is needed and how much is needed.
Even when you are making a profit, it does not mean that you will be able to pay your debts when it falls due.
Therefore, you must always make sure that you have enough cash to pay your suppliers, creditors, workers etc.
The way to do this is to understand the cash operating cycle and the cash flow plan.
3.1.2 Cash Operating Cycle The management of cash involves an understanding of the cash operating cycle shown below: CASH OPERATING CYCLE CASH ----- RAW MATERIALS ---- WORK IN PROGRESS ---- FINISHED ---- GOOD SALES • Cash The operating cycle starts with cash which your business generates from the sale of products or services.
• Raw materials Cash is used for the purchase of raw materials and other inputs that are necessary for production.
For example a furniture maker spends cash for the purchase of timber, nails, vanishes, foam, rubber etc.
which he uses for production.
• Work-in-progress These are products that are being produced in the workshop and the production is not yet completed.
• Finished Goods This refers to finished products which are still in your workshop but are ready for sale.
• Sales This is the final stage in the cycle when you sell to your customer either for cash or credit.
When you collect the cash you again use it to purchase raw material and to pay other creditors.
106ENT 201 MODULE 1 It is important for you to reduce the amount of time it takes you to use your raw materials to produce finished products or service and to sell it so as to reduce the time it takes you to tie your money down.
The shorter the cash cycle, the better for your business.
Another way of controlling your cash is through a cash flow plan.
3.1.3 A Cash Flow Plan A cash flow plan is forecast which shows you how much cash you expect to come in to your business and how much cash you expect to go out of your business every month.
A cash flow plan helps you make sure that your business does not run out of cash at any time.
You should therefore use your cash flow plan to make sure that your business always has enough cash to pay for your costs.
You can make a good profit in a year but still run out of cash during the year.
There are many reasons why your business may run out of cash.
• Sometimes you may have to buy raw materials or pay your suppliers before money comes in.
This means that cash goes out before cash comes in to your business.
• When you give credit to your customers and they do not pay in time whereas you need money to buy materials, pay your staff, electricity, rent and so on.
• You have to buy equipments, tools etc which is needed for production.
Usually, you have to pay cash for the equipments now before you start making a profit.
However, all of these problems can be solved by planning your cash flow.
When you plan your cash flow: • You have more control over the flow of cash • You are in a better position to solve any problems before they happen • You are warned in advance about future cash shortages • You can have cash ready when you need it 107ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.1.4 How to Make a Cash Flow Plan You can make a cash flow plan by thinking of • How much cash will come in to your business every month • How much cash will go out of your business every month.
To make a cash flow plan for your business, follow the example below.
TOLA ENTERPRISES CASH FLOW PLAN CASH FLOW PLAN JAN. N FEB MARCH I 1.
Cash at the beginning of the H S Month A C 1000 1100 1450 2.
Cash from Sales 4000 4000 2500 3.
Cash from other sources - - T U - O 4.
TOTAL CASH IN H S 5000 5100 5950 A 5.
Cash out for Materials Costs 2500 2500 C 2800 6.
Cash out for labour costs 450 450 450 7.
Cash out for other costs 600 600 600 8.
Cash out for buying equipments Tools etc.
250 - - 9.
Any other cash out 100 100 100 10 TOTAL CASH OUT 3900 3650 3950 11.
CASH MONTH END 1100 1450 2000 3.2 Steps to Follow in Marketing the Plan 108ENT 201 MODULE 1 From the above example, you can see that steps 1 – 4 are for CASH IN while steps 5 – 11 are for CASH OUT STEP 1.
Cash at the beginning of the month This is the amount of actual cash you have on hand and your bank account at the beginning of January.
STEP 2.
Cash from sales This is the sales you expect to make in the month of January.
This amount also includes the money you expect to collect from the previous credit sales you have made to your customers.
STEP 3.
Cash from other sources This includes the money you expect from other sources such as loan from Cooperative, ‘esusu; or contribution, bank loan or interest paid on your savings account.
If you get financial assistance from a family or friend, write it in this column.
STEP 4.
Total Cash in Add up all the cash in from steps 1, 2 & 3.
This gives you the total cash you expect to come into your business in January, February and March.
STEP 5.
Cash out for material costs This is the amount you expect to pay out in January to buy goods and raw materials.
STEP 6.
Cash out for labour costs This is the amount of wages you expect to pay for your employees working in production.
STEP 7.
Cash out for other costs This is the amount of cash your business will pay in January for costs such as rent, electricity, transport, salaries, and stationeries and so on.
STEP 8.
Cash out for buying equipment etc.
109ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS If you plan to buy any tools or equipment, go to the supplier, find out the price and write the costs in this column.
STEP 9.
Any other cash out This is the amount of any other cash you think your business will pay out during the month.
These may include loan repayment, interest on money borrowed etc.
STEP 10.
Total cash out Add up all the cash out from step 5 to 9.
This is the total cash amount you expect to go out of your business in January and subsequent months.
STEP 11.
Cash at the End of the Month You should subtract the total Cash Out from the total Cash in to get the amount of cash you will have at the end of the month.
The cash flow plan for TOLA Enterprises shows that at the end of January, they expect to have: Total Cash In Total Cash Out Balance Cash N5000.00 - N3900.00 = N1100.00 • If your Cash Flow Plan shows that your business is likely to run out of cash during the month, think about the following questions: • If you buy on credit, can your supplier give you more time to pay?
• Can your supplier give you raw material on credit?
• If you sell on credit, do your credit customers pay on time?
• Can you give less credit or give credit for a shorter period?
• Do you have to give credit at all?
• Can you increase cash from sales during the month?
• Can you reduce any of your costs?
• Can you get a short term loan from your cooperative, friends, family or your bank?
• Is it a must for you to buy the new tools or equipment?
If yes, do you have to pay for everything in cash?
Can you buy it on credit or take a loan?
3.3 Business and Family 110ENT 201 MODULE 1 Another crucial aspect of cash management is how to separate your family affairs from that of your business.
Very often, most entrepreneurs mix up their personal and family matters with that of their business.
This has led to the collapse of many businesses.
To avoid this common but ugly situation, make sure that: • You keep your business and family affairs separate.
• Do not take away cash or products from your business as a gift for family or friends.
• Pay cash for any goods you take away from your business either for yourself, family or friends.
• Pay yourself and members of your family who work for you fixed salaries or wages.
Employ only family members you can trust, who will be hard working and be a good example to other employees.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) Define cash 2) Explain the cash operating cycle 4.0 CONCLUSION You should also bear the following points in mind: You can make your Cash Flow Plan for a shorter or longer period depending on what is suitable for your business Always make a new cash flow plan before the old one runs out.
This is the only way in which you can see how much cash will come in and go out.
5.0 SUMMARY Always use your cash flow plan to make sure your business has enough cash all the time.
If your plan shows that there is no cash at the end of the month, it means you are likely to run out of cash that month.
Look at the amount you expect to come in and, pay and think of how you can solve the problem.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Write out the steps for Cash Flow Plan.
111ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong, E.E.
[1977].
Evaluating Development: The case of Western Nigeria.
Ilesha: Ilesanmi Press Rutherford, S. [1999].
The Poor and Their Money.
Manchester: University of Manchester.
112ENT 201 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 ENTREPRENEUR AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Entrepreneur and Entrepreneurship 3.1.1 Definition 3.2 Risks Borne by the Entrepreneur 3.3 The Role of the Entrepreneur 3.4 Inducement for Entrepreneurship 3.5 Business Environment 3.5.1 Political Environment 3.5.2 Technological Environment 3.5.3 Social Environment 3.5.4 Competition 3.5.5 Physical Environment 3.5.6 Economic Environment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the first twelve units, we discussed the various policies formulated and the Institutions put in place by the government in order to achieve economic growth via the development of the SMEs, as well as the importance of record keeping.
The policies formulated and the Institutions established are of no use if the people do not take advantage of the system by starting their individual projects and following proven guidelines in the management of the projects.
The next five units will therefore be devoted to the studying of topics that will explain who an Entrepreneur is and how businesses can be managed to optimal utilization of resources and profit maximization.
Many authors have defined Entrepreneurship in many different ways, yet there is no single universally accepted definition.
Some of these definitions given are looked into in this Unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objective of this unit is to explain the definition of Entrepreneur as well as the functions.
At the end of the study, the leaner would be able 113ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS to define Entrepreneur and explain his role in the economy as well as the environment within which he operates.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Entrepreneur and Entrepreneurship Entrepreneurship involves the creation of values, the process of starting of growing a new profit-making business, the process of providing a new product or service, and the intentional creation of value through organization by an individual contributor or small group of partners (Hisrich, 1986).
3.1.1 Definition Oslon (1987), leaning on the classical theory of the Capitalists, see entrepreneurship as risk taking.
The entrepreneur is an innovative individual who establishes and manages a business for the purpose of profit and growth.
He says that the critical trait of the entrepreneur ranges from a keen sense for innovation, knowledge of what is important and what needs to be done to a high tolerance for ambiguously unstructured situation.
This serves as attitudinal mode for a moderate risk taker.
Entrepreneurship involves the harnessing of individual dreams and imaginations to produce values in form of products and services.
Entrepreneurs are, therefore, agents of change and growth as they act to accelerate the economic growth, dissemination and application of innovative ideas.
In doing so, they not only ensure efficient use of resources but also expand the boundaries of economic activities.
In the developed economies, entrepreneurs generate two-thirds of all new jobs; account for at least two-thirds of all technological innovations; and influence more than two-thirds of the differences in economic growth.
In these days of globalisation and digital economy, small firms play a crucial role in experimentation and innovation that lead to technological change and employment growth.
An entrepreneur is one who discovers and decides what opportunities he wants to pursue and the risks he is willing and able to accept.
The entrepreneur somehow decides between time and money, between building his own and buying, whichever the opportunity is in order to attain its goals.
114ENT 201 MODULE 1 An entrepreneur is creative and this is the willingness to look beyond products to ideas.
Products and processes are only the vehicle through which an idea becomes effective.
3.2 Risks Borne by the Entrepreneur A good entrepreneur or business operator must identify four essential kinds of risks: 1.
The risk one must accept i.e.
the risk that is built into the nature of the business.
2.
The risk one can afford to take.
3.
The risk one cannot afford to take.
4.
The risk one cannot afford not to take.
An entrepreneur is an initiator of a business.
The initiator bears the financial risks, designs the operations and management of the business Schumpter (1934) says for example, that the entrepreneur’s goal is to develop new ideas, goods and services as well as new methods of production, identifying new markets, discovering new sources of supply and developing new organizational forms.
3.3 The Role of the Entrepreneur The role of the entrepreneur may be seen as follows: • The entrepreneur initiates an idea which if successful creates a new industry and not just a new product.
For example, the story of the Xerox Corporation – one of the spectacular recent growth companies in the United States is a breakthrough story.
The process was developed to overcome a major restraint on office reproduction technology.
The Haploid Corporation (as Xerox was then called) was a pigmy when it picked up the process.
Yet it spent $40 million of borrowed money until it had a process that worked; but the rewards are extraordinary.
• The entrepreneur diversifies the economy.
• The entrepreneur converts every opportunity into something that will meet the need of the consumer.
• Through research and development, the entrepreneur explores ways of developing local resources and encourages their uses.
• Entrepreneur helps in recognizing business opportunities, mobilizing resources and persisting to exploit these opportunities that are a necessary ingredient for self-employment.
115ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • The entrepreneur is the agent who maximizes opportunities for capital investment.
• The entrepreneur is a pacesetter.
He introduces the springboard on which business developers lift up.
• The entrepreneur initiates new technology.
For example, new technology is being discovered in computer.
This has now globalized the world.
• The Information technology entrepreneurs have through globalization removed distance following the popular saying that “with Internet, there is no distance”.
3.4 Inducement for Entrepreneurship Hisrich and Bush (1986) identified nine (9) factors in the order of importance as being significant for the inducement for entering into business: 1.
Achievement 2.
Opportunity 3.
Job satisfaction 4.
Independent 5.
Economic necessity 6.
Wealth 7.
Career/Security 8.
Power; and 9.
Status/Prestige Stevenson (1986), in addition, observed that displacement from one’s job, dissatisfaction, inability to find a suitable alternative, and financial independence are motives for venturing into businesses.
Gilad and Lavin address the issue of entrepreneurship from the behavioural perspective.
Their postulations are premised on the contingency school of thought, which assumes that the environment emits signals of “push” and “pull” variables.
For example, people are pushed into business through dissatisfaction with existing employment, class of employment and career set back.
On the other hand, they are pulled by the existence of potentially profitable opportunities and by the influence of parents, role models and background.
116ENT 201 MODULE 1 In relation to the environmental factors which push entrepreneurs into business, Gilad and Lavin identified increase in unemployment rate, higher quit rates, higher frequency of factory shut down, decline in income, shrinking labor market, high labour turnover, increase in savings which is a potential source of self financing, skill acquisition through training programmes and provision of basic infrastructure that would enable entrepreneurs exhibit their business acumen.
One may therefore be justified to say that entrepreneurship arises as a result of: • Availability of opportunities: - This may be an opportunity one may or may not have been looking for.
It may be financial opportunity, power opportunity, career opportunity, skill opportunity, technological opportunity, etc.
• Skill acquisition: - This is in terms of basic skills related to the job one wants to venture into, for example, a worker who has acquired sufficient skills in a given trade may be intoxicated into entrepreneurship because of it.
• The presence of basic infrastructure: - The availability of good water, good road networks, electricity and other social amenities encourages the growth of entrepreneurship and other small scale businesses.
• Inability to find suitable alternative employment: - The inability to find a suitable alternative employment can lead to entrepreneurship.
For example, a person who was in a senior management position in, say, an international organization, will find it difficult to condescend for a lower employment.
Instead of taking up another employment with lower pay and status, he/she prefers to be self-employed.
This may be in form of innovating an existing product or service or creating a completely new one.
• Job dissatisfaction: - As a result of frustration, humiliation, dehumanization, poor pay, poor working conditions and workplace, demotion, dearth of growth, etc.
job dissatisfaction may set in and this propels individuals into finding alternatives.
• Job satisfaction and skill development: - On the other hand job satisfaction can result in entrepreneurship.
This is so because an employee, who is satisfied, may be as a result of skills acquired, savings accumulated, information networks, power and wealth of experience may not want these to waste.
He rather ploughs them into some ventures.
117ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Status/ Class of employment: - Since there are different grades of employment and different people have their status to maintain, it will therefore be unacceptable to a production manager if he’s demoted to a factory worker he may resign to start his own business.
• Increase in employment rate: - The increasing job insecurity act as a catalyst in the creation of entrepreneurship.
The team of graduates produced yearly is therefore encouraged by the National Youths Service Corps (NYSC) and the National Directorate of Employment (NDE) to develop their skills for entrepreneurship.
• High frequency of Retrenchment: - Some factories and government Ministries retrench workers.
When this happens all the laid-off workers must find alternatives.
• Increase in savings and wealth: - Entrepreneurship may arise as a result of appreciable savings and wealth.
Savings and wealth here may include finance, skills, knowledge, land and building, education, information, etc.
• Recognition and power: - The quest for recognition and power may lead to entrepreneurship.
For example, ‘I want to be the inventor of…’ ‘I want to be the first person to…’ etc.
In other words, people want to show off e.g.
‘I can do it’ and so on.
This results in creativity.
• Independence: - The quest for people to be independent will make them to resign their appointment and start a business on their own.
This will lead to financial independence, social independence, class independence etc.
• Training: - Drawing from the information world, all entrepreneurs are able to explore and optimize available opportunities for healthy competition.
Universities, polytechnics, research institutes and other special training institutions, including vocational training centers, ensure thorough conduct of practical sessions of their courses in order to propel the entrepreneurship in the students.
• Other factors may include:-High rate of labour turnover, decline in income, and lack of job opportunities.
118ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.5 Environment of Business The environment may be defined as the set of all objects, which are influenced by and/or influence the system of interest.
The environment is characterized by complexity, turbulence, uncertainty and risk; hence the need for the entrepreneur to identify and recognize his/her own relevant and negotiable environment from the cascading environment.
Purposeful business systems influence and are influenced by their environment principally because the business system inputs are derived from the environment and the outputs are consumed by the environment.
The entrepreneur therefore, needs to analyze the environment on a continuous basis because it offers both opportunities and threats.
The environments of business can be internal (micro) or external (macro) and these are inspired and maintained by the entrepreneur (a person or investor who organizes or manages a commercial undertaking) after he/she has determined ‘what to do’, ‘how to do it’ ‘when to do it’ and ‘Where to do it’.
The micro business environment may include the management structure and element such as labour, machine and place which interacts within the work setting.
It is necessary to have an effective mix of the elements to be able to maximize productivity and profit.
The macro business environment may be classified as physical, socio- cultural, political, moral, technological, economical, legal, religious etc.
3.5.1 Political Environment The political environment is very important for the performance of the business.
It has been discovered that the poorest nations are those that are politically unstable.
The entrepreneur should have idea of the following: • General political climate of where the business operates: He should know and avoid illegal goods/services.
For instance, the Federal Government has sanctioned the importation of textiles, men’s shoes, toothpicks etc.
Unless an entrepreneur knows this he will not make a success in that area of business.
• Trend towards general regulation of the industry: This means that entrepreneurs should be conversant with all regulations governing the business of their choice and interest.
• Prices and income: Government makes regulations on minimum wages and price control board.
The latter is 119ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS however not very effective because of current currency deregulation.
• Industrial relations: The entrepreneur should be aware of the regulations on labour relations, regulation on localization of industries, registration of patent and trade marks/franchise, regulation with respect to business practices e.g.
minimum, wages, hours of work, quality of products, health and safety procedures.
3.5.2 Technological Environment The more technological developed a community is, the better it is for businesses to spring up.
For example, businesses emanate faster in cities where there are facilities for growth than in the rural areas.
It is easier and almost cheaper to start a cyber café in Lagos than in a hut in Delta State because of the technology already in Lagos which is not at Agbor.
3.5.3 Social Environment The social environment comprises of the structure of the population, regional location of target population, changes in class structures, new values and attitude to work, type of authority, leisure and changes in labour as well its mobility etc.
3.5.4 Competition Every entrepreneur should know as well as take the competitors’ activities into consideration when planning her activities.
Competition may be stronger as a result of merging and acquisition, product changes and process changes.
For example, if your competitors discover better and cheaper processes of production and distribution, they will outwit you.
3.5.5 Physical Environment As a result of the favorable physical environment in our country, the following principal raw materials are available and provide opportunities for the establishment of industries e.g.
for: i) Agro-allied: cassava, yam, rice, maize, soybean, sorghum, beans, groundnuts, vegetable oil, citrus and other fruits.
Melon, tea leaves, cocoa, malt, sugar cane, ginger, garlic and other spices.
120ENT 201 MODULE 1 ii) Building and road construction: bitumen, timber and wood, sand, clay materials, limestone, ceramics, sanitary ware, iron reinforcements, etc.
research findings, technical partners The product; National economic policies 3.5.6 Economic Environment The entrepreneur should be familiar with • The general state of the economy e.g.
Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) to salvage the economy and reset it on a healthy course of reconstruction, growth and development; foreign exchange market (FEM) for buying and selling forex at market determined rates.
• National economic policies especially those relating to small and medium enterprises.
• Sources of finance and prevailing terms.
• Banking regulations and special concessions to small enterprises.
• Roles of Development and Commercial Banks.
121ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Economic intelligence – information on economic activities both current and future.
• Level of employment system and distribution of purchasing power-income.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) Give two definitions of an Entrepreneur 2) What are the roles of an Entrepreneur?
4.0 CONCLUSION The Entrepreneur is needed to accelerate economic growth in any economy.
Both positive and negative reasons can spur an individual to abandon his work and become an Entrepreneur within a business environment.
5.0 SUMMARY The Entrepreneur is a risk taker who brings about innovation in an economy.
The reward of his action is the profit that accrues to him.
This will further lead to growth within the system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the factors that induce entrepreneurship.
Discuss two of them.
2.
List the different business environment.
Discuss two.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Charles, O.U (2004).
Becoming a Successful Entrepreneur.
Lagos Hedrix Production.
Siebert, J.C, (1989).
Concept of Marketing Management.
New York: Englewood Cliffs Publication.
122ENT 201 MODULE 1 123ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS UNIT 4 DEFINITIONS OF BUSINESS TYPES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definitions of Business Types 3.1.1 Definitions of Small Scale Enterprises 3.1.2 Cottage/Micro Industry 3.1.3 Small Scale Industry 3.1.4 Medium Scale Industry 3.2 Nature and Characteristics of Small Scale Enterprises (SSES) 3.3 The Importance of Small and Medium Scale Enterprises 3.4 Overview of Performance of the SME in Nigeria 3.5 The Role of SMEs in the Nigeria Economy 3.6 Advantages of SSEs 3.7 Disadvantages of SSBs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION An understanding of the definitions reveals that it is difficult to discuss micro financing without a thorough explanation of what a business is.
The entrepreneurs’ ideas develop not just into products but industries, which could be classified into Small, Medium or Large scale Enterprises.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objective of this unit is to explain the different definitions of businesses.
At the end of the study, the leaner should be able to differentiate between the different types of businesses 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definitions of Business Types Peter Drucker asserted that: “to know what a business is, we have to start with its purpose.
Its purpose must lie outside the business itself.
In fact, it must lie in the society since business enterprise is an organ of the society”.
The purpose of the business is to create a customer.
It is the 124ENT 201 MODULE 1 customer who determines whether a business will continue or not.
The business is sustained by the customer’s willingness to pay for a good or for a service that is produced.
Generally, a business may be defined as any or all legal activity/activities that are performed in order to earn a living and make profit.
It maybe a commercial venture out of which the owners earn their living by either producing or buying goods for sale.
It may also be defined as economic activity involving production, distribution, and or the exchange of goods and services.
This may be in the form of socio-economic activities whose output cannot be easily quantified in organizations such as Christian centers, humanitarian societies or voluntary organizations.
It can also be regarded as the activity an individual or a group of individuals engage in with the hope of earning revenue and profit.
A business (or enterprise), whether small or big, simple or complex, private or public is created to provide goods/services at competitive prices.
A business may also be classified as a system which is a linkage of input flows (energy, materials, or information), from a source in the external or internal environment, a transforming mechanism or process (a machine or a technical or human organization), and flows of output or outcomes, which are provided to end or intermediate users.
Business can be broadly defined as the act of production, distribution and exchange of goods and or services.
The word business can also be used interchangeably with a firm or enterprise in the sense that a firm is an enterprise or organization formed for the purpose of carrying on some kind of economic activity/activities.
In total, business is the sum of organised efforts by which individuals and organisations engage in commerce and industry to provide goods and services needed to maintain and improve the standard of living and quality of the society’s needs, wants and desires.
It performs the primary function of efficient and effective allocation of resources within the economy.
It is developed and managed by people to produce goods and services that the society wants.
125ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.1.1 Definition of Small Scale Enterprises There is no universally accepted definition of Small-Scale Enterprise (SSE).
The classification of businesses into small, medium or large scale is a subjective and qualitative judgment.
The definition is country specific and it is based on the peculiar needs as well as the public policies of the country.
Defining a Small-Scale business is a difficult thing because of the divergent views people have concerning the term.
For example, the United States provided, The Small Business Act (SBA) of 1953 and defined the term ‘Small Business’ as ‘one whose average annual number of employees ranges between two hundred and fifty to one thousand five hundred (250-1500) people.
Also, qualitative standards are sometimes used in defining small businesses.
The Act provided an outline for qualitative standards.
According to the Committee for Economic Development (CED), a business can be defined as small business if it has at least two or more of the following key features.
1.
Management is independent.
Usually the managers are the sole owners.
2.
Capital is supplied and an individual or small group holds ownership.
3.
The area of operation is mainly local.
4.
The business is small when compared with the biggest units in its field.
5.
Small share of the market that cannot influence the activity in most levels of the firms.
6.
The Chief Executive generally participates actively in most level of decision-making process and day-to-day operation of the firms.
7.
The Chief Executive can be known by all employees of the firms.
The common indicators as defined are: the size of capital invested (fixed assets), value of annual turnover (gross output), and number of paid employees, the popularity of the three indicators derives largely from their ease of measurement.
In Britain, for instance, a small scale business is defined as that industry with an annual turnover of two million pounds or less with fewer than 200 paid employees.
The United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE) defined ‘a cottage industry’ as an enterprise carried on wholly or partly with the help of members of the family either as a whole or as a part time occupation.
The commission therefore defined Small-Scale 126ENT 201 MODULE 1 Industry as one operated mainly with hired labour usually not exceeding fifty (50) workers if locomotive power was not used or twenty (20) workers if locomotive was used.
In Nigeria, the definition of SMEs varies from time to time and according to institutions.
For instance, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN), Monetary Policy Circular 22 of 1988 defined small-scale enterprises (excluding general commerce) as an enterprise whose capital does not exceed N500, 000 and or the annual turnover does not exceed N5m.
However, since 1990, due to the persistent depreciation in the exchange rate of the naira, the maximum size of capital investment has been raised to N5million and the turnover to N25million.
In the 1990 budget for instance, the Federal Government of Nigeria defined small-scale enterprises for the purpose of commercial bank loans, as those enterprises with annual turnover not exceeding N500.000 and for merchant bank loans, those enterprises with capital investments not exceeding N2million (excluding cost of land) or a maximum of N5million.
The National Economic Reconstruction Fund (NERFUND) puts the ceiling for small-scale industries at N10million.
Section 376(2) of the Companies and Allied Matters Decree of 1990 defines a small scale company as one with: a) Annual turnover of not more than N2m.
b) Net assets value of not more than N1m.
Thus we can say from the foregoing that a small-scale enterprise may be seen as an enterprise whose total cost, excluding cost of land but including working capital, is above N1m but not exceeding N10m.
The European Commission (EC) coined the term ‘Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)’.
The three components of the SMEs are: i) Firms with 0-9 employees are micro enterprises ii) Firms with 10-99 employees are small enterprises iii) Firms with 100-499 employees are medium enterprises.
The EC definitions are based solely on employment rather than multiplicity of criteria and restricted to enterprise, which employs less than 500 workers.
In 1992, the National Council on Industry streamlined the various definitions in order to ensure uniformity and provided for its review 127ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS every four years.
The definition adopted used a combination of capital investment and employment for categorization of industry.
The definitions were first revised in 1996 and then in 2001 as follows: 3.1.2 Cottage/Micro Industry Cottage/ Micro industry is an industry whose total project cost, (excluding cost of land and working capital) is not more than N1.5million and labour size of not more than 10 employees.
3.1.3 Small Scale Industry Small Scale industry is an industry whose total project cost, (excluding land and working capital) is above N1.5million but does not exceed N50million and a labour size of not more than 100 employees.
3.1.4 Medium Scale Industry Medium Scale Industry is an industry whose total projects; costs of land and working capital is above N50 million but does not exceed N200 million and a labour size of not more than 300 workers.
SMEs in ordinary parlance are business organizations that have lower capital base, turnover employment size and non sophisticated management style, in relation to large enterprises.
SMEs deserve support from governments, organized sectors and indeed, the civil society.
The specific objectives of the scheme are: • To facilitate the flow of funds for the establishment of new SME projects, reactivation, expansion and modernization of restructuring on going projects.
• To stimulate economic growth, develop local technology and generate employment.
3.2 Nature and Characteristics of the Small Scale Enterprises (SSES) Every organization that is profit oriented has the following broad-based features: location, management, organization structure, legality, capital base, marketing, management and product or service profitability.
However, there are some characteristics that are common to the Small- scale businesses.
128ENT 201 MODULE 1 • Small equity base The equity base is small.
This low capital does not give them any advantageous position to enjoy economics of scale in buying, selling or even production.
• Restricted Scope of Ownership: Most small-scale businesses are run on the basis of one-man ownership except for few occasions where there are partnerships, limited liability companies and co-operatives.
They are highly family centered.
• There is lack of credit and marketing facilities.
• There is over-dependence on imported technology hence the general low output per head as a result of use of local equipment where applicable.
• They stimulate rural development.
• There is less sharing in decision making.
Decisions are mostly ownership based.
• There is greater concern for financial matters hence the difficulty in expansion.
• There is the inability to separate private funds from company’s funds.
This is a hindrance in the efficient running of SSEs.
• Operators are reluctant in taking risks.
This is mostly because of the origin of most firms which may militate against the taking of risks in new ventures.
• SSEs are more closely attached to the products that launched them thus they find it difficult to shift from what they produce presently to other businesses this may be regarded as the problem of diversification.
• SSEs are product intensive i.e.
they tie objectives closely to the line than to other matters such as the use of capital (Capital here refers to money, machine and man).
• Low Literacy Level: Management is non-specialized with sole control of business functions like accounting, production, 129ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS personnel and marketing responsibilities rested on individual owner – managers.
This is equally true of any co-operation but small firms do not apply this well.
• There is lower turnover and higher labour investment ratio.
Although, there is no legislation stipulating how much a small company should earn in a year, experience has shown that the annual earning of most small scale firms range from very little to amount mostly not exceeding 5million naira per annum.
• The employer-employee relationship tends to be more difficult especially when it comes to recognizing and correcting inefficiencies.
• Performance standards are almost impossible to establish and enforce under the kind of informality that prevails in SSEs.
In other words, the large poverty level in technological and socio- political arena results into low standard of living.
• SSEs have special problem with respect to growth in corporate size.
This is mostly due to the limited resources and financial vulnerability of SSEs which usually increases rather than diminishes the risks.
• Limited Number of Employees: In Nigeria, firms with staff strength of one to fifty persons are categorized as small scale unlike in the United States of America where companies with 500 persons are still taken as small firms.
• Very Narrow Market Sphere: Small-scale enterprises because of their small capital base often concentrate on very small markets, which they can effectively service.
Some of them deal on convenient goods like soap, detergent, books, foods, beverages, home appliances, etc.
• High Rate of Failure/Mortality: Due to the absence of checks and balances, accurate accounting records, in some cases, the owner’s inability to account accurately, he disburses funds from his purse as he wills without proper records.
These types of firms are especially ripped with fraud hence failure.
• They remain small because they are sometimes unaware of the sources of funds made available by government.
130ENT 201 MODULE 1 3.3 The Importance of Small and Medium Scale Enterprises The small and medium scale enterprises (SMEs) are accorded a great importance in both developing and developed nations of the world.
The United Nations agencies have for long realized the importance and potentials of the SMEs all over the world and have taken positive steps to enhance the sector through agencies like United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and United Nations Industrial Development Organisations (UNIDO).
In Japan, for example, small business firms have been identified as the foundation of Japan’s industrial strength.
The sector employs 81.4% of the total labour force and accounts for 56.1% of the total manufacturing value added.
They offer great support to the Japanese industrial giant.
In China, this sector provides 60% of total output of fertilizers, 57% of the country’s cement output, 28% of big iron and 13% of crude steel and 67% of agricultural machineries.
In India, between 1984 and 1985, the sector provided 50% of total industrial output, 80% of total industrial sector employment and 40% of total export.
In USA, the importance of the sector cannot be over emphasized.
The sector provided 40 million jobs between 1984 and 1994.
In the United Kingdom a study revealed that small business provided between 800,000 to one million new jobs or businesses between 1982 and 1986.
In Canada, the sector employs 50% of the labour force.
To demonstrate the importance attached to this sector, Canada has a minister who is in charge of the formulation and review of policies and programmes related to this sector.
The same applies in Italy, South Korea and Indonesia.
3.4 Overview of Performance of the SME in Nigeria An appraisal of the performance of the SMEs in Nigeria shows that past governments have made some positive efforts on the sector.
For example, it is estimated that SMEs account for about 70 percent of the total manufacturing output.
Specifically, the agricultural sector, which largely consists of SMEs, employs over 60 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP).
Furthermore, SMEs are known to be very active in promoting increased use of local inputs into either intermediate or final outputs.
Similarly, many SMEs have successfully adapted imported 131ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS machinery for local usage, thus positioning themselves as veritable tools for promoting technical know-how and developing indigenous technology.
Finally, owing to the fact that SMEs are mostly resource- based and therefore, well dispersed throughout the country, they have, to a large extent facilitated the opening up of the rural areas and have assisted to mitigate rural urban drift.
The key to all these is entrepreneurship development which translates ideas into business.
The economy would have faired better in these areas if there are more entrepreneurs and more efficient SMEs.
The importance of small business sector in Nigeria could be summarized and includes the following: • Employment generation: It brings about industrial expansion and creates employment opportunities which make for a better economy due to high employment rate in the country.
For example, the establishment of an enterprise will lead to the demand of human efforts in different areas.
• Development of local technology i.e.
new technology: Nigerians are making new approaches to the provision of machines that can fabricate equipment for oil drilling and compressors, block molders, bakery and soap making equipment, farm tools e.g.
hoes, cutlasses, knives etc.
• Encourages the development and application of local raw materials: This sector has attracted small businessmen into investing in the processing of farm products and minerals.
• The sector encourages infrastructural development i.e.
the localization of a small project can challenge the government to extend the construction and maintenance of roads, electricity, water and other necessities as an encouragement in that direction.
• The sector promotes indigenous enterprises: This is a very vital role in the area of growth and development.
For instance, a pure water company will lead to the need for printers who will print the company’s name, address, NAFDAC and batch numbers, nylon bags production, sign writing etc.
All these are likely to be from the neighborhood of the enterprise.
• The sector encourages the growth and training of local skills and workers: There are young school leavers trained to serve these businesses in their communities who could rise to serve bigger organisations.
Technology clusters, for instance, 132ENT 201 MODULE 1 focuses on the acquisition and development of the skills necessary for efficient entrepreneurship.
Such skills include: a.
Entrepreneurship spirit, characteristics and personality.
b.
Ability to initiate ones own business.
c. Technical and other professional competence needed for productive work and employment.
d. Managerial ability to run the business successfully.
• This sector specializes in manufacturing products which the bigger firms or companies use for their productions.
In other words the sector supplies intermediate goods and raw materials to the large scale industries.
• This sector brings about the diversification of the economy i.e.
all sectors of the economy are represented as the little ones that are neglected are taken up by the small investors.
• The SMEs help to control rural/urban migration i.e.
with the establishment of businesses in local places; the drive for employment outside that environment is reduced as the companies in that environment will employ some of the people there.
• They bring about the improvement of the standard of living of the people and the quality of life generally i.e.
the presence of the small businesses attracts the infrastructures that bring about these developments.
For example the development in the telecommunication sector in Nigeria has not only created employment but also enhanced business operations and improved the quality of life of both rural and urban dwellers.
• This sector encourages the utilization and development of available local resources through improved production, storage, reservation or conservation, processing, recycling, packaging, marketing, etc.
• Promotion of production and development of consciousness: SMEs serve as major facilitators for industrial spread and rural development.
Any entrepreneur who wants to succeed must think of how to improve already existing products/services or produce new ones that will be acceptable by the target market consumers.
• Apart from skill acquisition, entrepreneurship helps to invent and develop better technologies which the entrepreneur uses instead of rudimentary technologies production which usually yield low outputs.
The better and efficient technologies 133ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS developed at the cluster enhance the output of the entrepreneur and increase his profit margin.
Hence, the enterprises grow, expand and create more room for employment.
• SMEs provide excellent opportunity for developing young talents into great entrepreneurs and managers which are necessary for economic development.
For example, this can be better illustrated looking at the activities of the Nigerian Opportunities Industrialists Centre (NOIC).
• It develops better and more efficient technologies for increased and optimal outputs of goods and services.
• SMEs support industrialization policies for a rural-urban economic balance in a country.
• Through research and development, it helps in developing local resources and encourages their uses.
This reduces importation and saves foreign exchange which transcends to a better economy.
• It discovers and develops better and optimal ways of using economy resources for economic growth.
There are some small scale entrepreneurs who are into recycling.
The end products of these thus become the raw materials of others.
• Foreign exchange is also earned by exporting the technologies developed in the “technology cluster” of a country e.g.
the Silicon Valley Technology in America and New York Banking Clusters are springboards for Nigeria’s information technological and banking growth.
• A well managed enterprise is the mother of many other companies.
3.5 The Role of SMEs in the Nigeria Economy The role of SMEs is based mainly on the belief that such enterprises are likely to: • Facilitate the development of a broader base indigenous entrepreneurial culture for the country and a higher value- added to domestic industrial production i.e.
basis of the national economy.
• Boost employment as they employ a larger number of people per unit of investment capital-intensive enterprises.
134ENT 201 MODULE 1 • Enhance regional economic balance through industrial dispersal, including rural areas.
• Moderate rural-urban migration.
• Promotion of effective domestic resource utilization.
• Facilitate managerial training for the unskilled and semi- skilled labour.
• Produce intermediate goods for use in the large enterprises.
• Stimulate and develop local technology and hence higher quality parts.
• Mobilize and utilize domestic savings.
• Increase efficiency by reducing costs and improving flexibility.
• Expand export possibilities and substitute imports effectively.
• Produce import substituting machinery and equipment (copying and duplicating multiplication of prototype machinery and equipment) for possible leasing.
3.6 Advantages of SSEs • SSEs are relatively less capital intensive and therefore ideal as a channel of faster growth in developing economies; • They are relatively more flexible and can react quickly and easily to changes and special requirements and are therefore better suited for launching new products, where scale of operation can be made very small at the outset and allowed to expand in case of success, thereby keeping risks under greater control than larger enterprises; • The sizes of these enterprises enable greater flexibility in their management and are therefore viable testing grounds for new techniques of production; • SSEs can easily adapt to the local market and local sources of raw materials and may thus achieve savings in transport costs, and are therefore more suited for promoting industrial dispersal or decentralization of industries in rural areas; • They are suited for mobilising small savings for proactive purposes, which would not be readily forth coming or at least not in industrial capital formation within the context of large- scale projects; 135ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • SSEs are more efficient than the large-scale plans in utilising and training a small number of skilled labour that can be readily and effectively utilised; • They are likely to provide linkages between the larger enterprises and local producers of basic raw materials through the production for semi-skilled entrepreneurs.
• They are within the financial reach of many entrepreneurs as the demand of the sponsors for the contribution of equity is less tasking.
3.7 Disadvantages of SSEs • Under-capitalisation – The major source of financing small- scale enterprises worldwide is owner’s capital.
Most proprietors do not allow outsiders participation.
This owner’s fund is usually not enough for the funding of the business.
• Small size of SSEs – This often gives neither encouragement to nor attracts the attention of outside interest.
Investors are more interested in bigger and established companies than the very young ones.
• High risk rating – Nearly all SSEs are usually classified as ‘high-risk’ ventures by most lending institutions.
They are consequently accorded very low priority rating in credit institutions’ lending schemes.
This problem is also often associated with high degree of loan diversion to unscheduled activities and high rate of default in loan repayment.
• Low productivity among the SSEs – As a result of poor financial base and smallness of their market share, the productivity of these enterprises is generally very low.
Competition becomes very difficult in both factor and product markets.
• High mortality rate – SSEs fold up during their first year of registration or operation.
The high rate of business failure among the SSEs is ascribed to poor knowledge of project conceptualization and implementation, and lack of managerial and technical skills.
• Dearth of tangible assets – SSEs and their owners lack adequate tangible assets that could serve as collateral to secure loans from private credit institutions.
136ENT 201 MODULE 1 • Inadequate quantitative data for decision making and strategic planning.
Even where these are available, the entrepreneurs may not use them.
• Vulnerability to economic downturn and recessions.
They suffer inability to cope with the demands of opportunities arising from rapid economy.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) List three advantages of SMEs 2) What are the roles of SMEs?
4.0 CONCLUSION The contribution of SMEs to economic growth cannot be over emphasised.
It is therefore necessary for the government to put in place concrete strategy to forestall their failure.
5.0 SUMMARY The advantages of the SMEs are many but it requires that the practitioner be dogged to be able to enjoy benefits.
Effort must also be made by the SMEs practitioners to overcome the disadvantages; otherwise he may fold up the business.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 List the disadvantages of SMEs.
2.
What are the characteristics of the SMEs?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Edwin, F (1979).
Management.
Massachusetts: Allyn and Bacon Inc. Harold, koontz, (1983).
Management.
Tokyo: McGraw – Hill Co. 137ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS UNIT 5 GENERAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES IN SMALL SCALE BUSINESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 General Management Practices in Small Scale Business 3.1.1 Definition 3.2 Planning in Small & Medium Enterprises 3.2.1 Planning Process 3.2.2 Components of Planning Process 3.2.3 Business Strategies and Policies 3.3 Organisation in Small Scale Enterprises 3.3.1 Work Analysis and Departmentalisation 3.4 Coordinating 3.5 Staffing 3.6 Directing 3.7 Control 3.8 Decision-Making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the first twelve units, we discussed the various policies formulated and the Institutions put in place by the government in order to achieve economic growth via the development of the SMEs.
The policies formulated are of no use if the people do not take advantage of the system by starting their individual projects and following proven guidelines in the management of the projects.
The next five units will therefore be devoted to the studying of topics that will explain how businesses can be managed as well as the optimal utilization of resources.
Mrs. Abeni employed her husband as the Managing Director of her Company as well as three of her children as Managers of different departments.
The husband rarely comes to the office.
He is always in the drinking bar.
The children on the other hand, invite their friends to the office and spend a substantial number of the office hours watching the television.
138ENT 201 MODULE 1 Mr. Chucks employed his brothers and sisters on a farm project worth over N3million.
After two years of practice he had to sell the farm since the brothers mismanaged the funds.
He acquired another farmland and started a fish farm project which is very buoyant and successful.
He did not employ any member of his family.
He has some personnel with defined roles and they all report to the Manager, who is a well-trained Acquaculturist.
It is therefore pertinent to put in place well-managed team to be able to achieve in spite of the non- human resources available.
1.0 OBJECTIVES The objective of this unit is to explain the efficient management procedure that will benefit the SMEs, such as planning, staffing and directing.
The leaner should be able to explain the different management procedures and apply them when necessary.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 General Management Practices in Small Scale Business 3.1.1 Definition Business Management refers to the efficient allocation and utilization of available resources to achieve the predetermined goals of a business.
Successful management of small-scale business may be described as the profitable use of those factors that are necessary to conduct a business successfully.
All business organisations irrespective of their size and nature apply the same general management practices.
Management principles and functions of large corporations are also applicable to small-scale business.
This does not mean that the principles and practices should be rigidly adopted in all cases, but should be adapted to the particular needs of the firm Meanwhile, effective management of any business enterprises will require careful and systematic planning, organising, staffing, directing coordinating and controlling of the enterprises activities.
3.2 Planning in Small & Medium Enterprises Planning is the most basic of management functions.
It is a decision- making process that addresses the specific features the entrepreneur desires for his business.
139ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.2.1 Planning Process Planning Process involves: 1.
Determining objectives 2.
Examining the environment and forecasting changes 3.
Developing methods (policies and strategies) that will be used to achieve the objectives.
Benefits of Planning Planning is important in view of the benefits offered.
Such benefits include: • Provision of rational, efficient and timely data • Coordination of the objectives / purpose of the firm • Setting of objectives / purpose for the firm purpose • Effective Control • Prompt and Improved decision-making timing • Optimal acquisition, maintenance, utilization, disposal, and replacement of physical and human resource.
3.2.2 Components of Planning Process The main components of the process include: • Objective: The objective of the firm is to convert the mission and the vision of a business into designated performance outcome.
Objectives are predetermined statements that commit the entrepreneur to produce specified results within a specific time.
Performance objectives must be stated in quantifiable levels and must contain deadline for accomplishment Objective may be set in areas such as market share, innovation, productivity, financial and physical resources, management performance and development.
Others are profitability, work performance and social responsibility.
Good objectives of a business must be • Clearly defined • Challenging 140ENT 201 MODULE 1 • Understood • Flexible • Related to broad goals • Attainable • Acceptable • Environment It is important for the planning process to recognize the need for establishment of a formal linkage between the internal and external environment.
Environmental analysis requires a business to predict among others the competency of the business over competitors in absolute and relative terms.
• Market analysis • Changes in socio-economic environment • Reaction of the owners, suppliers, competitor, government etc to successful implementation of the planning.
• Changes in technological environment and its impact on the business.
Environmental analysis will single out critical development within and outside a business and relate them to business plans or strategies.
3.2.3 Business Strategies and Policies Business strategies are the actions that the entrepreneur and management take in order to achieve the strategic and financial objective as well as the mission of a business.
Strategies such as market concentration, market development, product development, innovation, horizontal integration, vertical integration, product development, turnaround, divesture and liquidation are principal grand strategies, which could be used to achieve long-term objective.
Policies: Formulation of policies is an important aspect of planning.
Policies are standing plans that guide actions and decisions in an organization.
Formulation of definite, stable and flexible policies will provide continuous framework for the conduct of individuals in a business, ensure consistency of actions, provide direction for the business, enable a business to conserve its resources, foster favourable behavioural climate and assist in delegation of authority.
141ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS Policies may deal with strategic issues such as production, marketing, personnel, purchasing and financial.
Less strategic issues such as dressing, appearance etc may also be implemented through policies.
Many business policies are written policies i.e.
they are stated in writing.
These policies are more definite and prevent conflict and confusion.
Policies may also be unwritten.
Unwritten policies are not stated but based on the particular actions undertaken by the operator of the business.
For policies to be effective they must be realistic, attainable flexible, consistent with objectives, strictly followed communicated, understood and motivating.
Policies can be stated in general terms i.e.
broad policies.
Such policies relate to the business as a whole and express its overall purpose.
For example, the policies of Total Quality Management Policies may also be expressed in specific term i.e.
specific policies.
Specific policies are usually affecting the operation of departments.
Examples are: 4.
Marketing Policies: Market segmentation, product line, product differentiation, customer and channels of distribution, selling, pricing and promotion policies.
5.
Research and Development: stages in R & D target for improvement, depth of research, offensive or defensive make or buy research, limits on total commitment.
6.
Production Policies: Extent of integration production system, technology, and capacity etc policies.
7.
Purchasing Policies: Make and buy, vendor, coordination policy.
8.
Personnel Policies: Manpower planning, Recruitment, selection, Training and development, remuneration, and Industrial relations policy etc.
9.
Financial Policies: Sources of finance, financial structure, investment and dividend policies.
3.3 Organisation in Small Scale Enterprises Strategy and policy execution depends on good internal organisation and competent personnel.
To organise is to differentiate and integrate work 142ENT 201 MODULE 1 activities.
Managers take five fundamental decisions when they organize.
These decisions include: • Working Analysis: Analyse the total workload into tasks that can be logically performed by groups or individuals • Departmentalisation: Grouping of employees and tasks in a logical and efficient manner • Assignment of work to members of the firm according to their capabilities and interest.
In a small business, one often finds absence of specialisation, in fairly large organisation, it may be impossible to assign many functions to an individual; there may be need for specialization.
• Delegation of Authority: This is the assignment of authority and operating responsibility by the superior officer to the subordinates.
Decisions must be made by small scale entrepreneur in respect of the extent of delegation.
One of the problems faced by small-scale entrepreneurs is stress resulting from lack of delegation.
Delegation will create for effective management.
• Setting up mechanisms for integrating departmental activities into a coherent whole and monitoring the effectiveness of that integration.
This process is known as coordination.
3.3.1 Work Analysis and Departmentalisation The work analysis is the linking of business strategy (plan) and organisation design in order to achieve the organisational goal.
The activities that must be performed for the achievement of the business plan objectives would be listed.
This grouping together of these activities into manageable divisions is referred to as departmentalisation.
Examples of which are: (a) Functional Structure: This is common in small business; it involves division of the business into functional units such as production, marketing, finance, personnel etc (b) Geographical Structure: Organising the business on the basis of geographical areas or territories covered.
(c) Product Structure, Grouping activities along business and product line.
143ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS (d) Process Structure: Grouping activities on the basis of specific production processes undertaken.
(e) Customer Structure: Establishing units on the basis of customers service In small business organisations, employees are likely to undertake variety of jobs however, business owner should avoid work overload.
In addition, the principles of organising must be strictly followed in designing organizational structure.
Such principles include: • Hierarchy of Authority • Unity of Command • Clearly defined authority and responsibility • Clearly defined chain of Command • Appropriate span of control Usually, the entrepreneur in small business will exercise line authority on all the workers within a company.
This is the ultimate authority to decide, act, approve, command or disapprove directly or indirectly all activities, performed by individuals in an organisation (see figure 1).
As the business grows, this line authority may be complimented by staff authority.
This is the authority to advice, recommend or service the line authority.
E.g.
Personnel, Corporate Planning, Data Processing are examples of staff authority, (see figure 11) Entrepreneur Workers Figure 1 (Small Organisation) Entrepreneur Production Marketing Personal Data Officer Officer Officer Processing Officer 144ENT 201 MODULE 1 Figure 2 (Growing Organisation) Irrespective of how authority is centralised by the entrepreneur at the top, authority and operating responsibility must be delegated.
Delegation of authority is the passing of authority, duties and operating responsibility by the superior officer (entrepreneur) to the subordinate.
The delegation of authority is necessary for the effective functioning of a business; no entrepreneur can personally or completely supervise all of what happens in a business.
Decisions must be made on: (a) What to delegate (b) When to delegate (c) How to delegate (d) Whom to delegate (e) The extent of delegation One of the fundamental principles of delegation is the parity of authority and responsibility.
No person should be held responsible for a job unless he is given sufficient authority to execute it and no one should be given authority more than his responsibility.
Most small-scale entrepreneurs are faced with problems of inadequate delegation.
By delegating sufficient authority, entrepreneurs will relief themselves from operating tasks and concentrate on more important and strategic functions, profitable decision making, allow for flexibility, motivate employees, create opportunity for training employees, etc.
3.4 Coordinating This can be regarded as a management function as well as an essential component of an organisation.
Coordination ensures that the different activities of a business are systematically integrated.
It is required because there are different specialised units and the functions are interrelated as well as the difference in human beings.
In achieving effective coordination, there is need for a clearly defined authority and responsibility.
Rules and regulations must be spelt out and strictly followed.
In addition, effective coordination can be achieved through: • Group meetings, committees etc 145ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Participative management Style • Effective Communication • Discipline • Informal Communication 3.5 Staffing Organising is regarded as the first step towards implementation of plan.
This management function will create organisation positions that must be filled by qualified personnel The existence, survival, growth and profitability of a business depend on the role played by human resources, hence proper staffing will contribute to the overall success of a business staffing in the process of filling organisational positions with the right person at the right time and incurring the minimum possible costs.
Staffing may be regarded as part of organising or separate function of management, which requires ensuring that the personnel needs are constantly and appropriately fulfilled.
3.6 Directing This is the function of supervising activities of subordinate, and individuals.
It entails issuing instructions using the tools of leading, motivating and communication The formula for good management of small business is simple enough: to develop a sound plan, design appropriate organisational structure, to implement the plans and monitoring the performance of the business.
Good leadership is a pre-requisite for effective accomplishment of these tasks.
An entrepreneur has different leadership roles to play; he is the chief risk bearer, chief administrator and strategy implementer, and crises solver etc.
Motivational strategies should take into consideration, the following: (i) Motivation should reward good performance (ii) Entrepreneurs must always recognize good performance (iii) Employees must know what they should do to be rewarded (iv) Employees must be informed what they are doing wrong that withholds their rewards.
146ENT 201 MODULE 1 (v) Reprimanding a subordinate should not be open, it should seen as corrective measure rather than humiliating the subordinate.
(vi) The entrepreneur must be fair in dealing with subordinates.
Motivation for example, enables business firms to retain and attract qualified manpower.
In addition, productivity of employees can be achieved through effective motivation.
Strategies for motivating employees include monetary Incentives: salaries and wages, bonus, profit sharing incentive, commission as well as Welfare Schemes for Staff.
COMMUNICATION: This is the transmission of ideas, messages and instructions between the receivers and the senders.
An entrepreneur directing a business must communicate with both internal and external groups.
Communication is the lifeline of every organisation, it is the lubricant of any organisation.
Any organisation that fails to communicate properly must be prepared to face the consequences of ineffective communication An entrepreneur must instruct, explain, train, inform and sometimes demonstrate what the workers must do.
3.7 Control Organisation consists of people interacting collectively to achieve specific goals.
By joining an organisation, individuals subject themselves to control in order to make the collective effort feasible The word control refers to the process of measuring, comparing and correcting actions of subordinates to ensure that plans for the business are fulfilled.
It is dynamic process entailing: (i) Setting of Standards (ii) Maintaining current operating records for comparison with standards and (iii) Taking corrective measures when and where necessary.
Control differs not only in the activity being controlled but also in the character of control used.
Hence, control should be adapted to suit each specific situation.
Control of sales, inventory control, control of expenditure, strategy control, control of executive development are examples of control systems and each requiring distinct application.
147ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.8 Decision-Making People of all levels in an organisation must constantly make decisions and solve problems.
An entrepreneur is a decision-maker.
Decision- making is an important activity at all levels of management and for all aspects of management.
Managers must make decisions in planning, organising, staffing, coordinating, directing and controlling of organisational activities.
Decision-making involves: (i) Investigation of business situations.
That is, problem definition, diagnosis of the problem and identification of objective.
(ii) Development of alternatives.
Generating sufficient alternative courses of action.
(iii) Evaluation of alternatives to determine whether they are feasible and the extent to which satisfactory solution could be obtained.
In addition, the possible consequence of these alternatives for the rest of the business must be evaluated.
(iv) Choice making.
This involves the selection of one best alternative from available courses of action.
(v) Choice implementation.
Once the best available alternative has been selected, managers must implement the chosen alternatives.
(vi) Decision Monitoring.
After decisions have been made, the decision maker must attempt to monitor the implementation of decisions to ensure that things are working according to plans.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1) Outline and discuss the steps in planning in a small scale business.
2) Management principles of large corporations can be adopted in small scale enterprises.
Do you agree?
Why?
4.0 CONCLUSION It is very important for the Entrepreneur to have a well-spelt out objective, line of communicating with the staff, interacting with them and rewarding them.
This will enhance productivity and objective achievement.
148ENT 201 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMMARY The use of the management practices explained above helps the small scale practitioner to achieve the set objectives.
He must interact with his workers and see them as valuable assets to the organisation rather than objects that he can discard and hire at will.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1 Discuss the major methods of achieving effective coordination in small scale business.
2.
Briefly describe the leadership roles of an entrepreneur in a small scale business.
3.
How can a small scale business operator achieve effective motivation of employees?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Baumback, M. C. (1992).
Basic Small Business Management: New York: Prentice Hall Inc. Lawal, A.
A.
(1993).
Management in Focus Nigeria.
Abdul Industrial Enterprises.
Stoner, J. Freeman, R.E.
and Gilbert, D. (1995).
Management.
U.S.A: Prentice-Hall Incorporation.
149ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS MODULE 4 Unit 1 Contemporary Management Practices in Small Business I Unit 2 Contemporary Management Practices in Small Business II Unit 3 Causes of Failure of Small Scale Business Unit 4 Possible Projects UNIT 1 CONTEMPORARY MANAGEMENT PRACTICES IN SMALL BUSINESS I CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Management Practices: Time and Stress Management 3.1.1 Time and Stress Management 3.1.2 Benefit of Time Management 3.1.3 Causes of Time Management 3.1.4 Management of Time 3.1.5 Achieving Effective Time Management 3.1.6 Stress Management 3.2 Stress Management 3.2.1 Management of Stress 3.2.2 Symptoms of Stress 3.3 Social Responsibility in Small Scale Business Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The management of business organisations is transitory.
Many of the traditional management practices are being substituted with new ones, it is therefore crucial to small business operators to clearly understand some contemporary management practices that are challenging to business operators.
The main contemporary practices that are addressed in this unit include: • Time and stress management • Social responsibility and ethics 150ENT 201 MODULE 1 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the learner should be able to allocate time and manage stress effectively.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Management Practices:Time and Stress Management 3.1.1 Time and Stress Management Time management can be defined as the art and science of using valuable hours prudently and effectively to achieve personal, professional and organisational objective.
It involves, taking time to save time.
Time management requires systematic approach to managing programmes, projects, activities and schedules.
Time is very important like many other resources such as money, materials, men, machines and information.
In fact, it is more valuable than other resources.
Unlike other resources only time has an absolute and finite limit.
Everyone has 60 seconds in any given day.
Hence, time is inelastic, perishable and cannot be stored and converted to another source.
Recognising the impact of time in attainment of productivity, managers do not only plan their work but also their time.
Modern techniques such as organisation and methods, motion study, work measurement are used to reduce unproductive time of employees.
3.1.2 Benefits of Time Management Proper time management will yield benefits such as: • Efficiency of work • Development of employees • Elimination of productivity bottlenecks • Increase job satisfaction • Result in higher return on investment.
3.1.3 Causes of Time Management The major factors leading to time management can be listed below: • Unclear job goals and requirements 151ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Constant interruptions e.g.
A parade of visitors, and lots of telephone calls • Excessive meetings • Inadequate staffing • Lack of planning and organisation • Misplaced priorities • Failure to delegate • Procrastination • Inability to say ‘no’ • Excessive socialising • Lack of concentration and, distractions 3.1.4 Management of Time To manage time requires recognising the symptoms of time mismanagement and adopting appropriate management style capable of achieving effective time management.
The main symptoms of time mismanagement include: • Missed deadline.
Being late with important commitment.
• Excessive stress resulting from work overload and work pressures • Self doubt, pressure and tension on the job • Sleepless night • Exhaustion i.e.
to be tired unnecessarily • Working for longer hours • Numerous crises • Low productivity • Negligence or perfunctory tendencies • Poor quality of output 3.1.5 Achieving Effective Time Management The only way to achieve effective management is to change the management style in such a way that effective time management will be achieved.
Here are some ideas: • Planning for your best work hours i.e.
a time you are at best.
• Maintain adequate staffing to avoid work overload.
• Redesign work place to facilitate efficiency.
The office should be made conducive for concentration and favourable to interaction e.g.
sit where distractions will be minimal; keep reference material at close range.
• Limit your interruption by reducing unexpected visitors and phone calls, set aside some hours for meeting the visitors.
152ENT 201 MODULE 1 • Control meeting.
Invite only people who will contribute, publish agenda in advance, establish time limit and adhere strictly to them • Improve your reading and scanning skills • Overcome procrastination and paralysis by setting limit for completion of tasks.
• Delegate authority to avoid work overload • Insist on completed staff work • Simplify your day by avoiding work overload and over-tasking your capabilities • Develop record keeping for jobs.
At the end of a day, develop a list of activities for the next day and assign a priority ranking to each • Training and development of employee, on productivity improvement and time management • Insist on the completion of each day’s task • Use productivity tools and equipment, if available.
3.2 Stress Management Stress is a state of physical or mental tension resulting from factors that affect the body’s equilibrium or the body’s reaction to either pleasant or complement simulation (Barry man Fink, 1989).
At personal level, stress can have variety effects ranging from mild irritability to total disability.
Medically, stress may lead to hypertension, cancer, diabetes, diarrhea, excessive heart-beat, headaches, insomnia, sexual impotence etc.
Stress can also affect people’s relationship and life style.
It can also lead to irritable feeling, alienation, conflict, emotional outbursts, family problems, divorce, etc.
At organisational level, stress can lead to accidents, higher workers compensation, disability, higher medical and insurance costs, higher rate of absenteeism and turnover, lower group morale, labour unrest and losses in productivity.
3.2.1 Management of Stress Like time management, effective management of stress requires understanding the symptoms and causes of stress.
If the symptoms are identified, corrective actions should be taken to minimise the stress.
153ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.2.2 Symptom of Stress The non-typical behaviour of staff that clearly indicates stress include lack of appetite, inability to sleep, constant irritable feeling, inability to sit and relax, anger, bursting into tears, impatience, drug abuse, headache, excessive smoking and drinking, low concentration, frequent self doubt, feeling of dread, feeling of tiredness, uneasy feeling, high blood pressure, frustration, nightmare, absenteeism, aggressiveness etc.
3.2.3 Causes of Stress The main causes of stress can be discussed under three main headings: • Personal Sources: Problem such as family problems and the style of individuals may lead to stress.
For instance, highly emotional, aggressive, impatient individuals are more prone to stress than others.
• Organizational Factors: These may arise from the nature of the work, i.e.
insufficient time, monotonous jobs, highly risky jobs, lack of trust, role conflict and ambiguity, poor management style, work overload, lack of training, lack of promotion, poor planning, poor communication, etc.
are examples of organisational stress producing factors.
• Environmental Factors: Business firms operate within an environment.
Events that occur within the environment may result to stress.
Such events include noise, crowded condition, uncomfortable temperature, inappropriate lightening, air pollution, uncomfortable furniture, competition.
• Reducing Stress: The negative effects of stress can be minimised by means of the following categorised practices.
i) Individuals.
Coping with stress by means of • Non competitive physical exercise.
• Socialise with people other than co-workers.
• Open up to others by discussing freely your problems, fears and frustrations with those who care about you.
• Restrict the number of meetings you hold.
• Delegate responsibilities to reduce work overload and allow some measures of flexibility in the use of time.
• Develop a network of social support system through positive thinking, trust and have confidence in people.
• Moderate your life changes.
Too much unexpected changes produce stress.
154ENT 201 MODULE 1 • Protect your idle leisure time by making hobbies your social life, not talking.
• Avoid setting unrealistic goals and use of drugs to check stressful events.
• Pace yourself and allow for certain amount of flexibility in your day’s schedule.
• Practice good nutrition by feeding appropriately with balanced diet.
• Practice the style of time management.
• Train yourself on objective setting and adhere strictly to your plans.
ii) Organisations: Organisational sources of stress can be minimised by means of • Proper selection and placement to screen out individuals who are prone to stress and match individuals with their capabilities.
• Train employees on how to minimise stress.
• Improve organisational internal communication to reduce anxiety and uncertainty.
• Develop people oriented management style.
• Clarify role expectation.
• Implement employee’s assistance programme.
iii) Environment: Environmental sources can be minimised by: • Anticipating stressful period and planning for proper arrangement of the work environment in order to provide a safe and comfortable working environment.
• Redesigning jobs where necessary to motivate workers and reduce work overload.
3.3 Social Responsibility in Small Scale Business Management Social responsibility and business ethics are concepts that are fundamental to the survival of any business in the contemporary business environment.
Social responsibility and ethical issues form daily component of business activities.
They are involved in all facets of a business: decision-making, arbitration, marketing, finance, sales, performance appraisal, leadership, etc.
Social Responsibility: Business social responsibility focuses on what an organisation does that affect the society in which it exists.
The term, “social responsibility” can be described as the intelligent and objective concern which restrains individual or corporate behaviour from 155ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS ultimately destructive activities no matter how immediately profitable, and leads in the direction of the positive contribution to human betterment (Andrew, 1977).
The theory of social responsibility holds that a business should be socially responsible to a number of groups such as: • Owners, by maintaining a high level of efficiency and effectiveness leading to growth in investment and returns.
• Employees by making the work environment a better place to achieve the personal goals.
• Customers, by producing the required product at affordable prices, refraining from unfair trading practices, exaggeration, and misrepresentation in advertisement.
• Government, by contributing to government revenue, accelerating economic growth and complying with the legal environment requirements.
• Creditors and suppliers settlement of claims at the appropriate time.
• Larger Society; contributing to development of the society and observing ethical ideas.
Investment in social responsibility will bring about the following benefits.
• Long run profit maximisation • Enhanced public image • Long run viability • Prevention of government restrictive measures.
• Possibility of increasing profit in future.
Some of the social issues confronting entrepreneurs in Nigeria include: • Ecological issues: Business firms must reduce or eliminate problems resulting from technological breakthroughs.
Such problems include pollution, solid waste or refuse pollution, water pollution and noise pollution.
• Consumerism: The reaction of consumers to business injustices and their effort to have those perceived injustices remedied.
Such injustices include lack of production information.
• Minorities and the poor: Discrimination of the minorities and the poor considered disadvantaged must be avoided.
Examples 156ENT 201 MODULE 1 are discrimination in hiring, training and development opportunities.
• Business Ethics: Engaging in good, right, and moral business practices.
Small business can respond to these social issues by: • Ensuring minority hiring and equality in treatment of women in employment.
• Taking specific steps of combat pollution such as treating of stream water by installing pollution-control.
• Providing more consumer information and improving product safety.
Finally, in planning and evolving social responsibility programmes, the following phases of activities may be suggested: • Awareness within the organisation on the need for and importance of social responsibility in small business management.
• The entrepreneur involvement in social responsibility through specific charitable contributions, actions and decisions.
• The entrepreneur may appoint an officer to coordinate social responsibility.
• Social responsibility is incorporated into the objective of the business.
• Periodic appraisal of social responsibility performance and • Utilizing the report for reward system.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is time management?
4.0 CONCLUSION The implication of this theory is that a business should not seek profit maximisation only but should maintain an equitable working balance among some interest groups.
Part of the profits made by a business should be diverted towards betterment of the society.
Contribution of a 157ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS business to the betterment of the society will make it easier for the business to grow, survive, and make everlasting profit.
5.0 SUMMARY Time is very important like many other resources such as money, materials, men, machines and information.
In fact, it is more valuable than other resources.
Planning includes social responsibility programmes as well.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss social obligation of organisation.
2.
What is stress management?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Baumback, M. C. (1992).
Basic Small Business Management.
New York: Prentice Hall Inc. Lawal, A.
A.
(1993).
Management in Focus.
Nigeria: Abdul Industrial Enterprises.
Stoner, J. Freeman, R.E.
and Gilbert, D. (1995).
Management.
U.S.A: Prentice-Hall Incorporation.
158ENT 201 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 CONTEMPORARY MANAGEMENT PRACTICES IN SMALL BUSINESS II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Management Practices in Small Business 3.1.1 Business Ethics in Small Business Management 3.2 Quality of Work Life 3.3 Total Quality Management 3.4 TQM Implementation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Mr. Ade sent a boy to spy the activities of his competitor so that he can outwit him.
Mrs. Adio on the other hand, bought the blade produced by her competitor and soaked them in water for some days before repacking them for sale as the original product of her competitor.
The firm lost all its customers.
TOLANI Company got loan from friends and the bank.
The money was squandered by the management.
They declared the company bankrupt.
Mr Adio produces paint.
He let his waste products into the stream that runs behind the factory, which is also the source of drinking water for the neighbours.
He felt unconcerned.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The leaner should be able to explain the responsibility of a Small and Medium Enterprise to the people and the environment it is located.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Management Practices in Small Business 3.1.1 Business Ethics in Small Business Management A strong organisational culture founded on ethical principles and sound values is a necessary foundation for organisational success.
Business ethics is the study of people’s rights and duties, the moral rules that 159ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS people apply in making decisions, and the nature of the relationships among people (Stoner, Freeman and Gilbert, 1996).
In business, ethical issues can fall into four main categories: • Societal: At societal level, ethical issues determine the extent to which the social system, economic system and political system of a country have been based on sound ethical principles.
• Stakeholder: Every company has an ethical duty to its stakeholders – owners, employees, customers, suppliers and the community.
• Internal Policy: This relates basically to the company’s relation with its employees.
Here, issues relating to the ethics of employment practices of the company will be addressed.
• Personal: Individuals deal with one another.
Most of these interactions have ethical implications, individuals conscientiously or unconscientiously follow ethical guidance.
Meanwhile it should be noted that business with ethical standards is active rather than reactive.
Such business will have three primary advantages: • General greater drive and efficiency • Attract high caliber of people and • Develop profitable relations with its constituencies.
In view of the above mentioned benefits of sound ethical practices, entrepreneurs must be able to see ethical issues in the choice they face, make decisions within an ethical framework, build and maintain an ethical work environment.
The following are some guidelines for sound ethical practices: • Maintaining good, moral and right relationship with employees e.g.
clarity of communication, enforcement of corporate policies, good faith, bargaining, adequate compensation of employees and affirmative action of the right employees to be treated equally without discrimination.
• Ethical financial reporting i.e.
avoiding fraudulent accounting reporting.
160ENT 201 MODULE 1 • Ethical Advertisement Preventing deceptive and unfair advertisements, such as making false claims about the product or service.
• Maintaining confidentiality of individual and corporate records.
• Avoiding unethical actions and decisions in dealing with customers.
• Discouraging gratification and kickbacks, i.e.
collection of bribes, gratification and kickbacks within and outside the business.
Finally, to build an ethical work environment in small-scale industries, the following may be suggested: • The entrepreneur must lead in maintaining and observing ethical business practices by setting good, moral and right business practices for organizational members to follow.
• Ethical codes and standard of the business must be properly documented in writing and dissemination.
A good way of informing employees of ethical standards is the employee handbooks.
• Entrepreneur must design a system of monitoring or controlling ethical behaviour in his organisation.
This may include: • Careful screening and selection to ensure that employees with moral ideals are employed.
• Maintaining fair and equitable treatment of employees, to guarantee their loyalty.
• Helping employees emotionally to overcome temptation to behave unethically.
• Physical security, i.e.
limiting employees’ access to valuable documents and business secrets.
• Designing effective internal accounting and administrative control systems.
161ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • Formalisation of agreement between the entrepreneur and employees to protect business secrets.
• Education and training of employees on ethical ideals and practices.
• Periodic monitoring of organisational practices.
• Prompt reporting of violation of company official ethical ideals and giving guarantee of anonymity and immunity from retaliatory acts.
• Recognition and reward for ethical behaviour may be incorporated into the management practices.
3.2 Quality of Work Life (QWL) QWL means a set of objectives or organisational conditions and practices that make employees to perceive that they are safe, relatively well satisfied and able to grow and develop as human beings.
QWL holds that every individual has the right to a job that satisfies his or her personal needs.
The main components of QWL include: • Adequate and fair compensation • Safe, healthy working conditions • Alternative work schedule • Reduction in job stress • Development and growth of human capabilities • Social integration of people • Participation in decision making • Democracy in work place • Pension rights • Profit sharing • Company programmes designed to enhance workers welfare etc.
The application of QWL in business management has led to improvement in productivity of a number of organisations.
The Japanese firms’ experiences are a clear example of QWL success.
Most Japanese firms focus on human resources more than financial resources for their long run success.
This is achieved through job rotation, complete appraisal system, emphasis on work groups, open and free communication, consultative decision making and managerial concern for the employees.
162ENT 201 MODULE 1 For attainment of QWL in small-scale business, the following practices may be suggested: • Flexible work schedules • Improvement in health and safety of employees • Job design and redesign to motivate employees • Participative management style • Employee counseling • Autonomous Work Group • Career management 3.3 Total Quality Management (TQM) Success in contemporary business environment requires proper quality management.
One of the most quality improvement practices that gain momentum in recent years is a renewed attention to “total quality management”.
The growing concern for total quality management can be attributed to the fact that mature quality movement is capable of: i) eliciting employees cooperation for enhanced customer satisfaction.
ii) adding to product and service quality while not only reducing costs but increasing revenue and iii) providing long term approach to enhancing shareholders value by achieving corporate success.
The implication of the foregoing statement is that a mature quality movement, otherwise known as Total Quality Management (TQM) is the key to the success of high performance firms like U.A.C., DUNLOP PLC, NIGERITE, ELF PLC., etc.
Hence, small business organisations, irrespective of their sizes must cultivate and incorporate Total Quality Management in their organisational practices in order to survive, grow and achieve a position of the pre-eminence in the competitive environment.
Total Quality Management (TQM) is an organisation’s cultural commitment to satisfying customer through the use of an integrated system of tools, techniques, and training.
TQM involves the continuous improvement of organizational processes resulting in high-quality products and services (Stoner, Freeman and Gilbert Jr., 1996. p.211).
163ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 3.4 TQM Implementation (TQM) There are no universal methods of designing and implementing TQM in organisations.
However, the framework developed by Kano (1993) will be useful for small or large-scale industries.
Kano (1993) developed what he termed “The House of TQM” which shows the structure of TQM as the touchstone for identifying the evolution of TQM implementation in the United States.
The proposed framework is presented below: House of TQM by Kano (1993) The TQM structure implies that the base of a TQM programme is the “intrinsic technology”, which refers to the driving technology specific to an industry.
For example, petroleum engineering is the technology intrinsic to ELF PLC.
Given the existence of intrinsic technology, it is still necessary to carry out motivational programmes aimed at improving the level of organisational members’ commitment to successful implementation of TQM.
The problem is how to create the condition that will impel management and employees to develop positive attitude towards the proposed TQM programme.
The portion from the floor up to the roof is the TQM shown in form of pillars.
These pillars include: Concepts: These consist of both a theory of quality satisfaction of consumers and a theory of management.
The main concepts required for implementing TQM include: • Customer satisfaction, putting quality first 164ENT 201 MODULE 1 • The plan, do, check and action cycle i.e.
PDCA cycle, process oriented production and do it right the first time.
• Emphasis on the use of data.
• Ensuring employees commitment.
Techniques: The most popular techniques are parieto diagram, cause- effect diagram etc.
Promotional Vehicles e.g.
Deciding on who shall ultimately be responsible for promoting the company wide quality, what training and educational programmes to use in order to promote quality management philosophies.
Management tools and statistical methods are examples.
• Promotional vehicles also include the use of quality circles and team activity.
Quality circle involves a voluntary problem-solving group of workers who meet periodically to explore ways of improving quality and productivity.
After completing one assigned job, the same team will work on the next one in an on-going activity.
• Finally, the roof of the house of TQM shows customer satisfaction and quality assurance.
• In fact, the objectives of TQM include provisions of customer satisfaction and quality assurance.
These are based on the premise that realisation of continual improvement in quality company-wide can achieve growth, improve company reputation and increase economic performance.
Business firms exist to create customers and the need to ensure that a product or service provides the required level of satisfaction to the user.
Hence implementation of TQM in small scale business firm is a necessity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss total quality management (TQM) 4.0 CONCLUSION There are many management practice options.
Proper use of resources such as time, labour and other input will lead to an increased level of production.
165ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 5.0 SUMMARY The SMEs can not work in isolation.
It is therefore important for accurate, timely and efficient data; hence adequate records must be maintained by small scale industrialists as well as proper motivation of employees to achieve company-wide commitment to the quality programme.
Systematic integration of quality into organizational system by training and having quality awareness programs, group interaction, and avoiding bureaucratization of organizational practices is also important.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the implementation of TQM.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Baumback, M. C. (1992).
Basic Small Business Management.
New York: Prentice Hall Inc. Lawal, A.
A.
(1993).
Management in Focus Nigeria.
Abdul Industrial Enterprises.
Stoner, J. Freeman, R.E.
and Gilbert, D. (1995).
Management.
U.S.A: Prentice-Hall Incorporation.
166ENT 201 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 CAUSES OF FAILURE OF SMALL SCALE BUSINESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Business Failure 3.1.1 Causes of Failure in Small Scale Business 3.2 Symptoms of Business Failures 3.3 How to Avoid Failure among SMEs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Ade’s friend, Tope is a millionaire.
He is a fashion designer.
Ade did not consider his interest but went ahead to acquire the necessary machines.
After six years of practice he was frustrated out of the project since he never had any skill or the required natural gift for the business.
Tola wanted to embark on a project.
He approached Ben who is an Economist.
She wanted the Economist to carry out a feasibility study for her, but changed her mind and got the services of a quack who charged her lower than the fee of the professional.
Unfortunately, the quack painted a glossy picture for her.
She went ahead based on the report.
This led to her failure.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The leaner should, at the end of the unit, be able to identify the different causes of business failure and how to avoid them.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Business Failure 3.1.1 Causes of Failure of Small Scale Business The causes of failure in the small scale and medium enterprises are multi- faceted and numerous ranging from personal or micro to extended or macro.
Some of these are: 167ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS Poor management: This has remained the major single factor that has crippled many SMEs especially the developing economy.
This is as a result of poor record keeping, lack of technical and managerial skills.
Planning: This connotes a future-oriented process by which organisational goals are designed and logical steps and actions are outlined in other to facilitate the achievement of set objectives.
Most small businesses fail because of lack of planning and sometimes where and when there is plan the process or execution of those plans, are inappropriate.
It is quite true of many SMEs that he who fails to plan plans to fail.
Many SMEs operate without plans.
Training: Trainings, seminars, workshops, symposiums are very important for every body.
Since this will acquaint the worker or owner- worker with the most recent market information.
It becomes crucial for them to attend.
Most small business owners however look down on this aspect because of the costs involved.
The effect of this is the loss of new technology and business.
Information whether positive or negative, helps the organisations in doing better or corrects their blunders.
Information is very vital for organisational survival because it is like thermostat of the refrigerator or electric iron that regulates temperature.
Lack of entrepreneurial vision and ready market for the products of SMEs: Entrepreneurs should embark on products and services that are needed by the target customers.
Failure to do this results to product failure which may be because of no or insufficient research.
Too rapid expansion: This is very common in Nigeria.
Businessmen want to show-off that they are managing group of companies thereby overstretching the meagre resources that are inadequate for one company.
This therefore results to business failure.
Lack of requisite experience: The lack of experience and knowledge about the particular business on the part of the operator of the firm always leads to the rapid collapse of businesses in developing countries.
Succession procedure: Most Nigerian businessmen are polygamists with many children and even where they are not, there is usually no succession procedure which results to power tussle at the demise of the founder.
Power tussle is no fuel for survival.
Lack of consensus among owners: For any firm, be it small or big to succeed, there should be fair and equitable dealing among the owners.
Where there is lack of consensus among the owners based on unfair and equitable dealings, such development will lead to the demise of the business.
Therefore, the success of any business firm will depend on the 168ENT 201 MODULE 1 co-operation of the owners.
Such lack of consensus can also lead to laziness, indiscipline, negligence, and immorality among the owners and even workers.
But where there is good rapport among the owners, surely it will bring about success and increase in the profitability level of the firm.
Inability to generate fund: Existing fund could be tied to stock which is not moving or the cost of stock replacement might have increased.
If there is no avenue for the injection of new fund, the firm goes into liquidation.
Inability to generate fund may be as a result of product failure, no sales, poor customer relationship, incorrect product etc.
Fund diversion: This is very common with sole proprietors.
Money meant for a given business could be diverted into title taking, marrying more wives or doing incessant travels and entertainment, and building costly residential houses.
This has wrecked many businesses in Nigeria.
Operating on loose credit policy: Firms operating in this way usually build bad loans.
The firm could survive such situation if there is avenue for refinancing the receivables.
A firm with large receivables will end up being cash trapped and will find it difficult to replenish stocks and meet the demand of creditors.
The result is liquidation.
Employing beyond optimum level: Excessive employment of the factors of production, leads to immediate or eventual diminishing returns.
A Company which employs one hundred persons instead of forty will only end up paying excess wages and salaries for sixty workers hence liquidation.
The same is true of idle funds which either attracts interest or generates losses in terms of opportunity cost.
Large scale looting by rioters: This is very rampant in Nigerian cities.
Where looting is not very possible, the premises of an enterprise may be set on fire which may mark the total collapse of the business.
Shortage of skills: The owners of SMEs are people with little specialized skills or expertise; neither do they have finances to hire the services of specialists on part-time or full time basis.
The result is that they usually produce faulty and inadequate products.
Lack of advice and counsels: The proprietors of SMEs do not share their problems with one another; neither do they seek the professional advice to find solution to the problems.
In some cases the proprietors may have been counselled but they won’t adhere.
This is very true of some companies that employed experienced workers and literates but never sought their experience and knowledge.
Where the employees were given the opportunity to suggest, they were seen as bias.
169ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS Level of competition: If the level of competition from other firms becomes too high, a marginal firm always easily liquidates.
It has happened and is still happening to most organisations.
Fraud: When there is laxity in supervision, fraud could easily occur.
It is well known that fraud is the greatest killer disease of Nigerian businesses.
Here, fraud ranges from outright embezzlement of funds to diversion of funds meant for given transactions for the maintenance and organization of paraphernalia.
For example, money that is supposed to be paid officially may be spent as gratification.
Lack of research and development programmes: Research and development programmes need to be adequately pursued by small business entrepreneurs so as to ensure their long term survival.
Sooner than later, the SMEs run out of ideas and become obsolete.
Lack of research and development results in lack of current information concerning the product line or service.
The end result is failure.
Inadequate compensation for employees: Employees of small business firms ought to be compensated adequately.
A good number of instances exist in Nigeria where employees were instead, grossly exploited.
This however depends on the cash flow and sympathetic attitude of the originator of the business.
An unreliable, greedy and unsympathetic director is not likely to care much about the yearnings of his employees whether or not cash is flowing adequately.
This will result to employees being disenchanted and demoralized then contributing negatively to the growth of the business.
The business will eventually end up in liquidation.
Laziness: This may be from the entrepreneur himself, the management staff and or other employees.
Procrastination is said to be the thief of time, the same applies to the slothful man who will say ‘there is a lion in the streets I will be slain’.
This is a lazy man’s excuse which is a killer disease in our world of competitions.
Indiscipline: The Bible makes it clear that “understanding is a wellspring board of life unto him that has it and he that has no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is broken down and without walls”.
This is true of any entrepreneur that is not disciplined because his business will be like the city without walls.
Discipline here may be in spending both time and money.
Conflict of objective: An entrepreneur has his personal objectives in life and just as he intends to accomplish them, it is therefore, not expected that these personal goals should in way interfere with business 170ENT 201 MODULE 1 goals.
Thus, the businessman’s goal of building more houses and acquiring more wives should not be the immediate areas where the entire profit of a business should go to or else, the business cannot grow.
Absence of growth means extinction for that business.
Government policies: Inconsistent and ad-hoc characteristic of policies and measures is another very big problem of small business enterprises in Nigeria.
Most policies of government have been very inconsistent.
Such policies have not stood the test of time.
Consequently, they hardly achieve the intended objectives and focus of such policies and measures.
Inequity: This is a situation where all staff of the same skill, qualification, and experience are employed in the same organisation but are differently paid.
(For instance one is paid higher than the others because of the employee’s sponsor or guarantor or bargaining power).
Inability to forecast future economic tends: This is quite true especially in countries where there are no price control measures.
In Nigeria for example, prices are difficult to anticipate because of the macro economic instability.
Immorality: This is a cankerworm.
An immoral male entrepreneur will always be attracted by every lady.
In order to attract concubines he becomes prodigious and lavishes business fund.
He becomes an unnatural tuff, party-crazy and spends his business time and funds on women.
Other causes of small business failure are negligence, general recession in the economy, improper motivation of employees, insincere appraisal of staff and remuneration, war and violence, ostentation, death of key staff, sudden emigration of known customers; improper accounting records, over-borrowing, currency devaluation upward swing in production cost, etc.
3.2 Symptoms of Business Failure Business failure in any country, developed or developing, does not just occur in one day.
As the business failure does not occur accidentally some signals show a good entrepreneur that he should replace his/her courses of action.
Owualah (1999) identifies some of the signals as persisting negative cash flow; decline in market share due to decline in sales and profits.
These are serious symptoms, which if not properly handled can lead to business failure.
Other indicators are: 171ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS • uncompetitive products or services; • declining working capital; • deteriorating physical facilities; • high debt ratio; • sale of goods or services below cost price; • stocking of stock or inventories; • large scale retrenchment of staff; • persisting difficulty in securing new funds from banks and other creditors; • importantly, mismanagement of both human and financial resources can easily lead to business failure.
Kambia (1999) identifies the following as signals and symptoms of business failure: 1.
Perpetual borrowing because business is neither expanding nor realising profit from previous investment(s); 2.
Dwindling profit margin; 3.
Delay or staggering payment or even reduction of workers salaries and wages; 4.
Merging or collapse of branches or departments; 5.
Reduction of staff strength through resignation and lay off; 6.
Unnecessary delay in staff promotion; 7.
Persistent shortage of stocks; 8.
Frequent and unnecessary diversification; 9.
High level of outstanding receivables; 10.
Declining response from major suppliers or distributors; 11.
Withdrawal of distributors and request for the refund of distributors deposits.
3.3 How to Avoid Business Failure among SMEs Having identified the reasons for business failures, steps are needed to be taken to avoid the incidence of distress, failure or liquidation among SMEs.
These steps may be: • Start with an authentic feasibility report: Every business that aims at staying, as a going concern must be started with an authentic feasibility report.
A spurious report always leads to failure because it cannot be religiously implemented or followed.
• Continuous research and planning: For a company to stand competition it must operate on the basis of continuous research and planning.
A firm which does not operate along the line of good planning will find itself in liquidation.
Efforts should always be made to ensure that plans and budgets are duly 172ENT 201 MODULE 1 implemented.
When a plan becomes ineffective it should be quickly reversed.
• Effective manpower management: Tasks should be assigned on basis of skills, requisite knowledge and experience.
Staff should be adequately motivated.
Here we think of Fredrick Herzberg’s stick and carrot theory of motivation.
While emphasising good salary structure and working conditions, one should not lose sight of discipline.
The labour force should be kept within optimum level in order to avoid diminishing returns to scale of operations.
• Fund diversion should be avoided: Money meant for the firm’s operation should not be utilized for something else.
The operators of such companies should avoid wasteful dispensing and undue ostentation.
• Checking of fraud: Through constant and thorough supervision, fraud can be prevented.
There should be proper accounting records and periodic stock-taking.
Enough care should be taken about bank statements, cheques, cash disbursement and all documents relating to cash receipts and payments.
These items should be kept in very safe custody.
The degree of honesty, sincerity and personal integrity of staff handling money, loose stock and repairs should not be in doubt.
• Having innovation as a guide: To neglect innovation is to ask for failure.
Immediately a firm stops to innovate, competitors will have it overtaken.
This will lead to failure.
People are where they are because they are not convinced to change.
Entrepreneurs should see innovations as important force for moving forward.
• Operating within the law: Owners of firms should monitor the various company laws, edicts, decrees and policies and ensure that the business is being operated in line with the requirements of the government.
Firms must also operate according to customs, tradition and norms of the society of its location in particular.
• Avoidance of excessive borrowing: When a firm over-borrows, it exposes itself to excessive payment of interests.
Interests on payments are a fixed obligation.
A slack in business fortune will lead to a situation where such firm cannot service its loans.
This automatically results in failure.
Hence it is better to as much as possibly avoid unprofitable borrowings.
• Avoidance of undue expansion: A businessman should ensure that there is adequate consolidation of a given line of activities 173ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS before expanding into other areas.
Expanding too rapidly could lead to a situation where the resource which cannot satisfy company is being over-stretched to service more companies.
When this happens the business will fail so it should be avoided.
• Avoidance of loose credit policies: A firm that gives out goods on credit indiscriminately will surely fold up due to accumulation of bad debts.
Before allowing credit the credit worthiness of the customer should be taken into consideration.
• Optimum use of resources: The level of manpower and other resources employed should not be in excess of the tasks available.
Management should disengage all unwanted and redundant workers in order to keep the business on a sound footing.
Idle capital should be discouraged.
All resources should be optimised.
• Partnership and mergers: Based on certain challenges, a businessman should allow his firm to merge with other companies in order to avoid failure and for him to reap the gains of business synergy.
Merging is better than total failure.
• Rapport among partners: Constant squabble among partners or directors of any business concern should be avoided.
The operators of any given firm should always try to reach consensus without resorting to quarrels and long term disagreement.
• Emphasise knowledge and skills: A businessman should not go into any venture where he has very limited knowledge.
Over dependence on hired workers may instill pride on the workers thereby turning the owner of business into mere supplier of fund without skill.
There must be reliance on continuous staff training and merit.
• Consideration of location: This can make all the difference between the growth of two companies.
A firm that is disadvantageously located in terms of marketing should try to relocate to a more suitable area.
• Capital adequacy: There must be enough capital for the pursuit of a given line of business.
Apart from the initial owner’s fund, there should be opportunity for borrowing and a proportion of the company’s profit should always be ploughed back.
• Personal Discipline: This is very important since the success and failure depend on the attitude of the entrepreneur.
Discipline may 174ENT 201 MODULE 1 be in different aspects such as financial discipline, time discipline, behaviour and use of language.
Any person who is not time conscious most times ever meets up with appointments.
Ability to keep appointments religiously is a plus and if for any reason one may not be opportune to meet up, the other party should be informed early enough.
• Delegation of Authority: The entrepreneur cannot do all the work even if he knows them.
Teach the God-fearing, truthful, honest, and able-bodied employees the job and show them the way wherein they must walk and the work they must do “then you will have peace and live longer in prosperity”.
You can do this without losing control of anything.
• Keeping of Proper Accounting Records: This is relevant because it helps to check income and expenditure and fraud it is also important for reference purpose, for reporting purpose e.g.
to stakeholders, investors, government etc and for generating information from source document so as to be able to prepare financial reports.
• Other factors which may help to ensure the success of SMEs are dedication to duties, effective cost control mechanism, installation of safety provisions, avoidance of fire and other natural disasters by taking some degree of care, effective personnel management, ostentatious spending should be avoided while maintaining frugality.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What leads to business failure?
4.0 CONCLUSION A well articulated plan and strategies as well as proper mix of resources will prevent business failure.
5.0 SUMMARY Dedication to duty, the use of appropriate infrastructure and resources will lead to business success 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How can a businessman avoid business failure?
175ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Lawal, A.
A.
(1993).
Management in Focus Nigeria.
Abdul Industrial Enterprises.
176ENT 201 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 POSSIBLE PROJECTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 List of Possible Projects 3.2 Some Exportable Items and Where They are needed 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is just an additional piece of information which will appeal to those who are interested in embarking on some business ventures.
The list is inexhaustible.
This does not serve as a feasibility report.
I do hope you will find it useful.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objective is to enable the learner to have insight into some of the projects that he can venture into.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 List of Possible Projects Some examples of SMEs in Nigeria that you can start: fruit juices e.g.
orange, pineapple, apple, lemon cashew, coconut, etc.
rice milling, cotton seed oil, bakery and confectionary, melon seed oil, starch from cassava, sanitary wares, animal feeds, soyabeans cultivation, food processing, palm oil trade, 177ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS interior decorations, grain processing, fish farming, maize flour, wooden toys making, canned tomatoes, biscuit bakery, vegetable oil processing, yam flour, coconut processing, craft bag, oil mills, smoked fish factory, paper bags making, rice flour, soap and detergents, baskets & cane chairs, bone crushing, leather (footwear) production, leather tanning, chip board and glass nails, laminated photo frames, radio cabinets, honey extraction, cassava farming, cushion cover production, table napkins production, vegetable farming, furniture making, textiles production, glue manufacturing, hair brushes, tooth brushes, tooth picks, matches, thread, crayon manufacturing, fumigation and pest control, shoe polish, ruler manufacturing, production of tissue and serviette, corrugated, card-board boxes, etc.
mat making, planting and selling flowers, bolts, nuts and screws production, ceramic blocks, 178ENT 201 MODULE 1 concrete blocks, chalk manufacturing, pomade making, concrete poles and pipes, foundry, red bricks, pencil making, optical glasses, crown cork manufacturing, production of insecticides, paint manufacturing, staple pins, poultry wire net, barbed wire, steel rope, polythene bags, plastic toys, fasteners, tiles (floor and wall), wire mesh, production of chemicals, oil and gas servicing, table water production, panel beating, gem clips and safety pins production, bicycle spokes making, plant and hangers (steel wire) forging and machining plants to manufacture basic spare parts for the automobile industry, hinges and door locks, net and fencing wire, advertising specially, art gallery, auto driving school, marketing, recruitment centre, auto-mechanic service, bay-sitting services, beach concession, leisure centre, rental service, travel agency, transportation: passenger, haulage:- air, water or land, freight handling and management: air, water or land, estate agency, birthday, wedding and ceremonial cakes, 179ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS booking agency, building contractor, computer retail agency, GSM retail agency, health centre, cleaning services, cold room services, consultancy services, financial brokerage, stock brokerage, convenience shop, dancing school, day care and nursery centre, debt collection agency, duplicating, executive hair cut centre, fast food and snacks shop, magazine stand, laundering, scavenging, book binding, vulcanizing, refuse collection, hair dressing, music school, rubbish clearing, party organizing, secretarial school, remedial teaching, party equipment rentals, broom making bead making, raffia making, candle, plumbing, spraying, printing, videography, rabbitry, piggery, sheep and goat rearing, battery conditioning, iron founding, restaurant management, baby diapers production, t-shirt making 180ENT 201 MODULE 1 ice-block making nails manufacturing button manufacturing cornflakes welding electrodes black board dusters office files making carbon papers production hoses cotton wool production sale of machines tools production of industrial yeast from molasses production of adhesives party catering home delivery services newspaper vendring motor cycle transportation fleet production of printing ink advertising, broadcasting manufacturing and financing consultancy real estate consultancy building consultancy dredging and related engineering services electrical engineering, telecommunications, auditing, hotel development management travel agency courier services sale of agricultural equipment manufacturing of electrical and electronic domestic appliances, receivership and services, special corporate services, company secretarial services, manufacturing fabrication of aluminum windows and doors, installation of aluminum roofing sheets installation of aluminum doors and windows fabrication of suspended ceiling, partitioning system services, curtain walling marketing of plastic products, medical equipment, scientific equipment, manufacture and sale of crown caps, metal containers, screw caps, roll-on pilfer-roof caps, trinklets, 181ENT 201 MICRO CREDIT POLICIES AND INSTITUTIONS cotton buds, production of disinfectants manufacturing of fuel filters, warehousing, photography, production of fishing net, short term financing radio/television repairs and maintenance generator repairs and maintenance beauty saloons shoe repairing / cobbling watch repairing boutique-men’s, ladies, children’s or general Masonry 3.2 Some Exportable Items and Where They Are Needed Cocoa based beverages - Netherlands, UK, Holland, Republic of South Africa Gum Arabic - Tunisia; Cairo, Yugoslavia Napkins and Towels Guinea, Senegal (W. African Countries) Honey Germany, Italy, France, UK Cassava Kenya, Sweden, Germany USA Onions U.K. Germany, Italy, France Cosmetics - ECOWAS market Matches - ECOWAS market Handicrafts USA, UK.
Foam Products Chad, and Niger Republics Vegetables Europe Snails U.K. Mangoes USA, Germany, France Millet Saudi Arabia, U.K, Kuwait, Dubai Sweet potatoes Sweden Soya beans Germany, France, Italy, UK, Belgium Groundnuts Saudi Arabia Fruit juice Burkina Faso Cashew Netherlands Cement Chad, Niger Republic Animal feeds ECOWAS market, Sweden Ceramics and Tiles ECOWAS market Furniture Burkina Faso, Togo Insecticides Republic of Benin, Congo, Cameroun Carrot Saudi Arabia, Niger Republic Leather India, Korea, Poland, Sweden, Netherlands 182ENT 201 MODULE 1 Cow horns USA, Europe Ginger Germany, Finland, Holland, Sweden, Tunisia Cotton seed and lint U.K, Taiwan, Belgium, Yugoslavia 183
