NoneHCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT HCM 101: INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANGEMENT COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NOUN 2HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Introduction HCM 101 introduction to hospitality management is a one year, two credit unit foundation level course.
It will be available to all students to take toward the core module of their B. SC in Hotel and Catering.
It will also be suited as an “one-off” course for anyone who does not intend to complete an NOU qualification but want to learn the foundation of hotel and catering Management.
The course will consist of fifteen units, which involves basic Hotel and Catering principles, introduction of modern hotel and catering management systems.
The materials have been developed to suit students in Nigeria by adapting more practical examples from the local environment.
The course guide tells you briefly what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
What you will learn in this course The overall aim of HCM 101 Introduction to Hospitality Management is the introduce the fundamental principles and application of the managing hospitable industries such as, hotels, motels, guest houses and hospitals Course aims The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: 3 This course aim to give you an understanding of introduction to hospitality Management.
This will be achieved by aiming to; A Introduce you to the basic principles of Hospitality Management.
B Demonstrate how hospitality management can be applied to modern hotel and catering industry.
C Outline the design of hospitality management.
D Explain to you the current debate are the regulations and policies associated with government and the competition market.
E Give you an application of possible future development in hotel and catering management.
NOUN 3HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition, each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of the unit.
You should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may wish to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
Set out below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole On successful completion of the course you should be able to: 5.0 Explain the history of hospitality management 6.0 Describe classification of hospitality industry 7.0 Design the layout of hospitality industry 8.0 Identify hazards in hospitality industry 9.0 Explain security and safety in hospitality management 10.0 Illustrate the cleaning process in hospitality industry 11.0 Discuss accidents and preventions in hospitality industry 12.0 Discuss electrical and mechanical accidents in hospitality industry 13.0 Read and analyse staff welfare in hospitality industry 14.0 Discuss staff motivation in hospitality industry Working through this course The course should take you about 24 weeks in total to complete.
Below you will find listed to all components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate you time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Course material Major component of the course are: 1 Course Guide 2 Study Units 3 Textbooks 4 Assignment 5 Presentation Schedule NOUN 4HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Study Units There are fifteen units in this course as follows: Unit 1 The history of hospitality management Unit 2 Classification of hospitality management Unit 3 The house-keeping department Unit 4 Inter-departmental liaison Unit 5 Non-commercial hospitality management Unit 6 The layout of hospitality industry Unit 7 Guests rooms and properties Unit 8 Cleaning and cleaning equipments Unit 9 Security and safety in hospitality industry Unit 10 Hazards in hospitality industry Unit 11 Accident and prevention in hospitality industry Unit 12 Electrical and mechanical accidents in hospitality industry Unit 13 Staff welfare in hospitality industry Unit 14 Staff motivations in hospitality industry Unit 15 Factors affecting motivations in hospitality industry.
These fifteen units have been divided into four modules.
Each module consist of units of related topics.
First Module – consist of the first four units which deals with the introduction to hospitality management, the history, classification of hospitality management, the house-keeping and the co-operation expected among the various department in hospitality industry.
Second module – consist of four units (5, 6, 7 and 8) which explains non-commercial hospitality management, the layout of hospitality industry, the guest rooms and properties and lastly cleaning and cleaning equipment.
These are sequential topics which relates to one another.
Third module – also consist of four units (9, 10, 11, 12, 12) which deals with accidents and hazards in hospitality management/industry Fourth module – consist of three units (13, 14 and 15) which deals with staff welfare and motivations in hospitality industry.
Each study units consists of two to four weeks work and includes specific objective, directions for study, reading materials.
Each unit contains a number of staff test.
In general, these staff tests question you on the material you have just covered or required to apply it in some way and thereby help you to gauge your progress and to reinforce your understanding of the material.
Together with tutor- marked assignment, NOUN 5HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objective of the individual units and of the course.
Textbooks Your tutor should be able to recommend compulsory textbooks needed for the course and you should be able to afford to possess them Assignment File The marks you obtain in this assignment will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in assignment file itself.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course material gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember you are required to submit all your assignments by the due dates.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First is the tutor-marked assignment.
Second, there is a written examination.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of three hours duration.
This examination will also count for 40% of your total course mark.
Tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) There are seven tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You only need to submit six of the seven assignments.
You are encouraged, however to submit all the seven assignments in which case, the highest six of the seven marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% toward your total course mark.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reached your tutor on or before the dateline given in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time schedule, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and grades The final examination for HCM 101 will be of three hours duration and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which NOUN 6HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT reflect of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting the examination to revise the entire course, you might find it useful to review your self-test, tutor marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
Course marking scheme The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments Seven assignments, best six marks of the seven count at 1 – 7 10% each = 60% of course marks Final examination 40% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Course overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follows them.
WEEKS ASSESSMENT UNIT TITLE OF WORK ACTIVITY (END OF UNIT) Course Guide 1 Unit 1 The history of hospitality management 2 Assessment 1 Unit 2 Classification of hospitality management 3 Unit 3 The house-keeping department 3 Assessment 2 Unit 4 Inter-departmental liaison 3 Unit 5 Non-commercial hospitality management 2 Unit 6 The layout of an hospitality industry 2 Assessment 3 Unit 7 Guests rooms and properties 3 Unit 8 Cleaning and cleaning equipment 2 Assessment 4 Unit 9 Security and safety 3 Unit 10 Hazards in hospitality industry 3 Assessment 5 Unit 11 Accidents and preventions in hospitality industry 3 Assessment 6 Unit 12 Electrical and mechanical accidents 3 Unit 13 Staff welfare in hospitality industry 2 Unit 14 Staff motivations 2 Assessment 7 Unit 15 Factors affecting motivations 3 Revision 2 weeks Total number of weeks 42 weeks NOUN 7HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT How to get the most from this course In distance learning, the study units replace the University lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lectures instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way, that lecturer might get you some reading to do, the study units tells you when to read your set books or other materials.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction, next is a set of learning objectives.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
Self test are interspersed through out the units and answers are given at the end of the units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objective of the unit and prepare you for the assignment and the examination.
You should do each self test as you come to it in the study unit.
Observe the following strategies viz: i) Read this course guide thoroughly ii) Organised a study schedule and note the time you are expected to spend on each unit.
iii) Once you created your own study schedule, do everything possible to stick to it.
The major reason that student fails is that they get behind their course work iv) Turn to unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
v) Assemble the study materials and work through the units.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
vi) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objective, you can then start on the next unit.
Tutors and Tutorials Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor if you need help by any communication device available to you most especially.
If you do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings or if you have difficulty with the self-test or exercise or you have a question or problem with an assignment.
NOUN 8HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT You also try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
To gain the maximum benefit from the course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively Summary HCM 101 intends to introduce you to the fundamental principles of hospitality management.
Upon completion of this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of hospitality management.
You will be able to answer these kind of questions; 6.0 What does hospitality management means?
7.0 What are the principles of classifying hospital management?
8.0 What is an house-keeping department and the relationships with other department in hospital industry 9.0 What are the factors to consider in the layout of an hospital industry 10.0 The meaning of guests rooms, the properties and the maintenance.
11.0 The types of hazards, accidents and preventions in hospitality industry.
12.0 How can a hospitality management motivates her staff and the type of expected welfare packages for the workers.
Of course, the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the above list.
To gain the most from this course you should try to apply the principles of hospitality management that you encounter in everyday life.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
We equally wish you every success in your future career with National Open University (NOU) NOUN 9HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT HCM 101: INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANGEMENT COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developers Salami, R. A.
Unit Writers Salami, R. A. Programme Leader Course Coordinator NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA NOUN 10HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Module 1 UNIT 1 THE HISTORY OF HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 What is Hospitality Management 3.2 Hospitality Industry Defined 3.3 History of Hospitality management 3.3.1 History of Hospitality Management in Europe 3.4 History of hospitality management in Nigeria 3.4.1 The Second Stage (Nigeria Railways) 3.4.2 The Third Stage (1945) 3.4.3 The last Stage (1958) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the first unit of this course which explains the meaning of hospitality management and the history of hospitality history in Nigeria.
The learner will know the various stages of hospitality management development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (ii) Understand and explain precisely the meaning of hospitality management.
(iii) Understand the hospitality industries and the (iv) Industry of hospitality management industry.
NOUN 11HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.1 WHAT IS HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Hospitality management is the sum total organization involved in planning, controlling, supervising and co-ordinating all the human and other material resources which meant to provide comfort, conveniences, satisfaction and acceptable services to guests or any persons in a friendly and hospitable atmosphere in order to minimize complaints, uncomplimentary statements and to reduce waste of these resources.
Where do we receive hospitable services?
Move on to 3.2.
3.2 HOSPITALITY DEFINED This is an environment whose aims are to provide comfortable, suitable accommodation and safe catering services that is safe foods and drinks in a friendly hospitable and pleasing manner to whosoever needs such provisions.
Hospitality industry also provide ancillary services such as entertainment, car hire services, telephone and telex services or other e-mail services that is (electronic mail services) recreational services, laundry services and security services.
However it is to be noted that all the aforementioned services have to be paid for.
Examples of hospitality industries are Hotels, Motels, Guest- houses, Catering Establishment, Restaurant and Bars, Hospitals and Health Centres.
We shall come to them in a later part of this course unit.
3.3 HISTORY OF HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Self assessment question If you have a visitor from another town who arrive late, how will you receive him till the day break?
Explain.
The nature and structure of hospitality management can firstly be compared with our culture and tradition of providing a sleeping area and eating during our visit to a relative.
When we travel out of our home to visit a relation, that relative will cook food to eat, provide an area to sleep, water to drink and to bath.
Whether the relation’s gesture and provision for these services are appreciated will be determined by the satisfaction the visitor received and the impression he has about the way the hospitality treatment was handled.
This is the remote beginning of hospitality management in Nigeria.
To add more while you are still in your relation house, arrangement would be made on how to: (v) Keep your sleeping environment clean (vi) Sweep the room everyday (vii) Wash clothes if possible NOUN 12HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Likewise, the trends of hospitality management development graduated from cultural level to commercial and to a more technological advanced level.
The history of hospitality could therefore be traced to domestic hospitality.
This period witnessed the humble beginning of domestic accommodation.
The lodging of travelers and visitors from one geographical area, who for one reason or the other had to travel to other places.
Prior to that development time, travelers who needed accommodation, food and entertainment in their journeys depended solely on close relatives, friends and acquaintances to host them.
The same attitudes and behaviors are still very common in our society regardless of sex and occupational positions.
The reason is that Nigerians are so caring and hospitable.
3.3.1 History of Hospitality Management in Europe In Europe, traveling in the 18th century was an activity usually undertaken by a few wealthy, rich and educated individuals.
These travelers preferred to move together and when night came, they would all want to stay at a common place called INN, which was a public house where lodgings, drinks and meals were provided for a small amount of money or through trade by barter system.
Question: Do you still remember barter system?
This is the exchange of goods for goods or services for services.
Example, I have plenty shirts and trousers.
If I give you some of my foods, you will also in return give me some of your dresses.
This is trade by barter.
At this stage, the emphasis was on providing hospitality treatment rather than making financial profit.
In Europe, the era of monastries activities promoted building of missionary houses called Rest-houses catering rest houses.
Note well, monastries is a system of living together under one religion belief in the same area.
People were employed to assist to keep the place clean and provided foods,.
They were called INN-KEEPERS.
An influx in the number of Inn users increased demands for accommodation services that sifted the system to financial profit making ventures.
The missionaries while realizing the tremendous potentials in accommodation and catering services started to build more guest houses and more catering rest-houses in different locations.
NOUN 13HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.4 History OF Hospitality Management in Nigeria In Nigeria, hospitality industry began with the arrival of the missionaries on one and the trans-Saharan trade on the other hand.
The missionaries are the white men who brought religion of Christianity to Nigeria.
The work of the missionary necessitated them to build their rest houses and provided catering services after their evangelical work at the end of the day.
As they move from one geographical region to another in Nigeria, so they built rest-houses and catering rest-houses.
People were engaged and called the domestic servants.
An increase in the in the number of convert who became Pastors, Evangelists and Bishops were transferred to distant places.
Accommodation and catering services were provided for them.
This was how Rest-Houses and Catering Rest-Houses started in Nigeria 3.4.1 The Second Stage- (Nigeria Railways 1928) The second stage of hospitality management came when railway as a means of mechanized transport came to Nigeria in 1928.
The use of wagon in Nigeria encouraged more people to travel most especially from Lagos by rail to Kano.
The Hausas would come to the south to buy kola nuts while the Yorubas went to the north to buy groundnuts.
These traveling activities had another positive impact on hospitality industry as the demand for sleeping facilities and eating increased.
The first recognized catering organization was the Nigerian Railway Caterers Limited.
They contributed in no small measure to building of Guest Houses whose aim was to provide accommodation and catering services for their staff and other travelers.
It is also worth mentioning that inside the train wagons were provided sleeping beds, foods and drinks.
The era of railway in Nigeria was the period of people’s awareness about hotel and relaxation centres.
Government also started to invest in hotel industry, private individuals also participated.
3.4.2 The Third Stage (1945) After the second world war, (1939 – 1945), there was importation of cars into the country.
This also promoted urbanization because many roads were constructed to enable accessibility from one geographical area to another.
Roads were constructed by the then colonial government from north to west, west to south, south to east an east to the north.
More people had opportunity to travel far and near within the country for pleasure, relaxation, business and official work.
Hotels and Guest Houses were also on the increase to meet up with the demands while people were provided job opportunities.
NOUN 14HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.4.3 The Last Stage (1958) The final stage of hospitality management was the time when the civil aviation started operation in Nigeria.
This was the period of more sophisticated, technological advancement in transport industry.
Aircraft came to Nigeria, since that period, Nigeria started to receive international people called the foreigners, expatriate, international tourist.
The incoming of foreigners encouraged and promoted tremendous improvement on accommodation services and catering services to meet up with the international standards.
We had the Nigeria hotels Limited who was formerly the Nigeria Railway caterers Limited.
The first standard hotel of its kind was built in Kano called Central Hotel Kano.
Other Hotels operated under the Nigeria Hotels limited were: (viii) Premier Hotel in Ibadan (ix) Lafia Hotel in Ibadan (x) Ikoyi Hotel in Lagos (xi) Metropolitan Hotel in Calabar (xii) Hamdala Hotel in Kaduna (xiii) Airport Hotel in Lagos (xiv) Hill station Hotel in Jos Thereafter, Arewa Hotels Limited came as consultant and specialist in hospitality management and took over the management of these hotels - Daula hotel in Kano - Durba Hotel in kaduna and closed down - Durba hotel in Badagry in Lagos state - Kwara Hotels in Ilorin - Hawala Hotels in Bauchi - Zarander Hotel in Bauchi The Ibru organization in Nigeria also went into hospitality management business and is managing: Sheraton Hotel in Lagos Sheraton Hotel in Abuja Nicon-Nuga hotel in Abuja Self Assessment Question NOUN 15HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Explain briefly the role of missionaries in developing the hospitality in Nigeria Today we have many big, medium and small hotels in each state capital of the federation, while all are improving their services because the competition is keen.
It is only in the Federal Capital City (FCT) of Nigeria that the supply of hotel is lower than the demand.
This is due to the daily growing population of Abuja city.
Many young and old men and women are taking hotel and catering management as a professional and a very lucrative business except that it is capital intensive.
4.1 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the meaning of hospitality and the stages of hospitality industry development from traditional to advanced stage.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed the past and present history of hospitality management in Nigeria and the future potentiality.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT QUESTION ONE Explain Hospitality Management Industry?
QUESTION TWO What relevance has railway and motor car to the developments of hospitality management industry?
7.0 REFERENCE Hotel and Catering Supervision (Social and economic aspects of the industry.
)By Ken Gale and Peter Odgers, Published by Pitman, 1989, ISBN 0273 02 8162 Seminar papers on “Inaugural seminar 1 on Management of hotels and and the family support programme in the 21st century, Nigeria by Mrs. C. E. Ogunlade HOD Hotels and Catering Management .
Federal Polytechnic Ede.
NOUN 16HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 CLASSIFICATION OF HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT (INDUSTRY) TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Classification Of Hospitality Management (Industry) 3.1.1 Commercial Hospitality Management 3.1.2 Non-commercial Hospitality Management 3.1.3 Welfare Homes 3.2 Types of Hospitality Management 3.3 Hotel Industry – commercial Industry 3.3.1 Departments In hotel Industry (segments) 3.3.2 The Reception – Front office 3.3.3 Qualities Of a receptionist 3.4 Types Of Hotel 3.4.1 The First Class (Luxury Hotel) 3.4.2 The middle class Hotel 3.4.3 The Small size Hotel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the second unit of this course which clearly explains the classification of hospitality industry into three major categories.
This unit also explains hotel industry as an important hospitality management and also deals with some departments of the hotel industry.
Categorisation of hotel industry is also dealt with.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (xv) Understand different types of hospitality management (xvi) Differentiate between commercial and non-commercial hospitality management.
NOUN 17HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT (xvii) Know some details about departments in hotel industry (xviii) Know types/categories of hotel 3.1 CLASSIFICATION OF HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT I have explained the aim of hospitality industry as a welcome, receive and provide suitable accommodations and catering facilities in a friendly and satisfactory manner to whoso ever desires it.
Hospitality industry can be classified into the following categories, each with its specific functions and activities.
3.1.1 Commercial Hospital Management (Industry) As the name depicts and describes, it is purposely on money making and profit making organizations.
These types of hospitality management provide and sell accommodation, foods, drinks and other services.
It should be borne in mind that all hospitality management falls inside one common industry.
And that industry is known as a SERVICE INDUSTRY.
Remember that we have different types of industries in our environment such as: - Shoe manufacturing industry - Textile manufacturing industry - Upholstery manufacturing industry (furniture maker) - Textbook publishing industry - Soap making/manufacturing industry Self Assessment question Exercise: Can you write another 10 industries you are familiar with……………….
……………………………………………………………………………………… ……………………………………………………………………………………… ……………………………………………………………………………………… In the above industries, they produce different products; they use different raw materials, in all they belong to the same family which is PRODUCTION OF ITEMS.
Examples of commercial hospitality industry are:- - Hotels - Motels - Guest Houses and Catering Rest-Houses - Catering Establishment, Restaurant, Bar, Canteen, Snack Bar NOUN 18HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT - Industrial Catering Establishment We shall later discuss these one after the other.
3.1.2 Non-Commercial Hospitality Management These are the establishments whose intentions are not to make profit but rather to provide welfare services.
And for the fact that they do not commercialise, the industry does not mean that these services provided are poor or unsatisfactory.
It is not like that all the workers are being paid salaries and wages for the work they perform.
Examples of non-commercial and welfare hospitality industry are: (xix) Hospital (xx) Government Health Centres (xxi) Government Guest Houses (xxii) Armed Forces (xxiii) University Halls of Residence (xxiv) Post primary school Hostels 3.1.3 Welfare Homes Charity homes are provided both by the government, charitable organizations like ( The Rotary club of Nigeria, Red Cross Organisation), community organization and other philanthropic individuals.
Charitable homes are for the less privileged people such as the orphanage (fatherless and motherless children) school of deaf and dump (people who cannot talk and hear words) the blind (people who cannot see) and the handicapped like those children who cannot walk.
These homes provide comfort, accommodation, food and other essential and technical services to make these handicapped people to live and survive.
3.2 TYPES OF HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Hospitality management industry has been classified into three major parts, we shall now discuss different types of hospitality industry such as Hotel, motel, Guest Houses 3.3 HOTEL INDUSTRY - COMMERCIAL INDUATRY Definition: A hotel is an hospitality environment built either by an individual or a group of people or by state or by the federal government to welcome and receive guests in a friendly manner and to sell suitable accommodation and other ancillary services such as food and drinks to any normal person who appears physically fit and agreed to comply with the necessary documentations and instructions of the hotel and ready to pay for NOUN 19HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT the hotel services without prior contract.
By this definition, a hotel can provide services on the following conditions: - The person must appear sensible and physically fit (not at the point of death) or a mad man - An handicapped who appear well is not discriminated against except that he may need extra support and care - Who so ever is ready to document - Anybody who is ready to pay and not a fraudster for the services - No discrimination of sex, religion, race, tribe, occupation and nationality.
- No prior contract.
These includes hotel, motel and guest-houses 3.3.1 Segments of Hotel industry The operational segments or units or sectors of an hotel industry will largely depend on the size and the type of ancillary services it provides.
A big hotel will have more departments to cope with the administrative complexity than a medium size hotel.
However, we shall take a proper look at a very big hotel and discuss about the expected functioning departments.
One can therefore wish to learn from where to start or choose one’s personal carrier.
3.3.2 The Reception Department (Front Office) The reception department is the front office of any hotel industry either a first class, medium or small size hotel which I will soon talk about.
Reception is the most important section of a front office in a hotel.
Front office consist of (xxv) Lounge area (xxvi) Reception area (xxvii) Cashier unit (xxviii)Telephone unit (xxix) Car hire services unit (xxx) Manager’s or supervisor’s offices (xxxi) Porter or luggage boys.
Reception area is a place where customer’s activities, services and other enquires start and end.
The functions of the reception unit are: (1) To welcome guest in a friendly manner (2) To receive customers and attend to them (3) To provide necessary information about the hotel services to customers (4) To sell accommodation NOUN 20HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT (5) To direct both the residents and non-residents guests in the hotel on their enquiries like telephone, laundry and car hire services.
(6) To make accommodation booking /reservation The workers in this unit area are called the RECEPTIONISTS.
Young and fine boys and girls (18-25 years) are preferable.
The receptionist’s working environment should be well arranged and organized to prevent accident and unnecessary delays in attending to customers at the counter.
All the working materials and documents such as the arrival form, departure list, guest key cards and guest bill should be ready and handy.
LOUNGE AREA – This is a furnished area at the front office where guests are seated before the receptionist attends to them.
Guests are provided with newspaper, magazines and other journals to occupy them before the receptionist attend to them.
The place should be kept neat all the time.
Guest can smoke and have light refreshment such as tea, coffee, soft drinks and snacks.
THE CASHIER UNIT – Guest pays to the cashier and obtain receipt.
This enables the receptionist to release the room key.
THE TELEPHONE UNIT – There is a telephone operator to provide telephone services in the rooms or at the reception.
THE CAR HIRE SERVICES UNIT – Cars are offered for services on cash basis to guests who want to transact business or visit some places.
THE PORTER/LUGGAGE SECTION – They assist o carry loads to the rooms.
Self Assessment Question 1 Mention the function of a front office of a hotel?
2 What are the areas to be founding a front office of an hotel?
All the staff in the front office must especially the receptionists are expected to possess certain qualities to enable them deal successfully with the public.
They are the image makers of the hotel industry.
Any first impression that they show to the customer represent the impression which the guest will develop for the other departments and for the management as a whole.
The following qualities are non-negotiable.
NOUN 21HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.3.3 Qualities of a Receptionist A APPEARANCE – Regardless of sex, what a customer often notices first in entering the reception area is the receptionist’s appearance.
Nice, neat and befitting uniforms give pride and confidence.
This is the responsibility of hospitality management.
B ATTITUDE TO GUEST – Good manners and respectful ways of approach pay a lot of dividends to the management.
Receptionists are the most effective sales force and promoters through their level of discipline.
If there is an error on the part of the receptionist, he/she should be polite to say “am sorry sir or ma” or “Please, I am sorry sir/ma”.
C SALESMANSHIP TECHNIQUE – The receptionist should possess a good acumen to sell accommodation and promote sales of other available services.
This quality is highly desirable.
They should be able to persuade guests to accept or buy certain services in the hotel.
D HONESTY – Receptionist must not go beyond the limit of his responsibility.
He should be very trust worthy and transparent in his dealings both with the customers and the management E MEMORY – A good receptionist must have memory and knowledge of nearly all the hotels in his area and if possible with their telephone numbers, tourist attraction centres and other location of interest.
3.4 TYPES OF HOTELS Hotel can further be sub-divided into first class or luxury hotel, medium class hotel and small size hotel.
3.4.1 First Class Hotel (Luxury hotels) First class hotel are very expensive, lavishly furnished, very big in size, provides all types of services ranging from accommodation, food, drinks (alcohol/non alcohols) laundry, telephone and other electronic mail delivery services, car hire , swimming pool, entertainment (night clubs) banquets functions, room services recreational/games facilities and have big staff strength.
The organisation is very wide.
The number of rooms ranges from 300 bedrooms to over 500 bedrooms by the Nigerian standard of hotel classification.
NOUN 22HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Motel and guest houses do not fall within these categories.
They are small to be regarded as luxury or first class hotel.
This is because of their standard of services, the size of the organisation, the staffing and the facilities available are for the lower than the first class hotel.
Examples of first class or luxury hotel in Nigeria are: (xxxii) Sheraton Hotel, Lagos (xxxiii)Durba Hotel, Badagry (xxxiv)Federal palace suites Hotel Lagos (xxxv) Chelsea Hotel, Abuja (xxxvi)Premier Hotel Ibadan (xxxvii)Kwara Hotel, Ilorin (xxxviii)Metropolitan hotel Calabar (xxxix)Nigon –Noga Abuja.
3.4.2 Medium Size Hotel The numbers of rooms are not as many as thee first class usually between 100 rooms and above.
They offer wide range of services like the first class hotel.
The major different is the size of the establishment and the number of staff strength.
By the Nigerian standard, the following are medium size usually owned by individual, business men, They have 100 bedrooms and above.
(xl) Confluence beach Hotel Lokoja (xli) Royal Tropical Hotel Kano (xlii) Airport Hotel Lagos (xliii) Zaranda Hotel Bauchi (xliv) Agura Hotel, Abuja Motels and Guest Houses do nor fall within this category.
3.4.3 Small Size Hotel They are less furnished and the number of guest rooms is lesser than the medium size hotel.
Many services are not available and the size of the establishment is small, the staff strength is also small while the number of functioning department is reduced.
Here no demarcation between the front office and the receptionist unit.
The receptionist performs all the duties of the front office.
Small size hotels have less than 50 bedrooms.
Motels, Guest Houses are considered as small size hospitality industry.
Self Assessment Question Differentiate between first class, medium and small hotels NOUN 23HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that hospitality management means how to cater for people in a friendly and cheerful manner to enable the guest appreciate your services.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed the importance of hospitality management to our traditional, social and economic life.
Hotel industry is one of the commercial industries in hospital management industry which shall continue in the next unit 3.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question one 1 Explain the differences between commercial and non-commercial hospitality wth examples.
2 Explain front office of an hotel and their function.
7.0 References Hotel, Hotel and hospital House-keeping – 3rd edition by Joan C Branson, Margaret Lennox, Published by Edward Arnold 1976.
ISBN 0 7131 1974 8 Theory and practice of catering and hotel management by R.A. Salabi , Published by Tamaza Publishing company Limited 1st Edition ISBN 978-204- 04 -3 NOUN 24HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 THE HOUSE KEEPING DEPARTMENT TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 The House –Keeping Department- commercial 3.1.1 Duties expected of a House-keeper 3.1.2 An organizational Chart for a Small Hotel 3.1.3 An organization Chart for Medium and Big Hotel 3.1.4 The Supervisors 3.1.5 The Room Stewards 3.1.6 The Florist 3.1.7 The laundry Men 3.1.8 The Cleaners 3.2 The duty roster 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assessment 7.0 References and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this third unit, I will continue with the house keeping department of the hotel industry.
Remember that I have only discussed about the reception (front office) as a department.
The House –keeping is the second major department to discuss.
In this section, you will learn about the importance of this department in hospitality industry and the types of organization which is expected to take place.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, the leaner will be able to: (xlv) Understand the role house-keeping department plays in hotel industry.
(xlvi) Know how to organize house- keeping department (xlvii) Know that you can become a professional office holderin hospitality industry.
NOUN 25HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.1 THE HOUSE KEEPING DEPARTMENT- COMMERCIAL House-Keeping in any hotel, motel or guest houses play eminent role in the life of such establishment.
This department has a lot of responsibilities to perform in hospitality industry, be it commercial, welfare or charity.
In hotels, motels and guest houses, the department is noted to be the financial backbone of such organization.
This is due to accommodation it sells whose turnover is highest when compared with what other departments contribute to the daily, monthly or yearly turnover.
Therefore, no serous hospitality industry plays toy with the organization affairs of house-keeping.
The responsibility of the house-keeping department is usually that of a woman.
Majority of the hotels prefer female (a woman) with accumulated wealth of experience to administer the house keeping.
The preference of a woman to a man is believed that women are generally neater, more careful and keep better home (domestic) than men.
Although there is no hard rule or law that stipulate a man not to be a house-keeper.
The supervisor or the assistant can be either male or female.
The room stewards are males.
Females are not allowed to be bed room stewardess due to tendency of sexual sensation which can arise from male guest.
3.1.1 The Duties Expected of a House-keeper The duties of house-keeping in any establishment are the same.
Below are some of the major duties.
A A good house-keeper coordinates very well her staff to ensure that work goes on smoothly without complaints.
B She also coordinate well with other functioning departments of the hotel as she constantly conducts inspection round the premises.
C She is generally responsible for the maintenance of high standard of cleanliness and environmental sanitation of the establishment.
She organizes her staff to cover these assignments, the front office, general toilets, corridors, external premises, offices, staff rooms, gutters, the lounge and disposal of waste and litters fall under the house-keeping.
D She inspects occasionally but ensures that guest rooms are decent, neat, well dressed and ready for occupation on time schedule.
E She administers, plans, control all the items meant for house-keeping use.
She has a store where she keeps all the material.
NOUN 26HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT F She recommends to the management, what and what would be required so as to maintain the standard of services and if possible improve on it.
G She plans duty roster H She orders and issues items and keeps records I She keeps and controls the following • master and sub-marked keys • lost and found items with the register detailing them • hotel inventory book and records • first aid box • all cleaning agent, tools and linens store • daily room situation report book J It is also the responsibility of the house-keeper to concerns herself with the floral decoration of the rooms, the lounge, front office, some managers’ office and in most cases the restaurant K The security of guest and their luggage, including safe guarding the whole house-keeping department’s properties against theft and fire hazard, and prevention of other hazards are parts of her prime concern.
L The House-keeper should establish good working relationship with the maintenance and engineering department, otherwise she will be failing herself and the whole hotel management.
Any hotel, motel or guest house which allows it self to suffer maintenance problems will have all the room facilities and equipment spoilt and packed up.
Consequently, customers will be denied satisfaction services and series of complains will be forth coming which indicates that all is not well.
This shows signs of poor organization with corresponding bad services to the guests.
M She delegates authority or her assistance N She disciplines her staff when necessary.
In a big establishment, she recommends for staff dismissal.
She can also engage and employ staff that is she can engage casual workers as well as permanent worker.
NOUN 27HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.1.2 An Organization Chart for a Small Hotel Figure A HOUSE-KEEPING ORGANISATION HOUSE-KEEPER SUPERVISOR HEAD ROOM HEAD STEWARD LAUN DRYMAN ASST.
HEAD ROOM STEWARD LINEN ATTENDANT STEWARDS CLEANERS Figure A: This types of organization is suitable for a small hotel, motel or guest house where the head of the house-keeping is a supervisor either a male or a female.
There is only one Head steward with assistant.
The number of assistants depends on the number of stewards that he is assigned to control or the number of rooms.
The number of stewards also depends on the volume of responsibilities assigned to them.
We shall soon discuss about its duties of the stewards.
Self Assessment Question: List as many duties of a House-keeper NOUN 28HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.1.3 AN ORGANISATION CHART FOR A MEDIUM, LARGE HOUSE-KEEPING DEPARTMENT FIGURE B HOTEL HOUSE-KEEPER ASST.
HOUSE-KEEPER SUPERVISORS HEAD HEAD STEWARDS FLORIST LAUNDRYMAN STUDENTS LINEN STEWARDS ON I.T.F ATTENDANCE CLEANERS Figure B The type of organization in figure B is suitable for a medium or big size hotel.
There is always one house-keeper in the house-keeping department.
The only difference can be the level of responsibilities and the job description.
NOUN 29HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT THE ASSISTANT HOUSE-KEEPER- The number of the assistant house keepers depends on the size of the house-keeping department which also depends on the levels of responsibilities assigned to each of them.
The house keeper plans and decides the number of rooms under her control.
The assistant house-keeper may not necessarily be more than two in a big hotel.
But in a medium size it can be limited to only one.
3.1.4 The Supervisors The number of supervisors depends on the number of rooms or chalets allocated for control and supervision purpose.
There is no fixed number of rooms.
It all depends on the organization.
However, the supervisors perform great task in ensuring that rooms are properly cleaned.
They follow up the room standards performance to minimize mistakes and errors.
Their function in maintaining high standard of cleaning rest solely on the efforts they put in.
And that is why their number are reasonable in both medium and big size hotel.
They take order and instruction from the house-keeper 3.1.5 The Room Steward The hotel management and or the house-keeper should be very careful about the recruitment and engagement of bedroom attendants either in a small, medium or big hotel, especially those that will work in guest bedrooms.
The duties of the stewards entail a high degree of honesty and trust, because this staffs often come into intimate touch with the quests valuables in the rooms.
It is not uncommon to see hotel guest dragging the house-keeper or hotel manager to the police station because their property is missing and they hold their room steward responsible for the loss.
Owing to high incidence of theft in hotel rooms either a small, medium or big size are now warning and advising their respective guests to always deposit their valuables items for safe-custody, otherwise, these hotels management shall no longer be held liable for any losses in the room.
Below are the duties performed by the steward.
DUTIES OF BEDROOM STEWARDS a) Cleaning quest rooms, toilets, baths, dressing beds with clean bed linens (bed sheet) putting toiletries that is the quest soap, tissue paper (toilet roll) b) Clearing away used plate, drinking glasses, cutlery and service trays which were served by the room service stewards.
c) Reporting any damage and fault promptly to the supervisor who then informs the house keeper or directly call the attention of the maintenance NOUN 30HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT department if such s fault can be rectified within the shortest possible time.
d) Sending dirty bed linens and guest laundry to the laundry room.
e) They also assist the house-keepers in these ways by: f) Reporting stolen property, lost and found articles in a vacated room as well as forgotten items.
g) Reporting any suspicious matter and bad habits about guests.
h) Keeping vigilance on the rooms while working by ensuring that unauthorized people are not loitering round the rooms.
3.1.6 The Florish She is responsible for all floral arrangement and decorations throughout the year.
This position is not important as the house-keeping.
Supervisor normally undertakes this responsibility.
Some establishment can even contract out this job to a flower contractor.
3.1.7 The Laundry Headman This is another sub-section of house-keeping department.
It is equally important integral part of the house-keeping.
It major functions are: a) To receive hotel linens such as the guest rooms, bed sheets, pillow cases, blankets, restaurant table clothes, serviette clothes, staff uniforms and guest laundry (guest clothes).
b) To wash these materials and iron them properly.
c) To account for the guest laundry.
d) To return these items safely without any damages.
3.1.8 The Cleaners The hotel cleaners are responsible for: 1 Cleaning the corridor in medium or big hotels (but in a small, the steward do the cleaning of corridor) the stair cases 2 Sweeping and cleaning the external premises of the hotel like the gutters, entrance, car park, removal of cobwebs, throwing away debris in to the dust bin, emptying dustbins into the nearest refuge dump.
3 Engaging in odd jobs like carrying heavy furniture.
4 Sweeping and cleaning offices, lounge area, front offices.
5 Assisting the steward in major cleaning.
NOUN 31HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT DUTY ROSTER INHOUSE-KEEPING This is a list of staff names indicating the time of their duties and when they are off-duty either on weekly, bi-weekly or monthly basis.
The house keeper prepares it, a copy goes to each of the supervisor, one to the assistant house keeper and one copy is for the house-keeping notice board.
The purpose of a duty roster is to enable each staff to know the exact time to report for duty and to close.
It is very useful because some staff are always assuming.
“I thought I was on afternoon duty” when he is expected in the morning duty.
STAFF DUTY ROSTER OR ROTA S/NO STAFF POST MON TUE WED THUR FRI SAT SUN NAMES 1 Mr. A STEWARD OFF M M A A M M 2 B “ A OFF A M M M M 3 C “ A A OFF M M M A 4 D CLEANER M M M OFF A M A 5 E “ A A A M OFF A M 6 F STEWARD M A M M M OFF M 7 G “ M A M A M M OFF 8 H “ M A M OFF M A M 9 I “ OFF M A A A A M 10 J CLEANER A M OFF A A A A 11 K “ M M A M M OFF A KEY M = Morning duty 6.30am – 2.30pm A = Afternoon duty 2.00pm – 10pm Total number of Staff 11 The above format s used to complete higher number of staff.
Staff Assessment Question a) Who is a bedroom steward?
b) Who is a florist?
c) Who is a laundry man d) Who is a Supervisor NOUN 32HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt about the meaning and the importance of house- keeping department in hotel, motel and guest houses 5.0 This unit has revealed how a house-keeping department is organized and you have known the different functions each level of staff perform from the house-keeper to the bedroom steward.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Questions 1 Explain some of the function of house-keeping department 2 Explain briefly 10 duties of an house-keeper 7.0 References Hotel, Hotel and hospital House-keeping – 3rd edition by Joan C Branson, Margaret Lennox, Published by Edward Arnold 1976.
ISBN 0 7131 1974 8 NOUN 33HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Unit 4 INTER-DEPARTMENTAL CO-OPERATION (LIAISON) IN HOTEL INDUSTRY TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Understanding Inter-Departmental co-operation (Liaison) 3.1 House-keeping and Reception 3.2 House-keeping and kitchen/Restaurant 3.3 House-Keeping and Maintenance (Engineering services dept) 3.4 Other Inter-departmental Co-operation in Hotel 3.4.1 Reception and Accounts Department 3.4.2 Reception and Restaurant 3.4.3 Administrative Department and all other Departments 3.5 Importance of the Hotel Industry 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the fourth unit of this course –Introduction to hospitality management.
Remember that I am still discussing the segments or units or department of a hotel industry using a big hotel or first class as a reference which has all the expected functioning departments.
I have discussed reception (front office).
I have started with the house-keeping in unit three.
Unit four will complete discussion about the house-keeping department.
In unit four, you will learn about the inter-departmental co operation that should exist between the house-keeping and other department of the hotel.
NOUN 34HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Understand the meaning if inter-departmental co-operation in hotel industry • Know the importance of this responsibility • Understand the different co-operation expected to exist among various department of the Hotel.
3.0 UNDERSTANDING INTER-DEPARTMENTAL CO- OPERATION (LIAISON) Inter-departmental co-operation or liaison is a mutual understanding and an agreeable relationship between an hotel house keeper and other heads of department.
The objective is to bring efficient and satisfaction both to the customers at large and to the management as a whole.
Efficiency and satisfaction are the direct functions of good services that make an hotel to be regarded as not only good but perfect.
A good hotel portrays good management 3.1 HOUSE-KEEPING AND RECEPTION The house-keeping and the reception departments should agree to a great extent, understand the duty of each other.
These two units are very much inter-related even more than any other two units of an hotel industry.
Hence it can be said that one department cannot exist and function very well exclusive of the others.
If there is no reception, house-keeping department cannot exist to perform well and vice-versa in a well organized hotel, be it a small or big hotel in as much as guest rooms are involved.
Another factor to consider is the fact that any problem which adversely affects one department will also directly or indirectly affect the other negatively.
These two sections are complimentary department of an hotel.
Below are some of their relationships: A Reception provides and give useful information to customer about the atmosphere of the bedrooms and chalets like the facilities available thereby selling house-keeping products.
B Reception also provides essential information to the house keeping about room reservation time of arrival and if necessary any special requests that should be met or provided before checking in.
NOUN 35HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT C The house-keeping also depend on the reports prepared by the reception about the daily occupying rate (that is the number of rooms occupied when compared with the one not sold) the occupied rooms and vacant rooms.
(vacant rooms are rooms not sold during daily business hour.)
D The Reception relies much on the information and report on the rooms situations example faulty rooms, dressed and undressed rooms, vacant rooms , occupied rooms, rooms under repairs etc to enable the receptionist know the rooms that are available for sale .
E The reception also informs the house-keeping about guests who are on daily checking out list.
F The house-keeping also informs the reception about guests forgotten and found article for the possible return of same to the owner.
Self Assessment Question What do you understand by the word Liaison 3.2 HOUSE-KEEPING AND KITCHEN/RESTAURANT The essential co-operation are: 1 Room service to the resident guest is very vital as it yields a good proportion of hotels revenue.
The food and beverage service staff should ensure that food ordered for are promptly and satisfactorily served.
2 All the restaurant table clothes, serviette cloth and staff uniform in the kitchen/restaurant sent to the house-keeping laundry are to be attended to as quickly as possible and be brought back at a reasonable time.
3 All the used plates are brought out of rooms by the house –keeping room steward while the restaurant room service waiters collect the plates and sent to the kitchen wash up area.
3.3 HOUSE-KEEPING AND MAINTENANCE (ENGINEERING SERVICES DEPARTMENT) I have briefly emphasized the importance of these two departments to each other.
It is the prime concern and priority of the house-keeper this time to ensure that good working relationships with this department are established.
Otherwise she will fail herself, disgrace herself and disappoint management expectations.
The mutual relationships are: 1 The house-keeping informs the maintenance about faults either minor or major for their prompt action.
NOUN 36HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 2 Reporting any damaged and broken items in the rooms for repair or replacement.
3 Maintenance department has sub-sections like the electrical section, plumbing section, carpentry section; the house-keeper should know these sections and know their foreman in charge of each unit 4 For any major fault in the room, the house keeper can invite an outside contractor with the approval from the overall Manager o the whole establishment.
5 She ensures that she is used to a particular contractor as it is dangerous engaging different hands on a particular repair.
The life span of such equipment will not last long.
Secondly, she will not be able to access which of the workmen (contractor) are really doing a good job 3.4 OTHER INTER-DEPARTMENTAL CO-OPERATION IN HOTEL 3.4.1 Reception and accounts department The recognized liaisons that exist between the reception and accounts department concerns billing of quest account.
The reception must exercise proper care to ensure that all expenses and payments are posted correctly.
It is always difficult to recover money from the guest after he has checked out.
Even if such a customer comes back in future, there is no assurance that the hotel can recover the money even where there is a clear evidence of indebtedness.
The customer may refuse to pay.
This types of situation should be avoided as it usually develops into a hot argument which can lead to a breach of peace and future loss of patronage.
It is also the responsibility of the reception to inform the accounts department through their record about the daily room occupancy, the sales made and the discounts allowed 3.4.2 Reception and Restaurant There is a need for a good communication channel to exist between these two departments.
The expected co-ordination task between these departments is prompt release of information on he activities of one department which may require the services of the other.
Any confirmed booking either for a group of people, organization, clubs, seminar, workshops which originate from the NOUN 37HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT reception should be notified the restaurant department, most especially if the guests are to be provided with catering services like foods and drinks.
The necessity for this advance information is firstly to enable the restaurant manager or food and beverage manager to liaise with the chef (the head cook) and to make necessary food items available before the arrival day.
Secondly, it prevents the embarrassment which lack of information usually cause.
Thirdly, all the kitchen/Restaurant staff will be well briefed about the necessary arrangement to be made.
Such information from the reception to the restaurant department includes the following: • the date of arrival and time • the date of departure and time • the number of nights • the number of guests • the type of menu required, most especially, if the guest are trainers, though the food and beverage Manager may likely handle the aspect of the catering including the price • the limit on individual food consumption and whether alcohol is inclusive, 3.4.3 Administrative Department and Other Department It is administratively important that as well organized hotel has means and strategies of coordinating and managing the affairs of all department either in a small, medium, large hotels, motels, guest houses working toward common objective.
It is a sign of poor management (mal-administration) of each department is allowed to operate on its own without any form of control, checks and balances.
A system whereby there is an absolute absence of monitoring of activities and no constant and regular reports from the various heads of departments (HOD) depict ineffective administration.
The administrative department is therefore expected to shoulder its full responsibility by correcting these deficiencies.
Major responsibilities include controlling, directing, supervising and monitory the performance of all the sales and other functioning departments.
An administrative department is like an umbrella under which all other department find protection.
It is a powerful department that formulate policy, takes crucial and vital decisions on important matters as it affects the operations and management as a whole.
In addition, the administrative department provides company’s guidelines on rules and regulations meant to be enforced by the H.O.D.
Senior staff and intermediate staff recruitment, job description, job specification, termination and dismissal, pension, gratuity, promotion and appraisal are paramount NOUN 38HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT functions of the administrative department.
The junior staff appointment and discipline and termination are the responsibility of the heads of department in a large or medium size hotel.
General staff welfare, staff job security, safety hazards and health care are also the concern of administrative department.
Furthermore, in monitoring the general performance of other department of the hotel, the administrative department assesses the performance, progress and contribution of each department towards the growth and development of the hotel.
This assists management to detect out the departments that need more administrative or financial assistance with a view to improving performances.
It follows that an hotel’s administrative department should possess capable competent and well experience personnel who can perform all the functions enumerated above.
The administrative department in addition to her tasks, sets sales and profit targets for each sales department which makes possible objectives and evaluation of the achievement possible.
The functions of administrative department of the hotel solely rest on the overall boss who is either a Director, Managing Director, General Manager of hotel, either in a 10 bedroom chalet 50 bedrooms hotel 300 and above, there is a dire need for an effective administration.
The role and value of leadership in hotel industry must not be underestimated and it is non-negotiable if he aim of hospitality industry must be a reality at all time.
Self Assessment Question List the importance of co-operation among house-keeping department and the maintenance department.
3.5 IMPORTANCE OF THE HOTEL INDUSTRY Lastly we shall round up this unit by considering economic, social and other societal benefits of hotel industry.
(a) EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY: Hotel industry is an employer of lab our requiring the services of educated and not too educated, skilled labour, semi-skilled labour and un-skilled labour.
(b) NATIONAL PRODUCTIVITY: It increases the number of Nigerians who are working and not only just eating foods like the children and students NOUN 39HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT (c) AN INFLOW OF FOREIGN CURRENCY: When foreigners come to Nigeria and stay in hotels, they money which they earned in their country are spent in Nigeria.
By this method more foreign money (currency) comes to Nigeria.
(d) TOURIST ATTRACTION CENTRES: Modern hotels with modern technological and architectural designs are worth visiting.
Many Nigerians and even some foreigners (Tourists) go to these places to relax and go back to their home and destination.
(e) SECOND HOME: Hotel acts as a second home to people who go and put up inside Hotels have sleeping facilities and catering facilities.
(f) SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT/FUNCTIONS: People who have social engagements like wedding reception, open traditional dance without adequate space often go to hire spaces hotel for these type of functions.
Seminars, Workshops, Conferences are also organised in hotels.
One hotel generates revenue from these type of functions while the society also benefits by satisfying and achieving their objectives.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learn about the interdepartmental co-operations among various departments of the hotel and the importance of hotel industry in our society.
15.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed the relevance of the functioning departments of the hotel to have mutual understanding to enable them work as one team and achieve one common goal objective.
16.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT QUESTION I What type of co-operation do you expect to exist between the house-keeping and the Reception department?
NOUN 40HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT QUESTION II List some of the importance of hotel industry to your society.
REFERENCES Theory and Practice of Catering and Hotel Management 1st Edition by R.A Salami Published by Tamazo Publishing Co. Ltd – 1994 (SBN 978 – 2104 04 – 3) Hotel, Hostel and Hospital House-Keeping 3rd Edition by Joan C. Branson Margaret Lennox Published by Edward Arnold 1976 NOUN 41HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 NON-COMMERCIAL HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Non-Commercial (welfare) Hospitality Management 3.1 Meaning of Non-commercial Hospitality Management 3.2 Organisation of Non-commercial Hospitality Management 3.2.1 The house-keeping Department 3.2.2 The Catering services Department 3.2.3 The laundry Department 3.2.4 The store Department 3.2.5 The Maintenance Department 3.2.6 The Personnel Department 3.2.7 The Accounts Department 3.2.8 The Security Department 3.3 University Halls of Residence and Hostels 3.4 The Welfare/Juvenile Homes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the fifth unit of this course.
In this unit, you will learn about the meaning of Non-commercial Hospitality Management and how it is being organized.
You will also learn about types of non-commercial hospitality management.
Remember that previous unit dealt with commercial hospitality management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Understand what non-commercial hospitality management is all about.
- Understand how to manage non-commercial hospitality industry - Know the differences between commercial and non-commercial hospitality management.
NOUN 42HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.0 NON-COMMERCIAL (WELFARE) HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.1 MEANING These are welfare services industry established by the government and in some cases by philanthropists to bring reliefs to certain individuals in our society who are suffering and dying and still are spending huge sum of money on accommodation bills in the private sector of the hospitality industry.
It is part of any sensible government functions and commitment to provide free health delivery system to the society, Hospitals and welfare homes are established purposely not to make profit but to cater for the wellbeing of the society in which I and you belong to.
Once again, let us remind ourselves about the types of non-commercial hospitality management available in our society.
- The hospitals and health centres - The armed forces - University halls and residence - Post Primary school hostels - The welfare/juvenile homes The history of development in non-commercial industry is alike to the same ways the commercial hospitality developed.
The missionaries greatly assisted by building hospitals in various parts of the country.
Some are still functioning very well till today.
Examples are: The ECWA Eye Hospital in Kano and The ECWA Hospital, Egbe in Kogi state And other places are where these missionaries first settled down.
Even though hospital industry falls under the non-commercial hospitality, the rapid development in the industry had encouraged its commercialization.
We now have medical doctors establishing their private hospitals and clinics and are making money.
We have individual people who consider hospital management as profit making and thereby established big hospitals.
On the other hand, we can justify hospital as non-commercial from the historical background.
Traditionally, we still experience where birth deliveries are free of charge in he villages and also some churches in the urban centres.
The active involvement and participation by the private individuals to commercialise the non-commercial hospitality industry is mainly due to the fact that the government of the day could not cope with the demands of free health delivery programme by building new hospitals.
In a NOUN 43HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT nut shell, the personnel in hospitality industry either private or government owe it a duty and sense of responsibility to provide efficient hospitable services in a friendly, cheerful and satisfying manners.
It is ti be borne in mind that hospitals fall under service industry.
I have already cited service industry.
Self Assessment Question Can you list ten service industries you are familiar with.
3.2 ORGANISATION OF NON-COMMERCIAL HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Human efforts and endeavours that make use of personnel and material resources deserve proper and efficient organization to prevent failure, disappointment and total collapse.
The house-keeping services in halls of residence, hostels, welfare homes and in hospital fall under the leadership of somebody in the management set up.
In hospitals, we have patience patients who are the guests in the wardrooms.
In Schools and University, we have student who are the guests in hostel or hall of residence.
Even in welfare homes, we have the handicapped who are the guest in he dormitory.
All these places must be kept cleaned, properly looked after, carry out the necessary repairs, the bed linens (bed sheets, pillow cases for he patients use, staff uniforms) have to be properly taken good care.
Not only this, they need catering services.
Foods and drinks on dietary recommendations for the patience has to be provided.
Even though the undergraduate in the University are no longer fed by he government, the student have to be fed regardless whether their parent have paid for it or not.
The food for the student are usually subsidied.
As we have small, medium and large hotels, we also have hospitals classified into these categorily.
The number of bedrooms equally determines the size of the establishment.
Though some are medically specialized on certain field than others.
Example are: – Nationals Orthopeadic hospital who specialist on bones treatment and fixtures.
– Eye Specialist hospital who specialise on eye treatment.
– Specialist hospitals specialise on certain areas of medical treatment.
In the University halls of residence and student hostel, the number of residential blocks and halls determine the size of the house-keeper.
In NOUN 44HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT University a block of building may contain 50 rooms and each room, and each room contain two or three undergraduate student.
In secondary school, there is a big hall where beds are arranged side by side along the wall.
The little name for personnel in hospital and educational house-keeping differs from hospital to hospital, sometimes the word ‘Officer’ is often use like the domestic officer, or matron to mean the head of the house keeping under whose jurisdiction we find catering service.
There are many departments in hospital industry as we have it in hotel industry and there is need for proper co-ordination and inter department understanding among them.
The following are some notable department that arte actually involve in the management of the industry.
The house keeping department The catering department The laundry department The store department The estate engineering services department (maintenance) The personnel department The account department The security department The above organization is for the big hospital establishment.
Some small hospitals have no catering department.
In that situation, patients rely on the food brought from outside or from the relations.
So also maintenance of equipment and facilities are on contract basis.
The account department/personnel may be handled by the secretary or the office clerk 3.2.1 House –Keeping Department This department headed by either a Matron, senior domestic officer or a house-keeper performs all the functions of hotel house-keeper to avoid repetition.
3.2.2 The Catering Department This department provides specific and particular recommended foods to patents in their ward.
The type of cooking and ingredients use vary as cooking is done o specific instruction.
Some patients may not require salt in their food or sugar e.g NOUN 45HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.2.3 The Laundry Department These cater for washing of hospital linens as we have it in hostel industry.
This can be washing machine, or manual or by contract.
3.2.4 The Store Department It issue both provision, food items to the catering department as well as items to be used in the house-keeping department within the patient ward or I he theathre.
3.2.5 THE MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT Function in he same way as the hotel maintenance time.
3.2.6 Personnel Department It deal with staff matters, staff welfare, employment, termination, training, promotion and other administrative functions.
3.2.6 The Account Department Keeps record of all transaction, both the expenditure ad the revenue The security department provides security to lives, properties and environment of the hospital industry 3.3 UNIVERSITY HALLS OF RESIDENCE AND HOSTEL I n the past, University student ate in the campus cafeteria.
Self service was I operation and tray service.
Students lined up with their tray and food is dished on the service plate.
Student ate by giving tickets to the cooks.
Now a day such facilities have been stopped.
No more laundry service.
What is obtainable in the hostel now is repairs of room facilities by the engineering department.
Such repairs include: roof leakage and repairs, faulty toilet, maintaining cleanliness of the campus, corridors, window glasses etc which fall under the house-keeping Planting of tress are normally contracted out and goods landscaping system.
Planting of flowers and potted plants NOUN 46HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT In the past, primary school student are provided with catering service, the breakfast lunch and dinner are provided daily through each school term.
The school Matron controls both the catering services and the dormitory.
The level of staff is very low.
Students in secondary school assist to keep their surrounding clean with few cleaners employed by the school authority to look after the strenuous job.
The student sweeps their dormitory, lay beds, wash their toilets and bath rooms.
The school authority undertakes few maintenance jobs such as repairs of leaking roof, falling doors and windows and replacement of iron beds such as single type and double decker type.
Self Assessment Question List all the departments you know in a big hospital.
3.4 THE WELFARE/JUVENILE HOMES The responsibilities of looking after the handicapped and the less privilege children rest upon the school head (principal) and the welfare officers.
The school principal must be someone who is a specialist in handling handicapped and less privilege children.
The welfare officers are in charge of training these children In many technical and demonstration way.
There could also be social welfare officers who assist and train them technically.
The welfare attendants ensure cleanliness of he hostel and maintaining the cleanliness of the entire premises.
They assist the children arrange all their technical tools which re meant to assist them function well.
There are lots of philanthropists and philanthropic organizations that complement government effort by assisting and providing technical aids and food to the children.
Welfare homes are non-commercial hospitality industry.
The juvenile home is another school under non-commercial hospitality industry.
These are under aged children who are either too stubborn or uncontrollable at the parent home or those who are who can not be convicted for crime.
They are kept in this school until when they graduate and proceed for further reading.
These two types of welfare home provide sweeping accommodation, catering services, medical services and other technical aids to alleviate their deficiencies.
Self Assessment Question How many welfare homes do you know and which you have visited, how does it look like?
NOUN 47HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt the meaning and types of non-commercial hospitality management and the type of organization that is available.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has released to you the major difference between the commercial hospitality management and the non-commercial hospitality management in our environment as one established for money and profit making (commercial) and the other as non profit making (non commercial) welfare, charitable services.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question 1 Explain 5 important departments in non-commercial hospitality industry Question 2 Explain welfare home?
What are the differences between an hospital and welfare home?
7.0 REFERENCES Hotel, hostel and House-keeping 3rd Edition by Joan C. Bronson, Margaret Lennox Published by Edward Arnold 1976, ISBN 07131 1974 – 8 OTHER RESOURCES HND final year Handouts 1992, Kwara State College of Technology, Ilorin.
NOUN 48HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Module 2 UNIT 1 THE LAYOUT OF AN HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY TABLE OF CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 The layout of an Hospitality Industry 3.1 Planning and Arrangement 3.1.1 Design of the Establishment 3.1.2 The type of Service to be offered 3.2 Land 3.2.1 Advantages and Disadvantages of Bungalow over Sky-scraper 3.3 Location of the Establishment 3.4 Infrastructural Facilities – water, electricity, communication, bank 3.5 Management – Organisation , Staffing 3.6 Equipment and maintenance 3.7 Government Approval 3.9 Capital 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference and other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this sixth unit, you will learn about the layout of hospitality industry.
You will be very familiar and understand the various factor to consider when an hospitality management industry is to be established.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Understand the meaning of layout of hospitality industry - Understand what to do if you want to establish an hospitality establishment.
NOUN 49HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.0 THE LAYOUT OF AN HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY The lay-out of hospitality management industry simply refer to planning and arranging of activities and resources to establish an environment of hospitality.
3.1 PLANNING AND ARRANGEMENT Planning and arrangement involve looking for the essential materials resources, methology, strategy and putting all the formidable ideas into realities.
Planning of hospitality industry involve the following stages.
3.1.1 Designs of The Establishment After a plan or an idea has been made, it has to be interpreted into clear visions.
The first step is to consult a designer for an architectural interpretation of your idea.
An architect is a qualified person who has undergone educational training in drawing and designing buildings such as residential homes, business offices, commercial industries, non-commercial industries and market complex.
The designs should show the following features.
a) The shape of the building (external view) b) The size of the building to determine the classification into Big Hotel or Big Hospital Medium Hotel or Medium Hospital Small Hotel or Small Hospital c) The type of rooms and the number of guests’ bedroom such as: Single rooms, double rooms, executive rooms, studio suites, business suites etc.
In the hospital, the size of the hall, the numbers of beds to contain, private patient ward or rooms are to be specified inside the design.
d) The number of guest rooms will be revealed, its design for many storey building called the sky-scraper (tall building).
Sky-scraper building economises space and when guest is on a high floor, he appreciates the beauty of the environment because he can see many far places.
We have many types of Sky-scraper hotels in Nigeria such as: - Nicon-Noga Hilton hotel in Abuja - Premier Hotel in Ibadan - Central Hotel in Kano - Federal Palace Hotel in Lagos - Eko Holiday Inn in Lagos - Metropolitan Hotel in Calabar NOUN 50HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT - Ikoyi Hotel in Lagos All these hotels are very tall building with many floors like 5-10 floors.
3.1.2 THE TYPE OF SERVICES TO BE OFFERED The standard of the hotel determines the type of services to offer.
This is reflected in the architectural design to show the various departments such as the front office, the food and beverages department that is (the kitchen, restaurant, bar, banquet), the house-keeping (bedrooms), the auditorium (a big where people can sit for receiving lecture, training, conference, meeting and workshop) banquet hall (where social engagement takes place like wedding reception, social night parties, get together etc) office such as managers’ office, the executive officer’s office, supervisor account office, personnel office, security office, public toilets which is very important on he design, swimming pool, recreational facilities field such as tennis court.
This design is for the first class hotel or Luxury hotel.
The hotels that meet up with the above standard in Nigeria are not many.
3.2 LAND Availability of land is another big problem to the planning and executing the project.
In Abuja for instance, land is not available as one would like to possess it.
Land that is available is maximumly utilized by building sky- scrapers., but in developing state capitals, the reverse is the case.
If you happen to go to confluence beach hotel in Lokoja in Kogi state, the hotel acquired ample space of land and built char lets instead of a block of many storey building.
The type of visibility study carried out gave opportunity for the future extension.
3.2.1 The Advantages and Disadvantages of Chalets or Bungalow Over Storey-Building A Bungalow is comfortable for guest as no stress is needed to climb unlike sky-scraper.
B Even though lifts are provided in tall building, electricity failure can cause disappointment and a guest has to climb many floors to his/her room.
C Incases of eventualities such as fire out break, the guests in the tall building are vulnerable to injury and escape may be difficult unlike the chalet where the guest can quickly run out of his room D Room service are strenuous, even though there are light catering services provided in each floor, this often lead to delay in service.
E Where land is scarce, sky-scraper is the answer.
NOUN 51HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT F Maintenance job in the skyscraper building is more difficult and involve more risk hazards than the bungalow especially when re- painting external views, and when repairs on the air-conditioners whose compressors are filled outside.
In hospitals, skyscraper is often avoided because of discomfort and the inconveniences it causes to the patients.
Bungalow buildings are preferable to the tall building.
Hospitals in most cases do not go beyond one storey building.
But due to space problem, some private hospital owners capitalize on building storey building like 3 or 4 floors.
But in government hospitals, it is not more than one storey building in rare cases.
Purchase of land should also be given considerations both to the present and future expansion either in commercial or non-commercial hospitality industry 3.3 LOCATION The location of hospitality industry should consider the followings: (a) accessibility to the public and the society (b) does it promote attraction centres (c) does it provide sufficient packing space for the vehicles 3.4 INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITIES This includes provision for:  Constant supply of water.
Some hotel industry and even hospital industry lack supply of water.
They have to depend on water tanker to discharge water into the water reservoir.
This does not facilitate effective cleaning and washing.
 Electricity supply: Supply of constant electricity should be seriously considered in the layout.
Electricity and water are the life wire of hotel.
Guests can endure some inadequacies but can never compromise shortage of water and electricity.
The purpose of staying in hotel is to relax and enjoy the maximum value of money paid for the room.
An air-conditioner can not function without electricity.
The television cannot work.
Any place known for storage of these two infrastructural facilities are not suitable both for commercial and non-commercial hospitality industry.
In the hospitals the patients need light very importantly.
 Good roads and communication: Good roads and telephone services are essential facilities and services which ought to be provided for in the hospitality industry.
Consider whether there is NITEL (Nigerian Telecommunication Plc) connection in that area.
NOUN 52HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT  Bank: Is there any commercial bank in that area to safe-guard the money and cash sales?
This is very important to prevent incessant armed – robbery.
Both the commercial and non-commercial hospitality industries should ensure perfect banking system.
Self Assessment Question List the names of 10 Hotels you know or have visited.
3.5 MANAGEMENT This is a process of designing and maintaining hospitality industry in such a way that all the workers, the materials and the equipments are working efficiently, well controlled and supervised in order to achieve or accomplish high productivity.
Both commercial and non-commercial establishment must have selected aims and objective on why such an establishment is established.
It is part of the layout of an hospitality industry.
The following aspect of management must be considered.
(a) The type of Organisation to be formed – Management staff level, Intermediate staff level and junior staff level should be considered.
(b) Staffing – Consider availability of different categories of staff.
The qualified, the skilled, the semi-skilled, the un-skilled, labourers, willingness of people to work in certain part of the country because of religious disturbances and imposition of religion legal system in some part of the country.
3.6 EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE It is equally important to consider the availability of equipment and the case of maintaining them.
This is very important in determining the outlay of an hospitality industry.
3.7 GOVERNMENT APPROVAL Before work commences on the project, the local or state government whoever is directly involved should be notified and approval from the urban development office has to be obtained.
3.8 CAPITAL Capital comes as the last point instead of coming first in this discussion.
After all, the plans and ideas have been down, capital will be the next point to NOUN 53HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT consider.
By doing so, you have arrived at a tentative figure that you hope to spend.
How to obtain money may be sourced from a reliable and reputable commercial bank or a merchant bank.
To obtain loan from the bank, you must have what is called a collateral security.
Collateral security is the bond between you and the bank.
The bond can be inform of landed property like houses, valuable properties which you must surrender to the bank in case of your inability to pay back the money to the bank.
Depending on the size of the hotel or hospital, capital can also be obtained from business associates or from other cooperative bodies.
It is to be understood that any loan collected from the bank or co-operative society attracts additional interest (that is an extra money payable on the principal or original amount of money collected).
Self Assessment Question 1 Mention five important things you use electricity for at home 2 How relevant is electricity and water supply to the lay-out of an hospitality establishment example hotel?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt and understood the meaning of the layout in hospitality industry and the necessary and important factors to consider when plan to establish this industry.
5.0SUMMARY This unit has revealed all the ideas and methodology involve when considering a layout for hospitality management industry.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT QUESTION 1 Define layout of an hospitality industry and list some point to consider during layout processes.
NOUN 54HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT QUESTION 2 What are the advantages and disadvantages of bungalow chalets over sky- scraper in hotel?
7.0REFERENCE Hotel and Catering Supervision (Social and Economic Aspects of the Industry) By Ran Gale and Peter Odgers Published by Pitman ISBN 0273 628162 1984 OTHER RESOURCES Handouts HND II 1982, Kwara State College of Technology, Dept.
Catering and Hotel Management NOUN 55HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 GUEST’S ROOM AND PROPERTIES TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The Guests Bedroom and Properties 3.2 Facilities in a Standard Guest’s Bedroom 3.3 Furniture 3.3.1 Bed 3.3.2 Mattress and Pillows 3.3.3 The Wardrobe 3.3.4 The Dressing Mirror Cabinet 3.3.5 The Upholstery 3.3.6 The Reading Chair/Table (optional) 3.3.7 The Carpet 3.4 The Bed linens 3.4.1 The Bed sheets 3.4.2 The Blankets 3.4.3 The Pillow cases 3.4.4 The Towel and face towel 3.4.5 The Bed cover 3.4.6 The Window blinds 3.5 Electronics 3.5.1 Colour Television 3.5.2 Telephone Handset 3.6 The Equipment 3.6.1 The Air-conditioners 3.6.2 The Refrigerator 3.6.3 The Water Heater 3.6.4 Bath Plate and Bath Tray 3.7 Electrical 3.8 Other Facilities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources NOUN 56HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.0 INTRODUCTION This is the seventh unit of this course.
This unit explains the Guest’s rooms and the essential and important facilities which are expected to be available for guests comfort and satisfaction.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (i) Understated the various types of facilities and amenity is a standard guest’s room (ii) Understand the purposes that each facility serves.
3.1 WHAT GUEST’S BEDROOM AND PROPERTIES A guest’s bedroom in hotel house-keeping is an apartment or a chalet reserved for sleeping and resting purposes and if possible to receive catering services such as foods and drinks from room services.
Some guests derive pleasure eating and relaxing with drinks in his room instead of going to the restaurant to eat or to the bar to drink.
However, room services attract additional charges which the guest has to pay for.
This is another source of revenue to the hotel management.
The properties in a guest’s bedroom are of two types: namely: That which belongs to the house-keeping department that is all the furniture, equipment, electronic, bed linens and other amenities provided for the comfort and satisfaction of guests.
The second is that which the guest brought for his own personal use.
However, we shall concern our discussion to the management’s properties.
Self Assessment Question:- List down in a piece of paper all the properties in your room.
3.2 FACILITIES IN A GUEST BEDROM The followings are essential if not compulsory facilities which should be available and be provided in a guest room to enhance maximum comforts, and satisfaction and to prevent “I am not satisfied” by the guest.
NOUN 57HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.4 THE FURNITURE 3.3.1 Bed The traditional impoverished sleeping from the floor mat to the thatched beds which changed to the iron beds and today, we have beautifully designed bed cabinet.
The modern beds are being made from different types of wood finishes such as: the Mansonia wood, Plywood, Black Afara wood, Mahoganny wood.
These are local materials which our furniture makers produce.
We also have making industry and factory to cope with the high demands for tasty furniture.
A good bed in hotel must be strong due to heavy use and also blend with the interior decoration of the room.
The size of a normal bed in a standard room is 6ft by 6ft hat is 18.29am by 18.28am.
3.3.2 Mattress and Pillow There are two types: High density mattress and Low density mattress.
H high density mattress is made from rubber foam which is strong, hard, heavy to carry, durable and expensive.
It gives maximum comfort and does not cause back injury such as back pain and side pains.
It does not go down when a guest lies on it.
A low density mattress is equally made from plastic foam but is soft, non- durables and less expensive.
When a guest lies on it, the spot of the body always appear by pressing – down.
The purchasing officer has to be experienced in knowing the differences.
The pillows are either soft or hard.
A soft pillow is preferable to hard pillow.
Hard pillows can cause neck strain.
Sleeping on a hard surface though not on the naked floor is medically better than sleeping on soft surface.
3.3.3 The Wardrobe Bedroom wardrobes are made usually from plywood having partitions inside with two doors or sliding wood door.
Wardrobe is to safeguard guest personal properties and to prevent his articles from being scattered in the room and hence makes the room untidy.
3.3.4 Dressing Mirror Cabinet Dressing mirror cabinet are made from a high quality wood finishes such as Mansonia wood and Plywood.
This cabinet comes in various decorative designs with a cushion stool used to sit down for proper make-up.
A very thick mirror glass of high quality is attached to the top back side of the NOUN 58HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT cabinet.
The cabinets drawer where guests keep their cosmetics especially women.
3.3.5 The Upholstery Chairs and Stool The type of upholstery chairs and stool provided in a guest’s bedroom adds additional elegance and interior decorative effects.
A full upholstery chair in a room which is meant for guests relaxation elevates the standard of the room.
The stool is for putting drinks and other items.
3.3.6 The Reading Chair and Table These are optional and can be provided on request.
In order to economise the available space in the room and avoid congestion, chairs and tables are not in many cases provided.
3.3.6 The Carpet Wall-to-wall carpeting of a room adds glamour to the furnishing of the room and also improves the internal decoration.
Carpet is very silent when stepped upon and it also provides warmth.
A c……….. carpet should blend with the colour of the ceiling and the wall.
However, much care should be taken to always avoid water, drinks and other solution pouring on it.
This makes carpet to have bad odour which may adversely affect the life span.
3.4 THE BEDLINES In the house-keeping, bedlines comprises the followings: 3.4.1 (a) Bedsheets, are used to dress the bed 3.4.2 Blanket used to provide warmth on the dressed bed 3.4.3 The pillow cases are used to cover the pillows.
Usually a room must have not less than two pillows and maximum of four 3.4.4 The towels and the face towels for cleaning body after bath and face towel for cleaning face.
3.4.5 The bedcover which is a thick material is used to cover the dresses bed and to prevent dirt and dust on the bedsheets and pillow cases NOUN 59HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.4.6 The windows blinds to protect guest’s privacy there are different designs such as pelmet rail window blind, sabi-cort rail type and the most executive and expensive is the aristocrat window blinds.
3.5 ELECTRONICS 3.5.1 Colour Television: A - 14 inches or 20 inches colour television is another entertaining facility to enable guest watch movies, listen to the news and to keep a guest from boredom.
The use of black and white television is now obsolete and phased out.
This can only be seen in a village or rural guest houses.
3.5.2 (b) Telephone set: A telephone set for communication to make request for a room service or any important enquiries at least within the hotel environment is a good convenient facility.
This saves guests time walking distance or coming down from his room to the reception or other department.
Self Assessment Question:- Give examples of Bedlines, Furniture, Electronics 3.6 EQUIPMENT 3.6.1 The Air conditioner is to provide a conducive atmosphere.
During the heat period usually the dry season (from December – April) in the south or (December – June/July) in the North, the weather is very hot including the guest’s room.
And for this reason, many people prefer to go and rest for few days in an hotel with functioning air-conditioners.
There are 3 types of air-conditioners: - the central ceiling system which is now gradually being phased out.
- the window air-conditioner unit - the split unit which is now current in use.
3.6.2 Refrigerator is used to preserve drinking water, some fruits and vegetables bought by the guest.
3.6.3 Water Heater in the bathroom used to provide both cold and hot water.
During the cold season, guest does not use cold water except hot water for washing purposes.
3.6.1 Bath plate and Bath Tray The choice of bath plate and bath tray has to be given careful thought when purchasing either.
Consider the safety of their uses.
Bath plate often times causes accident and injury to the guest when taking bath.
The surface NOUN 60HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT becomes very slippery when foam from soap runs over it.
The use of it is very dangerous if proper and attentive care is not exercised.
The bath tray is inserted inside the ground.
This is safe and not dangerous as the guest can stand very well inside it and well balanced.
3.7 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES Bedside lightings which is adjustable for reading while on the bed is another good provision to provide convenience.
This light must not be too harsh.
It should be of the normal voltage apart from the central light in the room.
3.8 OTHER FACILITIES Other facilities include:- waste baskets for throwing pieces of paper and tissue paper used for blowing nose etc; Ash-trays to prevent cigarettes and falling on the carpet and thereby destroying it; Glazed pictures on the wall; room flowers; provided it will not occupy space and cause inconveniences.
Equipping hotel bedrooms depends on the standard or luxury rating of hotel.
A 50 – bedroom hotel which classified as a small hotel, because of the available number of rooms can by far look more attractive and luxuries than a 100 – bedroom hotel.
However, the more the furnishings the more the luxuries; and the more is the standard, the more the patronage, the higher is the tariff, the higher is the turn – over and the more the expensiveness.
Self Assessment Question: (i) List 5 types of facilities expected in a standard bedroom if a luxury hotel.
(ii) Explain guests bedroom 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learn about the facilities which are expected to be provided in a standard guests bedroom.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed all the essential facilities which give guests comforts, satisfaction and encourage them to re-visit the hotel.
NOUN 61HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 13.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question i Explain 3 major types of facilities in a guest’s room Question ii Explain the roles which these facilities play in house-keeping department.
Answer i Furniture: These are the facilities which are produced from wood and wood finishes is beauty the room and provide essential comfort to the guests.
These are Beds, Bedside cabinet, Upholstery chair, Wardrobe and Mirror cabinet, Mattress.
Electronics: These are the television to provide news and entertainment inform of watching movies.
The telephone box for internal communication.
The Bed linens to protect the mattress and for dressing bed.
These are bed sheet, pillow cases, blanket and bedspread, window blind is also part of lines.
7.0 REFERENCES Hotel, Hostel and Hospital House-Keeping – 3rd Edition by Joan C. Branson Margaret Lennox Published by Edward Arnold 1976 (ISBN 07131 19748) Practice Theory and Catering of Hotel Management by R. A. Salami 1st Edition Published by: Tamazo Publishing Co. Ltd, 1994 ISBN 978 – 04 – 3) NOUN 62HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 CLEANING AND CLEANING EQUIPMENT IN THE HOUSE KEEPING DEPARTMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Cleaning Defined 3.2 Importance of Cleaning in hospitality Industry 3.2.1 Attraction 3.2.2 Prevention of Dirts 3.2.3 High Regards and Respect 3.2.4 Life Span of Facility 3.2.5 Good Impression 3.3 Types of Dirts and Removal Dirt, Dust, Stains, Debris 3.4 Types of Cleaning Materials 3.4.1 Brooms, Duster, Rag, Toilet brush, Suction rubber, Mop, Steward bucket.
3.4.2 Heavy equipment Electric vacuum cleaner, Electric scrubbing machine, Electric suction 3.5 machine 3.6 Choice of Equipment Cleaning Agents Water, Detergent, Soap, Toilet soap, Abrasives, Toilet cleaner, Window 4.0 cleanser, Paraffin, Mentholated spirit, Bleaches and Polishes.
5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Summary 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment References and Other Resources.
2.0 INTRODUCTION This is the eighth unit of this course.
In this unit, you will understand the meaning of cleaning and the equipment which are used, and their purposes.
3.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: NOUN 63HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT - Understand cleaning and the importance of cleaning of a guest bedroom - Understand the equipment used for cleaning guests rooms and be familiar with the cleaning agents.
3.2 CLEANING DEFINED Cleaning can be defined as the method of proper removal of dust, dirt, stains, wastes litter, debris, empting of waste basket and any unwanted materials from the interior surfaces of a habitation to make that interior appear clean, neat, tidy, odour free, hygienic and habitable.
3.3 IMPORTANCE OF CLEANING IN HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY 3.2.1 Provides Attraction: A cleaned room attracts and gives pleasure and satisfaction to the guests and this further encourages future patronage.
3.2.2 Life span of facility: A properly cleaned room prolongs the life span of the amenities and make them to remain in a good condition for a long time 3.2.3 Prevention of Dirts: Cleaning removes and prevents dirts, cobwebs, other irritating substances and eye – sores from existing and accumulating 3.2.4 High Regard and Respect: Guests always have high regards and respect for a well – cleaned room which is hygienic and conducive to health and happiness.
3.2.5 Good Impression: A lasting impression and good are built for such an establishment.
Guests always have confidence in such an hospitable establishment.
Self Assessment Question:- How many times do you sweep your sleeping room in a week and why?
3.3 TYPES OF DIRTS AND METHODS OF REMOVAL Dust: Dust is loose particles which are frequently air –bone and later settle on any surface.
Removal: Dust can be removed by sweeping, mopping, dusting or suction.
After it has been collected it is disposed of by burning; or empting inside the dustbin or NOUN 64HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT inside a sac which air cannot enter i.e not air-borne.
It is later on disposed off.
Wet duster is also good for removing dust as the particle will cling on to the wet – duster.
A clean duster must be used, it becomes dirty, wash in a clean detergent water and rinse properly to remove the foam other wise, there will be stains on the cleaned surfaces.
Dirt: Dirt is dust or other material which by means grease, oil or moisture sticks to a surface of any material Removal: Dirt can be removed by cleaning the dirty area b washing with water and detergent; or by mopping with water and detergent.
Stains: These are marked spot on surfaces caused by splashing liquid, grease, oil, stout beer, blood, soup, sauce, stew, gravy.
Removal: Removal can be through: - hot water and detergent and then used cloth to clean the spot - if the mark still remains, painting of the whole area will remove the stain.
- use bleach solution in water and detergent Debris: These are dry or wet wastes arising from careless dropping of waste paper, throwing away of unfinished fruits and vegetable, wrapping papers, pure water leather bags, empty cans of soft drinks and can – beer, d………….
and dry leaves falling down from trees Removal: - Sweeping - Using hand to park and collect these rubbish.
Sweeping is another method of removing these items and later burn them or thrown into the dustbin which is later disposed off.
Self Assessment Question:- Explain dust and stain and their removal method.
3.4 TYPES OF CLEANING MATERIALS IN THE HOUSE- KEEPING.
To ensure efficiency and best way of job performance, the house keeper should endeavour to provide the bedroom cleaners and the bedroom stewards NOUN 65HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT with cleaning equipment and materials suitable for the type of job being carried out.
The following are the essential cleaning materials.
3.4.1 Brooms: Short broom for sweeping, long broom for removing cobwebs.
- Duster: Dry duster for cleaning the television, mirror, furniture.
Wet duster for cleaning the toilet wall tiles, the wash hand basin, the W/C in the toilet, the water heater.
- Rag: For polishing mirror and television with the polishing agent/chemical - Toilet brush: With hand bristle for cleaning inside the W/C and to remove with stain removal chemical - Suction rubber: For pressing down accumulated waste - Mop: To clean the toilet floor and the corridor with water and detergent.
When the mop sponge is dirty, it has be rinsed in clean water and begin to use.
Mop can also be used to drain water from hard surface like tiles and terrazzo.
- The Steward Bucket: To contain little items like the toilet papers, guest soap, air freshener, duster, toilet brush which steward carries as he moves from one room to another.
3.4.2 Heavy Equipment (a) Electric vacuum cleaner – This machine is operated by electricity to vacuum clean the room carpet by removing dirts and dust.
(b) Electric scrubbing machine – For washing tile and terrazzo surfaces.
It can also be used for cleaning and washing and for removing stains (c) Electric suction machine – used for sucking wet surfaces only like water is poured on the carpet or there is flood in the room.
It draws the water into the chamber/container which is later empty when it is full.
You can find these equipment at UTC, UAC, CFAO offices in Kano, Kaduna, Lagos, Jos, Abuja.
Self Assessment Question: What do you use short and long brooms for at home?
What other materials do you use for cleaning at home?
3.5 CHOICE OF EQUIPMENT It is very wise for an house keeper to choose the right type of equipment for a particular job to promote efficiency and high level productivity.
It will also prevent waste and loss of time.
Consider the following factors: NOUN 66HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Good Quality – A good quality of equipment should be purchased to prevent frequency breakdown.
Easy to empty and clean – No difficult in discharging or throwing away the dirts collected.
Replacement – Availability replacement in future.
Noisy – Is the equipment very noisy to disturb others and make the environment noisy too.
Low noise – Equipment is good so that when there is a fault can easily be detected.
Cumbersome – How heavy or light is the equipment to carry from one room to another or from one floor to another.
Consider this.
Safety – How safe is the equipment to the user and other colleagues at work Complication – Is the equipment sophisticated and complicated in use.
Do you easily understand the method of operating and using it?
3.6 CLEANING AGENTS (a) Water is the simplest cleaning agent used in conjunction with cleaning chemical to make it effective.
(b) Detergents are cleaning agent which when combined with water effectively remove dirts and dust.
Examples are: Omo, Elephant, Blue detergent, Arial and Surf detergent.
Those are dry detergent.
We also have wet detergent such as liquid detergent such as morning fresh, Harpic, Tinner detergent and Rin detergent.
There are various type in the open Market and Provision stores.
When few quantity is dropped in the water it will form foam and do a good cleaning job.
(c) Soap is also used for cleaning, cheap but not as effective as detergent.
(d) Toilet soap contains perfume and that is why hotel always use it.
Examples of toilet soaps are Lux, Imperial leather, Dudu Osun, Tura soap, Medicated soaps such as.
They are locally available and can be found in supermarket.
(e) Abrasives used for cleaning tiles, toilet W/C, sink, cooking pots, back of cooking pots, frying pan such as (f) Vim: They have scrubbing and rubbing action on these metals, enamel and pots.
(g) Toilet Clearer are specifically meant for washing W/C pan and not for any other purposes.
NOUN 67HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT (h) Window cleanser is applied by rag and rubbed with dry cloth.
(i) Paraffin oil for cleaning baths and efficient (j) Mentholated spirit like turpentine used for removal of grease and candle was from surfaces.
(k) Bleaches for removing stains and makes clothes whiter and shiner.
Such as JIK (l) Polish provides a shining effect and also cleans very well.
Polishes also provide a protective coating to the surfaces.
Used on floors, leather, shoes, furniture or metal.
Self Assessment Question.
Mention 3 types of detergent & 3 types of Toilet Soap you know.
4.0 CONCLUSSION In this unit, you have learnt about the meaning and importance of cleaning in house – keeping department.
You have also learnt about the removal and cleaning agents.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed how relevant it is to know about cleaning and the types of materials and cleaning agents to use for effective result.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question i Explain cleaning and give example of 3 types importance of cleaning in hospitality industry.
Question ii List 3 examples of dirts and their removal from surfaces 7.0 REFERENCES Hotel, Hostel and Hospital House-Keeping by Joan C. Branson and Margavet Lennox Publisher: Edward Arnold 1976 (ISBN 0 7131 1974 8) Other Resources Handouts HND Catering and Hotel Management 1982.
Kwara State College of Technology, Ilorin.
NOUN 68HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Unit 4 SECURITY AND SAFETY IN HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Security and Safety in Hospitality Industry 3.2 Type of Securities and Safety Problems 3.2.1 Theft 3.2.2 Attacks 3.2.3 Injury 3.2.4 Fire – Out break 3.2.5 The Free Girls (The call - Girls) 3.3 The Management Responsibilities 3.3.1 The Duties of Employers 3.3.2 The Duties of Employees 3.4 Prevention of Theft 3.4.1 Security Personnel 3.4.2 Checkings 3.4.3 Periodical and Regular Inventory 3.4.4 Guarantorship 3.4.5 Inscription of the establishment names and address 3.4.6 Disciplinary Actions 3.5 Prevention of attacks on guest 3.5.1 Un-authorised visitor or un-wanted people 3.5.2 Computerised checking 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 2.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit (9) you will learn about the security and safety of lives and properties and types of securities problems.
The necessary preventive NOUN 69HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT measures will also be discussed.
Units 10 and 11 will deal with Injury and fire – outbreaks respectively.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Understand the meaning and importance of security and safety in house-keeping apartment.
- Understand the security and safety procedures against theft and attacks 3.1 SECURITY AND SAFETY IN HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY Definition: Security and safety are designed approach to protect lives and properties in hospitality industry.
It is also a methodological efforts to free lives and properties from danger.
Security and Safety of house – keeping department means the endeavours which the management puts – in place to prevent dangers and also to protect the followings: - Protection of guest’s lives and their belongings - Protection and safety of security of staff lives - Protection of the managements properties 3.2 TYPES OF SECURITY AND SAFETY PROBLEMS 3.2.1 Theft:- The percentages of valuable items being lost and stolen in Hotels, Motels, Guest Houses, Hospitals is high.
Hotels and Hospitals being a very large establishments usually records higher percentage.
Room facilities are vulnerable to theft.
All possible methods should be adopted to minimize this crime.
This is because, the cost of replacing such items on affect the profit margin.
It is however, not a joke to believe that some bad guests would check-into a room of two thousand Naira per night and away with hotel property worth five thousand Naira only.
e.g.
room’s air-conditioner compressor and other accessories parts can be neatly removed, or the television engine without the room being detected by the security personnel or even by the room stewards.
Those styles of thefts are very rampart in hotels and hospitals.
Cars can also be stolen from the car – park.
Handy items can easily be pocketed or bagged.
Guest’s money, wrist watch or jewelry are susceptible to theft in the rooms.
In the hospital, patient’s valuable items are not left out.
NOUN 70HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.2.2 Attack:- Assassination and attacks are another security and safety problems in hospitality industry.
Although, the rate of this crime is very low when compared with theft cases.
However, it occasionally happens in hotel and hospital.
3.2.3 Fire – Outbreak:- This is a common occurrence in the house – keeping departments, no other department easily catches with fires in hotel or hospital except the staff quarters within the premises 3.2.4 Injury:- This is a daily occurrence in nearly all the departments with the kitchen as the highest, then, the house-keeping staff.
3.2.5 The Free Girls:- Otherwise known and regarded as the call – girls are another security and safety problem to hospitality management.
The management in hotels should tighten-up the security forces against these type of girls.
They have caused a lot of havoc in hotels like stealing, sedating guests while keeping companionship at night, fighting, smoking and getting drunk.
These social vices from them should be curbed to protect the good image and reputation of management.
3.3 THE MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES The establishment management owes it a point of duty to ensure and guaranty security and safety of lives and properties (the guests, visitors, staff) at all cost and by whatever possible means.
3.3.1 Duty of Employers The management is the first to demonstrate concerns for security and safety in hospitality industry in the following ways a.
To provide safe environment and set-up safe notary practices b.
To provide and ensure twenty-four hours security check within the establishment c. To provide instruments and supervisions within the work place which will guaranty health and safety d. To provide safe equipment and ensure proper maintenance to prevent accidents and injury e. To ensure that all materials are being used transported and stored correctly f. To ensure that access into and out of the building is easy g. To be able to identify the establishment properties by inscribing the name and address of the hotel in the properties.
NOUN 71HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT h. To ensure that the workplace is structurally safe, with adequate facilities such as lightings and ventilation.
i.
A safety policy must be drawn-up and placed in such an area that it can be visible and legible to all concerns – the guests, staff and visitors.
j.
To provide trainings and induction courses for the staff to increase their understanding about security and safety and to also improve their work proficiency.
3.3.2 Duties of Employees The employees should be security conscious and take all the necessary precautions on self-defence which is the first law of nature.
The followings are the responsibilities.
(a) To take responsibility for personal health and safety (b) To behave responsibly, so that workmates and colleagues are not harmed by mistakes or negligence (c) To observe all the safety practices laid down by the employers (d) To use all the equipment properly and to avoid meddling with it in such a way it might become a source of danger to you and others.
3.4 PREVENTION OF THEFT Theft can only be minimized in hospitality industry in the following ways 3.4.1 Security Personnel It is expected that the security department should be well organised and be provided with adequate staff and working materials and facilities to enhance efficiency and increase productivity.
The head security officer, often an ex- policeman or ex-army officer can be employed from any local legion security office.
He organises and controls the security department.
He ensures that some security personnel would move round the premises un-noticed and un- identifiable by visitors and the guests.
His duty is to look for suspicious and undesirable character in hotels and hospital.
He keeps in touch with other security officers and pass any useful information to them.
Security office has to advice the management on security and safety procedures.
Security office arranges how to escort the accountant to the bank to cash in money and the deposit money.
NOUN 72HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.4.2 Checking Another important prevention theft is proper checking of vehicles coming in and out of the premises.
The car boots should be properly checked at the main entrance and exit.
The staff should equally be checked when going out.
All the car owners are given security pass which permits them to go out with their vehicle.
The security permit should be specially designed and secured to prevent duplication.
Many hotels have fallen victims of car permit duplication which have resulted into many cars stolen for which the management was allowed to go scot-free.
Other heads of department should also try to always check and double check their staff closing most especially on non-perishable items and handy small equipment.
3.4.3 Periodical and Regular Inventory This system will assist in preventing theft.
All the head of department should cultivate this in mind as part of the management policy.
3.4.4 Guarantorship Another way of prevention internal theft i.e that can involve staff with their collaborator is to ensure that all the workers produce two reliable guarantors or one reputable guarantor.
These guarantor will take an undertaking with the management incase his guarantee defaulted or involved in theft cases, if the management could not recover the loss from the staff, then the guarantor has to come in for the settlement.
3.4.5 Inscription of Names This is another security measure against theft.
The name and simple address (if space is available on the item) are printed or screen – printed on the items and properties to the hotels and hospitals such as the linens (bed sheets, pillow-cases, pillow, towels, blankets, all the departmental equipment.
This should be neatly done to prevent a rough job which can also spoil the item most especially in printing.
A high quality paint should be used to avoid being washed off which can cause stains.
NOUN 73HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.4.6 Disciplinary Actions Any staff who is caught stealing either a senior staff or a junior staff and even the security staff should be disciplined accordingly.
This will serve as a deterrent to others and instill fears in them.
If such an offence is to be tried in the law court, the management should not compromise it.
3.5 PREVENTION OF ATTACK ON GUEST A well organised establishment whose security and safety arrangement are effective, the guests in hotels and hospitals are not easily accessible to and easily attacked.
One of the safety security measures is to ensure that no visitor beats the security arrangement at the main entrance without being inter-rotated about his mission.
Secondly, all visitors have to go through the receptionist or reception before he is allowed to see guests.
It is the responsibility of a sensible and skillful receptionist to inform a guest about his visitor.
Guest should not be made to receive visitor without his consent.
It is part of the management obligation to protect guests while still in the daily room occupancy list.
While the guest equally has the right to sue an hotel if he notices in-security.
An intelligent receptionist and security officers in hotels or hospitals should ensure that the security arrangement are not punctured from the angle of the establishment.
The management should not compromise.
3.5.1 Un-Authorised People These people who are un-wanted and sometimes being chassed out of the establishment premises should not be allowed inside.
In hotel industry, the call girls or the free-girls should have their limits.
Their presence in hotel industry is somehow controversial.
There are arguments in support of their casual presence and there are contrary opinions about their presence.
However, if they have to be allowed in, they should be restricted.
Visitor within the house keeping apartment should be on surveillance.
Even those that come to drink eat and relax are sometimes dubious in characters.
In the hospitals, the hours of visitation should be clearly displayed at the main entrance and in the ward area.
This prevents un-necessary movement.
Secondly, the security officers have to be on patrol during the visiting hours and without a cogent reason, no one should be allowed to visit patients and staff on duty.
NOUN 74HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.5.2 Computerised Checkings Checking and searching people by computer is sill at its infancy in Nigeria except at the air-ports, government houses and at the presidential State House.
This device is to detect hidden weapons meant to commit crimes.
It is hoped that in the nearest future, it will be introduced at the reception or at the main gate.
In the next unit, we shall be discussing the Hazards Prevention.
Self Assessment Question.
Define the word security and the word safety mention two ways to prevent theft in the hospitality industry.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt the meaning of safety and security and the importance of security and safety in the hospitality industry.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed the importance of security and safety in hospitality industry and the preventive measures against theft.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question 1 Explain 3 major types of security safety problems in hospitality management industry.
Question 11 Explain the duties of an hotel employer to safe – guard lives and properties 7.0 REFERENCES Food and Drinks services in the restaurant by: Sarah Macleod and Fiona Dorglass by Hodder & Stoughton 1994 NOUN 75HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 HAZARDS IN HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.1 Hazard Defined 3.2 Causes of Injury 3.2.1 Mistakes 3.3 Type of Injury 3.3.1 Fall 3.3.2 Causes and prevention 3.4 Cuts and Abrasions 3.4.1 Cause and Prevention 3.5 Burns and Scald 3.5.1 Causes and Prevention 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the tenth unit of this course which is the continuation of unit 9 (security and safety in hospitality industry).
This unit explains detailed causes and prevention of hazards in hospitality industry 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - acquire full knowledge of hazards in hospitality industry - understand various types of hazards, causes and possible prevention.
3.1 HAZARD DEFINED Any risk or danger that leads to physical injury of the body, pains to the body and destruction of properties is regarded as hazards.
NOUN 76HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.2 CAUSES OF INJURY Mistakes: the major cause of injury can be summarily called mistake.
A staff who has been using a knife to cut vegetable and, unexpectedly the same knife cuts his finger and blood started oozing out.
This type of incidence is a mistake which although it has a cause.
Even though, the worker did not pray that the knife should cut his finger neither did he wish that the knife should injure him.
Mistakes in some cases leads to an accident.
An accident is an unexpected circumstances which can lead to hazard, and can lead to an injury, while an injury can lead to death.
In hospitality industry, accidents do not just occur, but are caused by someone.
Accident can be fatal with serious damages on the injured person.
Time and materials are always lost when accident are always lost when accident occurred.
Productivity is disorganised if not paralysed most especially if there is no immediate replacement.
3.3.
TYPE OF INJURY 3.3.1 Fall This is a sudden going down on the floor or on the ground.
It is an unexpected collapses of the body.
CAUSES (a) Collapse: One can collapse and fall down.
A worker who over-works himself may be extremely tired and fall down.
A sick worker can also collapse and fall down.
To prevent this, worker should have sufficient rest after closing, one day off-duty in a week will enable worker to regain lost energy.
While a sick worker should not engage in work but go for medical treatment.
(b) Missing tile: A missing tile from the floor will result into an uneven surface which can cause a worker to hit his leg inside the created cavity and fall down.
Prevention is by replacing the broken pieces and other cracked ones should be removed and replaced.
(c) Loose edge and worn carpet: The loose edge of carpet will bring out yarns rope which may enter somebody’s foot while walking.
This can cause sudden fall.
Prevention is by cutting the loose edge and trim smoothly.
(d) Slippery surfaces: A wet surface, oily and greasy surfaces can result into serious fall and lead into serious injury like fracture of legs and hand.
Prevention is to NOUN 77HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT avoid wet surfaces by immediate mopping.
Secondly, any oil or grease spillage should washed with warm water and detergent as quickly as possible.
(e) Spills not removed: Any solution such as soup, gravy, sauce, stew, okro soup or ewedu soup that poured on the floor should quickly be removed and cleaned properly to prevent fall accident.
(f) Cleaning Equipment abandoned on the passage: No equipment should be abandoned on the passage without prompt remove when not in use.
Many staff are caught unaware and will run into the equipment or hit their legs which can cause fall.
All traffic area should be cleared without obstruction.
(g) Faulty Step ladder: A week step of ladder can be broken when climbing up.
This can also cause fall and back injury, fractures and pains to other parts of the body which hit the ground.
Ensure that before a ladder is used, It is inspected to ensure that the steps are strong.
(h) Wrong Steps: Putting legs in an unusual place can cause misplacement of steps.
This can result into fall.
One should ensure that one looks forward (i) Wrong use of equipment to climb up: Using chairs, box, stool to climb up is dangerous and can cause fall because it is not balanced well.
Use good ladder to climb.
Self Assessment Question.
Define Hazard, List 4 causes of falls in hospitality industry.
(j) Bathroom Plate: Many bathroom plates have no handle to provide support during bathing.
This has led to toilet injury in many cases to both the old and the young.
Fall usually happens when the soap foam little movement without handle or hanging on to another support can result into fall and fatal accident.
Usually, falling head long.
This can be prevented by purchasing bath with handle.
Alternatively, avoid the use of bath plate and provide bath tray which does not need support.
This is the only type being used in the hospital.
(k) Week Chairs: A week chair can easily make someone to fall down.
When the mortise of a chair is removed, the chair becomes weak.
Always provide strong chairs.
(l) Placing Chair Wrongly: Many people fall down because of improper placing of chair before sitting down.
Always ensure that chairs are properly put down before sitting on it.
(m) Collision: This is caused by lack of concentration collision happens when two people run into themselves.
One or the two of them can be NOUN 78HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT responsible.
Always face the direction you are heading to.
Looking sideways while in fact you are moving forward can cause injury.
(n) Too Much Haste: Too much haste without carefulness can cause fall.
Always be steady.
All these factors are responsible for falls.
Falls happen either in hotels, motels, Guest houses and in the hospitals.
3.4 CUTS AND ABRASIONS Any damage to the blood vessel will lead to blood coming out of that area.
Cut is an injury received from unexpected contact with a shape object.
The causes and preventions are 3.5.3 Causes and Prevention (a) Careless Placing of Razorblade: Razor is a small but very sharp object.
When carelessly placed it can result into an injury.
Prevent razor by folding it inside the wrapper.
(b) Careless disposal of broken glasses: Broken glasses in the bar and bottles in our work – place or at home should be properly disposed off.
The pieces should be properly swept due to the painful effect any small piece can cause.
Prevention is by handing glasses well, carry bottles and glasses by using tray.
Do not carry bottle too much.
Even if you do not use a tray, do not carry too many glasses and bottles.
(c) Careless Opening of Tins/Cans: Wrong method of opening tins like tin-tomato, sardine often causes cut injury.
Use a good thin cutter.
Do not use knife to pierce tins.
Cut injury happens in every department of hospitality industry, either in hotel, motel, restaurant, bars, reception, house-keeping as wall as in the hospitals.
3.6 BURNS AND SCALD This is another type of painful injury resulting from the effect of hot object on the human body.
Burns is caused by direct contact of dry heat with a hot object.
Mistakenly touching of hot object like pressing iron or hot cooking pot.
Scald is an injury from wet heat such as hot vapour, steam of boiling water and food.
These type of injury are more frequent in catering department and sometimes in the offices when office staff prepare tea or coffee.
3.6.1 Causes and Prevention The following are the causes: NOUN 79HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT (a) Careless lighting of gas equipment: Gas cooker should be properly observed to ensure no leakage before it is ignited.
(b) Careless use of an electric iron Always switch off the pressing iron from the mains supply somebody may want to carry it to another place without using the handle but hold the body directly.
(c) Absence of fire guards: Ensure that you safe and guard against fire.
(d) Carelessness on the part of smokers: Ensure that cigarette ends are extinguished inside the ash tray after smoke.
Do not sleep when you are closing off.
This is the only preventive measure.
(e) Newspaper, Journals, Clothing materials: Careless place near candle can result into burn.
Ensure of safety of lighting candle.
(f) Hot Water Incidences Careless uses of hot water from shower without firstly establish the degree of hotness.
Direct pouring of hot water from the gas into the flask can cause scald.
Always remove the kettle from the burner.
So also, anytime an hot object is to be handled, use thick cloth.
(g) Careless Storage of Petrol and Kerosene: Indiscriminate storage of petrol and kerosene have destroyed many lives, killed many family.
Wrong storage of petrol should be avoided in hotels and hospitals.
Buy the little quantity of kerosene and petrol you need.
Though, the scarcity of these products in the past encouraged or even compelled many people to store it.
The consequence is serious and permanent injury if the person is lucky to escape death.
(h) Careless bathing with hot water: without first put in hand on the water surface before being poured on the body.
Nearly all these types of injury are being recorded in hospitality industry both in the Hotel and in the Hospital.
Cases of petrol are not exempted.
List Assessment Question: List 4 ways of injury by burn.
4.0 CONCLUSION By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - explain the meaning of hazard in hospitality industry NOUN 80HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT - list types of injuries, causes and prevention 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed hazards in hospitality industry and the effects it has no the life of the staff.
If has also revealed that both staff and the management should take necessary precautions to avoid occurrence.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question i Defined Hazard as explain 4 type of Injury and their causes.
Question ii Explain the difference between burn and scald.
How can they be prevented?
7.0 REFERENCES Food & Drinks service in the restaurant by Sarah Macleod Fiona Douglas Published by: Hodder and Stoughton – 1994 (ISBN 0340 -611510) Theory and practice of Catering & Hotel Management by R. A. Salami 1st Edition 1994 Published by Tamazo Publishing Co. Ltd. ISBN 978 – 2104 04 – 03) Hotel, Hostel and Hospital House-Keeping by Joan C. Branson Margaret Lennox Published by Edward Arnold – 3rd Edidtion (ISBN 07131 1974 8) NOUN 81HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Module 3 UNIT: 1 ACCIDENTS AND PREVENTIONS IN HOSPITAALITY INDUSTRY TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objective 3.1.
Accident defined 3.2.
Types of Accidents 3.2.1.
Architectural Designs Mistake 3.2.2.
Preventions 3.2.2.
Installation Accidents.
3.3.
Electrical and Water lines Mistakes 3.3.1.
Electrical Fuses 3.3.2.
Use of Sub-standard Materials 3.3.3.
Lack of job specification compliance 3.3.4.
Fire Accidents 3.3.5.
Combustible materials, Air and Heat 3.4.
Fire Fighting/extinguishing Fire 3.4.1.
Starving 3.5.
Smothering 3.5.1.
Cooling 3.5.2.
Fire Extinguishers 3.5.3.
Red fire Bucket 3.5.4.
Fire Alarm Detector 3.5.5.
Fire Brigade 3.5.6.
Preventions of Fire 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor marked Assignment 7.0 References and other resources NOUN 82HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the eleventh unit of this course.
This unit is also a follow-up to units 9 and 10 discussing about the security and safety hazards in hospitality industry.
This unit explains the general causes of accidents and the preventions 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - Understand the meaning of accidents in hospitality industry - Understand types and causes of accidents and - Understand the preventions 3.1 ACCIDENT DEFINED Accidents are un-expected circumstancial happening resulting into industry, pains and discomfort of the body.
Most accidents are avoidable if necessary precautions are taken.
Accident can also lead to destruction of lives and properties.
3.2 TYPES OF ACCIDENT I will like to categorize type of accident into five major parts.
This will embrace any noticeable form of accident which may likely occur in hospitality industry.
These are:- Architectural mistakes (Human Installation, accident (mistake); fire accident; Electrical accident; mechanical equipment operated.
3.2.1 Architectural Design Mistake.
Architectural mistakes in designing during the initial outlay and planning of hospitality industry can cause accident at a later date.
Many buildings used to collapse because of the defects in the structural design.
Poor design of staircases, structural projections are very common accidents in a building which can result into a temperament injury or in some fatal circumstances can lead to instant death.
When projected angles suppose not to be too long, if an architect designed it longer it may fall down in future due to pressure and forces of heavy traffic.
3.2.2 Preventions NOUN 83HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT A qualified architect should be looked for during the initial outlay of any building in Hotels, Motels, Guest Houses and in the Hospital.
An architect who has a degree, well experienced should be consulted to produce architectural design since you are a novice on the professional line.
A qualified architect can be discovered from his past performances and the number of projects which he has successfully handled.
This is the only way architectural and structural accidents can be avoided.
3.3 INSTALLATION ACCIDENT This is another type of major accidents in hospitality industry.
The contractors handling installations of materials and equipment during construction work often than not causes accident after the job has been handed over to the establishment.
Many accidents have been recorded from faulty installations of materials.
Many electrical pipe lines are wrongly connected most especially the conduct wiring system.
3.3.1 Electrical And Water Lines Should be properly demarcated to prevent contact with each other.
Water is a good conductor of electricity.
A very careful handling of electrical installation is very important.
3.3.2 Electrical Fuses which are meant for low voltage should not be mistaken for high voltage.
This is to prevent plugging a low voltage electrical equipment on a high voltage mains supply or vice-versa.
3.3.3 The use of Sub-Standard Materials.
3.3.4 Many contractors are fond of using sub-standard materials during construction work in order to maximize profit.
3.3.4 Lack of jog Specification.
Many contractors and builders do not comply with the structural design specifications and this often times leads into accident in the nearest.
3.3.5 Preventions NOUN 84HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Greediness to make more money and to cheat usually prevent builders to buy or use high qualit6y materials for the construction work.
This type of habit should stop in order to prevent accident.
Civil level of understanding.
The builders and the contractors do not bother on the civil implications and social condemnations of bad job.
When a builder gets a construction job, his thinking at that time is “how much is coming into my pocket?
How to finish and complete the building success fully, get goodwill, good recommendations and build up reputations will be put aside.
The prevention measure on this habit is that builders should first look for goodwill and reputations.
Secondly, they should know that good names are better than riches”.
Thirdly, they should consider that human beings will stay in that building and therefore, should not be a murderer through bad job and poor construction.
Contractor should also be self disciplined and obey the ethics of their profession.
Self Assessment Question: (a) Define Accident.
(b) List 5 causes of accident 3.4 FIRE ACCIDENT Fire accident is combustion of flammable items.
Fire burns through three processes: these are by: fuel(something to burn)Air (to produce oxygen and enhance burning to continue Heat (to supply energy) 3.4.1 If there is no materials to burn e.g.
fuel, burning cannot take place,.
This is combustion.
If there is no air, burning will extinguish If there is no heat, fire cannot strengthen.
3.5 FIRE FIGHTING AND EXTINGUISHING FIRE The first three ways to prevent fire to burn is to prevent the three ways that burning can take place.
These are: 3.5.1 Starving NOUN 85HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT If there is no further articles for fire to burn it will extinguish.
For an example, if you light a piece of paper, after the paper has finished burning the which part black substances appear called carbon.
This carbon residue does not burn again; the fire will disappear.
So when fire is burning, and there are no more materials to burn it will go off.
If a building is burning, after all the combustible materials have finished burning, the wall remains because blocks are non.
Combustible.
3.5.2 SMODTHERING This is a way of removing the air.
If fire is restricted into an enclosed area, it will stop burning.
If you light a candle and after sometime, you cover it with a glass or bottle, it will be put-off.
3.5.3 COOLING If water is poured on water, it reduces the heat and the fire will be out.
That is the reason, why water is always the first material to use and attack fire burning.
Burning has weak effects on wet substances and that is also the reason why fire cannot burn inside water or river or ocean.
3.5.4.
Fire Extinguishers All the staff working in hospitality industry be it a receptionist office clerk, room attendant, supervisors, managers, security officer, waiters and kitchen staff including the drivers should have the knowledge of using fire extinguishers.
The way to operate it and handle it must be taught and be understood by them in case of an emergency, After it has been used, the empty cylinder should be sent to the dealer to help service and refill the cylinder.
3.5.6 Red Bucket of Sands Red buckets filled with dry sands are to be provided along the corridors, open corners of building, outside the office and other strategic places which can easily be used to attack the beginning source of fire before other fire fighting equipment are provided.
3.5.7 Fire Alarm Detector NOUN 86HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT These are usually installed on the corridor walls and other external areas.
When you notice fire burning, the glass is broken as already instructed inside the fire glass notice.
Break glass in case of fire” 3.5.8 Fire Brigade Fire brigade services are available in state capitals and major urban towns in each state.
Their number is usually “999”.
They have more sophisticated weapon to fight fire.
These facilities are not available in too many parts of the country.
This accounts for the fact that when a building catches fire, no assistance, unit when the whole building is razed down the government should do something about it.
Although, the remote causes of fire hazards are not rampant in villagers as in the urban area.
3.6 PREVENTION OF FIRES PETROL STATIONS & PETROL TANKERS.
Petrol station fire hazards are many and fire always extend to the neighboring buildings and properties.
Petrol tanker vehicles are also in this group.
Many lives have been claimed as a result of petrol hazard.
The prevention is that filling stations should not be cited in a congested area, market area, commercial nerve centers; while houses should not be too close to the filling stations.
The petrol tankers should drive very carefully well to prevent accidents and burning.
Hotels, Motels, Hospitals should not be established near filling stations and vice-versa Cigarettes Ends All cigarettes ends should be thrown inside the san bucket and ash tray.
Careless dropping of cigarettes end can result into burning and fire-outbreak.
Indiscriminate storing of Petrol and other Inflammable liquids and substances.
All inflammable substances such as petrol, kerosene turpentine, aerosols like air fresheners should not be placed near source of fire e.g.
in the kitchen area.
Gas Cookers NOUN 87HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Before gas cooker is lit, ensure that it is proof not leaking.
Experience matters a lot in this regard.
Many uses cannot perceive smell if gas leakage.
It is not a safety guide.
However, try to learn this.
And if you do not know how to operate gas cooker equipment leave it and use the one that is safe like the kerosene store and fire-wood.
Wrong Placing of Canole When a canola is lit, try to stay with the canola.
Do not light canola and go away.
It is very risky and dangerous wrong lighting and placing canola has caused many homes, guests bedrooms, to catch fire and destroy properties.
Fire notice Board This should be displayed in conspicuous places of the hotels and hospitals.
The directive of what to do is usually written as “IN THE EVENT OF AN OUTBREAK OF FIRE, LEAVE YOUR ROOM IMMEDIATELY FOR A SAFE PLACE RAISE ALARM”.
Other directives apart from that can also be displayed.
Indiscriminate burning refuse Refuse and derbies should not be burnt in an unsafe area without being attended to.
Burning should take place in an isolated, open area to prevent spread of the burning or to prevent air.
Breeze carrying fire into another un-safe area.
Supervise burning until when it is finished.
Self Assessment Questions.
List 5 ways to prevent fires in hospitality industry.
4.0.
CONCLUSION By the end of this unit, it is expected that you should be able to explain accident, causes and preventions of type of accident in hospitality industry.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed the hazards of accident in hospitality industry, the cause and how you can prevent it in order to safe-guard lives and properties.
NOUN 88HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question 1 Define accident and explain 2 major types of accident in hospitality industry.
Question 2 Explain five ways on how fire can be prevented in hospitality industry.
7.0 REFERENCES Salami R.A. 1994, Theory and Practice of Catering and Hotel Management Tameza Publishing co. Ltd. 1st Edition Joan C. Brainson and Margaret Lannox 1976 , Hotel : Hostel and Hospitality Housekeeping-3rd Edition Edward Arnold.
NOUN 89HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 ELECTRICAL & MECHANICAL ACCIDENTS IN HOSPITAL LIST INDUSTRY TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Mechanical/Equipment Accident 3.2 Types of Mechanical Injury 3.2.1 Mechanical Cut 3.2.2 Prevention and Safety measures 3.3 Electrical Accident 3.3.1 Types of Electrical Injury 3.3.2 Electric shock 3.3.3 Electric burns 3.3.4 Electric paralysis 3.3.5 Types of Electrical Hazards 3.4 Electrical Accident Preventions 3.5 General Summary of Accident Protection 3.5.1 Planning of Work Environment 3.5.2 Protection 3.5.3 Consequential effect 3.5.4 Self acclaimed accident 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the twelfth unit of this unit.
This unit is a continuation of security and safety in Hospitality Industry.
This unit explains possibly the last forms of accident and injury in hospitality industry which is Electrical and mechanical accidents.
In the learners should be able to learn about this type of accidents.
NOUN 90HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: - understand electrical and mechanical accidents - understand the type of injury and consequences of mechanical and electrical accidents - understand the safety procedure 3.1 MECHANICAL/EQUIPMENT ACCIDENT These are the equipment and devices that works with electricity current.
Without the electricity the equipment cannot work.
And when the machine is working it is switched off or the NEPA (National Electric Power Authority) takes light off, the equipment automatically stops working and production also comes to a half.
3.2 TYPES OF INJURY There are only two types of injury which mechanical accident can cause, there are Mechanical cut and electrical shock.
3.2.1 Mechanical Cut The injury can happen when:- - the hand is put inside the grinding plate to remove food like the tomato grinding machine, beef mincing machine, maize, corn, beans grinding cut.
- when the hand is put inside the motor blade by mistake or naked blade.
- there is a mechanical fault i.e the machine is faulty and report is not made for repair.
- when an untrained staff operates the machine - when the user does not concentrate, he may not know when he puts his hand in a working place.
3.2.2 Prevention/Safety Measures - Ensure that the equipment is in perfect working condition - Ensure that the equipment is well protected against hazard - Ensure that you observe the operational instructions - Ensure that all the necessary repairs are carried out on faulty mechanical equipment before use.
NOUN 91HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT - Do not manage and electrically operated machine, the hazard risk is always high.
- Do not joke with mechanical equipment when working, avoid riddles and joke, minimize discussing with your colleague while in the machine.
- Ensure low noise environment so that when the equipment develop fault, you will be able to hear and stop the equipment from causing hazard.
Very important - Do not touch electrical equipment with wet hands - Never move any electrical equipment working without disconnecting it.
3.3 ELECTRICAL ACCIDENT This is direct contact to body with a life-ire.
It is an accident which involves any part of the body to touch a naked wire, with current.
Electricity injury can be mild or severe and fatal in most cases.
The extent of electrical injury depends on the (power) voltage of the current.
And, the more the voltage the more severe is the injury while a low voltage can cause mild injury.
3.3.1 Types of Electric Injury 3.3.2 One of Electric Injury is Electric Shock Electric shock injury depends on the type of voltage that somebody mistakenly comes into contact with.
A house – hold lamp holder flexible wire for 40 WATTS or 60 WATTS bulb at home will produce a mild electric shock than the cable supplying current for the air-conditioner or electric – iron.
3.3.3 Electric burns Electric burns is causes by positive and negative connection meeting at the same point which results into serious spark.
The spark produces and disperse high current radiants which causes burn.
This type of electrical injury is very common with the electrical engineering staff.
Many staff who have patches on their faces, neck and in particular and fingers are due to an electric sparks.
NOUN 92HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.3.4 Electric Paralysis A very powerful and high voltage of electricity can cause permanent paralysis of the hard.
It is caused in the same way as electric spark.
The only differences is that, electric paralysis is a very power current.
3.3.5 Causes of Electrical Hazard (a) Detective Ear thing: A detective ear thing of electrical equipment during construction of a building can cause electric hazard.
So also, a detective ear thing of electrical installation can cause electric hazard.
(b) Damaged cables, and flexible wires: These types of spoilt wires if not replaces can cause electric hazard when the positive and negative wires touch each other.
(c) Overloading: overloading of circuit can easily result into electric spark and can generated into fire accident.
(d) Unquenched handling of electricity can lead into electric hazard due to wrong connection.
3.4 ELECTRICAL ACCIDENT PREVENTIONS (i) Do not touch electricity wire with wet hands.
This is because, water is a good conductor of electricity which can cause electric shock.
(ii) Always keep electric supply cables away from wet surfaces and floors to avoid shock.
(iii) Always switch off all electrical appliances at the end of days business except the freezers and fridges.
(iv) Always switch off all electrical appliances when you want to carry out repairs of clean and remove from the main socket.
(v) Always remove electric cables from the possible where legs can cause damage by being walked over (vi) Always attend to electrical faults promptly and protect the fuse boxes by closing them.
(vii) Only qualified electricians should be allowed to hand electrical problems, repairs, installation or extension of main voltage supply.
3.5 GENERAL SUMMARY OF ACCIDENT PREVENTION Each year in hospitality industry, many hotels and hospitals record cases of injury of different types of accident too.
Many could have been avoided if proper care and precautionary measures are taken.
NOUN 93HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.5.1 Planning of Work Environment The work environment should be planned so that potentially dangerous activities are kept within a restricted area: the cover should be placed near sinks and tables so that hot pot of soup or rice do not have to cross the traffic areas.
3.5.2 Protection Comply with all the instructions and safety guide of electrical machine and equipment 3.5.3 Consequential Effects Consider the effects that your actions may have on the safety of other e.g always wipe off any spills on a traffic area to prevent slippery and accidental fall.
Do not take things for granted and always ensure that objects are not placed on a traffic area without being removed and put in proper place.
3.5.4 Self Acclaimed Accident Many people do not consider that accidents can happen without notice, and many are very ignorant of this fact.
The followings are some of the self – acclaimed accident (a) Heavy load: Always use your tight to assist in carrying load and not the back.
However, this is a safe practice.
But in some parts of this country usually the farmers most especially the women in Niger State use their shoulder to carry load.
(b) Assistance: Always seek for a helping hand to carry load if it is too heavy for you to lift up.
This assists to prevent fall and damage to the spinal cord.
(c) Alcoholism: If you must operate machine; don’t drink.
And if you must drink, don’t operate machine.
Many staff have suffered injury resulting from alcoholic accident.
Drunkenness is very dangerous while at work.
It should be prohibited.
Many establishments always regard it as a punishable offence.
Self Assessment Question: List 5 causes of electrical hazards Explain self acclaimed accident with examples.
NOUN 94HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, it is expected that you have learnt about the mechanical and electrical accidents commonly happens in hotels and hospitals.
You should have been able to understand as well the causes and their safety precautions.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed how staff usually sustains injury from accidents and the causes for such hazards.
This unit has also revealed how staff can stay at work accident - free 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Question I (Tma) Explain three causes of mechanical cuts and preventions.
Question II (TMA) Explain an electric shock, the causes and preventions 7.0 REFERENCES Hotel and Catering supervision (Social and Economic Aspects of the Industry) by Ken Gale, Peter Odgers Published by Pitman 1984 ISBN 0273 028162 NOUN 95HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 STAFF WELFARE IN HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Staff welfare Defined 3.2 Importance of staff welfare 3.2.1 Sense of Recognition 3.2.2 Staff Interest 3.2.3 Job Satisfaction 3.2.4 Staff turn-over is reduced 3.2.5 Good working relationship 3.2.6 Industrial Conflicts prevented 3.3 Staff Welfare Package 3.3.1 Conducive Atmosphere 3.3.2 Infrastructural facilities 3.3.3 Staff Canteen 3.3.4 Staff uniforms 3.3.5 Medical Treatment 3.3.6 Death Benefits 3.3.7 Staff Retirement Benefit 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the thirteen unit of this course.
In this course, the students will learn and know about the welfare of staff working in the hospitality industry and the various welfare packages which the staff needs in this work-environment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, learner will be able to: NOUN 96HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT - explain the meaning of staff welfare - list all or some of staff welfare packages and explain the importance of staff welfare.
3.1 STAF WELFARE DEFINED Staff welfare is the total responsibility which the management of any establishment has designed to provide for staff in order to ensure a safe and conducive work environment, to ensure security and safety of lives and properties and a guaranted future benefits.
Future benefits means life and the work; and that is w……….. staff retires home.
Staff welfare differs from one establishment to the other due to the environmental advantages and economies of the opportunity cost that is available.
In an hotel for example, feeding of staff is much easier than feeding staff in the hospital because hotel can prepare foods, while it is also easier for the hospital staff to receive immediate medical attention faster and easier than a staff in hotel industry.
In these examples each of them as a comparative advantage of work- environment than the other and also had advantages of internal economies means that the food that the staff will eat cannot affect the restaurant profit margin, while the drug that an hospital staff will take will have no effect on the level of drug availability in the hospital.
Though, a proper records have to be taken for proper accountability 3.2 IMPORTANCE OF STAFF WELFARE A good staff welfare package has the following benefits both the staff and the management 3.2.1 Sense of Recognition When a staff work environment is conducive such staff develops sense of belonging and responsibility.
If a cleaner has a place to sit or relax during work – hour, he is happy unlike when he sits under the sun.
in hotel industry, there is a cloak-room where stewards and cleaners stay after work.
3.2.2 Staff Interest for the job A good welfare system can make staff to have more interest on the job.
The most important factor that promotes efficiency is interest for the job.
Some people work for the sake of receiving salary and wages while the interest is not there.
If interesting is developed for job, there will be joy.
This point leads us to job satisfaction.
NOUN 97HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.3.2 Job Satisfaction A staff who is satisfied with his job has little to complain about.
Such staff are always happy, perform very well and their level of productivity and performances are always high.
At the same time, some staff are not satisfy with the job they perform probably due to their pay which does not commensurate with their educational standard, or that the job they perform does not justify what they expect to receive.
3.2.4 Staff Turnover is reduced Staff turn-over is the rate of employment and re-employment and termination and frequent replacements when staff turn-over is high, it depicts poor management of staff.
Progress is discouraged.
Productivity also declines while efficiency is adversely affected.
The staff feel that work is threathened.
Management should identify why staff turn over is high and make necessary improvement.
When there is frequent change of hands, the standard of service is adversely affected.
For instance, an hotel reception having four different hands (receptionists) within six months would experience different level of performance viz: satisfactory, not satisfactory, below average performance.
There will not be a steady flow of satisfactory and required level of performances.
Staff turn-over is costly because each time a new hand comes in, he has to be trained.
Even though, if it is In-house training, it involves extra efforts, energy and time.
The management should therefore, endeavour to maintain her staff strength, and working staff by providing nice staff welfare packages.
This is how a high staff over can be reduced or prevented.
3.2.5 Good Working Relationship When the staff and the management are satisfactory with each other, good working relationship is encouraged which is better and suitable for the management.
The management will be able to achieve her goals.
There is tendency for progress and increase in the level of efficiency and productivity.
3.2.6 Industrial Conflicts Prevented A very good staff welfare packages will eliminate industrial conflicts and misunderstanding from the staff and the management.
But in a situation where the packages is poor and discouraging, an incessant complaints, sabotage incitement and conspiracy will prevail among the worker.
This will eventually lead into mis-understanding between the staff and the management.
This does not augur well on the progress and future development of the establishment.
Hotels, Motels, Guests house and NOUN 98HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Hospitals should endeavour to provide essential and work stimulating welfare packages for the staff, 3.3 STAFF WELFARE PACKAGES The followings are the responsibilities which the management are expected to provide for the working staff in order to allow conducive and satisfactory performances to reign among the staff.
The management should realize that having a well furnished hotel, lavishly furnished a room or having modern and sophisticated equipment in the hospital, the management cannot do the job involved.
It is the duty of workers to provide services.
And if the workers are not motivated to do the job, there will be low and unsatisfactory productivity.
3.3.1 Conducive Atmosphere A conducive atmosphere to work will promote good health, living and comfortable work environment.
However, work environment cannot be the same in hospitality industry because of differences of services.
The kitchen staff work in a hot environment due to the heat from cooking, where as, the waiters work inside an air-conditioned in the restaurant.
This conditional variance can call for an individual for the kitchen staff by giving them heat allowance.
In addition, the management should ensure that the kitchen heat must not generate to an extent of becoming sources of hazard.
The management should provide devices on how to reduce the heat and make the kitchen health hazard free section.
3.3.2 Infra-structure facilities The management should provide working facilities to enhance efficiency and also increase level of productivity.
In hotel or hospital, when there is no mopping sticks, vacuum cleaner or suction, no cleaning agents like harpic, detergent to use for cleaning toilets, definitely the toilets will become dirty and filthy.
In the offices, adequate provision of chairs, tables, file cabinet, office equipment should be provided.
In a situation whereby many staff are sharing one table to work or when a staff has to wait for another to finish his assignment before he can start his own will cause inordinate delays and will discourage high productivity and free flow of work.
The management must be very responsive to the cost management.
The provision of amenities will be subject to and be determined by the volume of job and the existing job.
NOUN 99HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.3.3 Staff Canteen Provision for free food or subsidized feeding while on duty is a good welfare package.
It presents staff from loosing reasonable hours going out to eat.
And is some cases, staff canteen can be contracted out to an independent caterer to run.
The management provides the hall, the dinning chairs and tables, the cooking facilities such as electric gas cooker/burner, fridge, electricity and water supply.
The caterer provides the raw-materials, service plates drinking glasses, table mats, cutlery and other table accompaniments.
The price list is cheaper than the outside price list.
Where the management subsidizes, a ticket is used by the staff to eat.
The Caterer and the management will sort out the accounting reconciliation at the end of the month.
3.3.3 Staff Uniforms Staff are provided with appropriate uniforms.
The stewards, the room maids, the cleaners, the receptionists, the waiter, the security officers will have different style of uniforms.
Uniforms give pride.
3.3.4 Medical Treatment In hotel industry, there should be provision for first aid box to assist staff treat minor injuries, mild aches and pairs while on duty.
This is the responsibilities of the house-keeping in conjunction with the overall boss of the hotel.
In hospital, there is provision for first aid box regardless of the fact that they are in drugs house.
Major accident and injury to staff in hospitality industry should be well taken care.
Such a victim should be taken to the hospital for treatment while the hospital bill must be paid for by the management.
Welfare on medical treatment differs from one organization to others, while some organization will specify the type of ailment they can be responsible for, some can give other conditions.
Some management will decline on treatment of gonorrhea, HIV Aids, abortion and other infectious diseases; some do not pay for staff admission in the hospital but can pay certain part of the bill.
Some medical welfare can only cover the staff without members of his family, while some hotel can specify staff welfare for medical treatment.
3.3.6 Death Benefit A good organization should take care of a staff that died on duty or while still in the active service of the employment.
Welfare package on death varies from one hotel or hospital to other.
But whether in a small medium or big NOUN 100HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT establishment, the management cannot shy away from this responsibility.
Payment of the deceased entitlement to the next of kin is a good welfare package.
3.3.7 Staff Retirement Benefit Staff welfare also takes care of what happens after the “work has finished” or “life after work”.
A good organization should pay gratuity for the job well done.
Gratuity depends on the policy of the company.
Gratuity is always calculated on the numbers of year a staff put-in.
small size hotels and hospitals do not always recognize staff retirement compared with big hotels or hospitals or in government hotel and government hospital.
Whether in a small or medium or big hotels or hospitality, the management owes it as a lot of responsibility to make her staff perform well, live a better condition of health, work in a comfortable environment and an environment devoid of hazards, insecurity and an environment that guarantees better future.
Any management that provides these types of welfare packages will always have good staff and these staff are also great asset to the establishment.
Self Assessment Question: List 7 types of staff welfare package 4.0 CONCLUSION It is expected that you have learnt about staff welfare in hospitality industry and you should be able to list all the importance staff welfare and the factors affecting staff welfare.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed to you the effects of good staff welfare to any management that provides for it and the disadvantages of not providing good welfare for the staff 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT TMA Question i Explain staff welfare and explain 2 importance of staff welfare Question ii Explain 5 types staff welfare packages.
NOUN 101HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT (i) cilities to facilitate job performance (ii) Staff canteen to prevent staff going far to look for wheat to eat is also a food welfare package.
(iii) Medical facilities to ensure good health (iv) Staff uniform.
To enable pride and confidence to be demonstrated 7.0 REFERENCES Hotel and Catering supervision (social and economic aspects of the Industry by Ken Gale, Peter Odgers Published by Pitnan 1984 ISBN 0273, 028162 Personal Individual skill experiences at de-friendship motel as “Motel Manager” (1985 – 1990) Kano Motel La mirage as “General Manager (1990 – 1995) Kano NOUN 102HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 STAFF MOTIVATION IN HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Importance of Motivation 3.2 Provide Encouragement 3.2.1 Job mobility 3.2.2 Qualitative staff 3.2.3 Standard of living 3.2.5 Career Development 3.2.6 Job Satisfaction 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the fourteenth unit of this course.
In this unit learner will be taught about motivation of staff in hospitality industry.
The explanation and motivation factors will be discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVE By the end of this unit, learners should be able to: - explain the meaning of motivation - list the importance of motivation and list the need for motivation.
In hospitality industry.
3.1 MOTIVATION DEFINED Motivation is the sum total encouragement and inducement which an employer provides for the employees to keep the job moving.
The encouragement and inducement are the needs which motivate staff actions.
NOUN 103HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.2 THE IMPORTANCE OF MOTIVATION Motivation is one of the strategies an employer need to enable him forge ahead successfully in managing the team work of the organization.
These actions are production of goods and services.
3.2.1 To Provide Encouragement Motivation is to encourage staff to put in their extra efforts in order to realize the goals of the management.
When staff are provided with certain incentives, they will be satisfied to make sacrifice in for of extra duty.
In hotel industry, there is not specific time of closing as well as in the hospital.
A waiter in the restaurant who is expected to officially close at 10pm in the night may have a customer who can walk in at 9.45pm and if this customer does not leave the restaurant, he can not leave him and lock the door.
He has to stay.
The waiter knows that he is expected to stay.
If such a waiter has not been motivated, he will tell the customer that the has closed.
This is a loss of revenue to the employer.
In the hospital, a staff nurse who was on night duty and expected to close at 7.am might not be able to go if there is an emergency few minutes to her closing time.
Motivation gives courage to work which also increases productivity.
It also increases efficiency and satisfactory services in hospitality management.
3.2.2 Job Mobility An employer who motivates the staff will reduce high rate of job change- overs.
A good staff is an asset which the management must keep and maintain.
Many hotels, Guest houses and hospital might not have regard for a staff professionalism until when such a staff leaves the organization for another allied organization.
The former organization might not got an immediate replacement.
The effect of vacancy might have a serious draw back and consequence of that establishment.
The new hand to be employed may be lacking some qualities.
This usually happens to Hotel manager is leaving one hotel for another hotel.
Even, some employers are in the habit of snatching good hotel manager to work in their organization.
The service hands are not excerpted.
If a staff is good in the restaurant service, he may be motivated by another hotel to join their work force.
The chef d…………… (the head cook) is another type of staff that can be motivated by another management to take over kitchen organization.
There is high demand for the chef in many big and medium size hotels.
Not everybody or staff in the kitchen can assume the responsibility position of a NOUN 104HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT chef.
In the method of recruitment are carried out.
A good motivated establishment induces staff to keep to the job and get the job going – on.
3.2.3 Qualitative Staff Staff can only learn and become an expert if he stays long in a work- environment.
Experience comes but not in one day.
Experience is from learning processes.
And staff who started from the low cadre and rise up to the level of a supervisor must have got the required experience for efficient performance of duty in that particular organization.
Such staff can even rise to a more higher level of responsibility.
If another vacancy exists and a new hand brought in as a supervisor from school of catering and hotel management, the staff who rose to the supervisory level will have more experience than the fresh one from school.
Experienced staff are qualitative staff.
Experience facilitates services, because it makes use of the possible best way of doing and providing services and production in the most economical way.
It saves cost, time, prevent accident, increases productivity and provide a solid foundation for the establishment.
Management should try to motivate staff in – order to get actions from them.
3.2.4 Increases Standard of Living Staff standard of living is encouraged.
This promotes satisfaction of their opportunity cost, it enhances provision for their basic needs or primary needs.
Workers primary needs are: food, air, drinks, sex houses, clothing.
A well motivated staff is a well paid staff whose needs are met.
The secondary needs which are self recognition, self esteem, love and affection, companionship, social status, societal status, occupational relevance and recognition are bound to be achieved.
Many domestic development and acquisition of secondary needs are achieved.
But in an establishment where incentives and the remuneration is poor, staff can hardly meet up with their primary need before they can imagine going for the secondary needs.
3.2.5 Career Development Staff who wishes to advance to a higher level of responsibility can decide to stay with the organization and subsequently be encouraged to develop his skills and knowledge and through learning process; or learning by correspondence and even register for part – time learning.
It always happens in many establishments and to many staff.
A well motivated stall continue to use his experience and industrial skill for the progress of the company.
NOUN 105HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.2.6 Job Satisfaction A staff who is well catered for will have satisfaction for the job.
Such staff are always happy with their staff job performance.
They are proud to be identified with such an organization.
In many hotels and hospitals, some staff are frustrated because they are not satisfied either with the employer or with the work environment.
Much cannot be expected from such staff.
It is either the job does not commensurate with the pay or the pay does not commensurate with the job.
Job satisfaction is a by product of motivation.
There are staff who for one reason or the other do not want the public to identify them working in a certain company.
And, as such as they close for work, they do not even like to appear in their uniform, while some staff are very proud of their work environment.
They have pride working in that establishment.
This type of interest to be associated and be know as staff of a particular company should be a major concern and responsibility of the employer.
Self Assessment Question: (i) Defined the work motivation (ii) List four important of motivation 4.0 CONCLUSION By the end of this unit, it is expected that learner should be to explain motivation and relevance of motivation in hospitality industry.
5.0 SUMMARY Summary unit has reveled the type of need and responsibility which an employer should do to improve the living condition of the workers to enable them go on with the job.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT TMA Question 1 Define Motivation Explain 2 importance of staff motivation in hospitality industry.
Question 2 Explain Job satisfaction and Career Development as related to staff motivation NOUN 106HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES AND OTHER SOURCES Hotel and Catering supervision (social and economic aspects of the Industry) Ken Gale.
Published by Pitman ISBN 0273 028162 1984 Personal Industrial Skill Experiences at De- friendship motel as “Motel Manager” (1985 – 1990), Kano.
Motel ha mirage as ”Ge neral Manager” (1990 – 1995), Kano NOUN 107HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 FACTORS AFFECTING MOTIVATION IN HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT INDUSTRY.
TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Motivation Defined 3.2 Types of motivations 3.2.1 Remuneration 3.2.1(a) Salary 3.2.1(b) Wages 3.2.2 Factors affecting variance in salary and wages 3.2.3 Differences in salary and wages 3.4 Allowances and Loans (short term and long term loans) 3.5 Benefits 3.5.1 Official cars 3.5.2 Medical facilities 3.5.3 Off – duty 3.5.4 Annual leave 3.5.5 Casual leave 3.5.6 Career Opportunity 3.5.7 Training & Induction 3.5.8 Pension, Gratuity, Death and Compensation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References and Other resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the fifteen unit of this course which is also the last unit.
In this unit we shall complete discussion about staff motivation.
The proceeding chapter dealt with the explanation.
This unit will explain types of motivation in hospitality industry.
NOUN 108HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this last unit, the learner should be able to: - explain the various types of staff motivations - list types of staff motivations - explain how motivation can influence staff productivity and efficiency 3.1 Motivation has been defined as sum total encouragement and inducement which an employer provides for the employees to keep the job moving.
The encouragement and inducement are the needs which motivate staff actions.
These actions are the product of goods and services.
3.2 TYPES OF MOTIVATIONS We shall consider in as much as possible various type of motivation that will enable you to know the type that you prefer in any organization.
Staff motivations differ from one establishment to another.
However, an employer who can not motivate the team work hardly get high level of productivity.
This is because the staff will not consider the job first, but it is the staff first, job last.
While in some well motivated establishment, the staff firstly consider the job, because without the job, the basic and primary needs such as food, clothing, accommodation, sex, air are not achieved.
And these are the factors of human survival and existence.
They consider job first and self last.
When the money comes, they plan for the way on how to spend the money.
The reverse is the principle of some establishment.
They do not bother if he company collapses because there is no provision for their basic and primary needs.
We shall divide motivation into three groups in a tabular form and discuss them Remuneration Allowances/Loans Benefit Salary House allowance Official car Wages Transport allowance Medical facilities Over-time allowance Off- duty Vehicle loan Annual leave House loan Casual leave Refurbishing loan Career opportunity Job security Training and induction Pension and gratuity NOUN 109HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT Death Occupational compensation 3.2.1 REMUNERATION This is the total basic pay which an employer agreed to pay the employee for performing certain agreed or specified job in an organization.
This comes in a form of salary or wages.
Wages and salary are therefore, payment for personal services rendered for performing certain duty.
Salaries are usually paid monthly, although two payments may be made in a month depending on the policy of the establishment.
In hospitality industry, it is not a common system of payment.
It is only very common in product manufacturing industries.
Wages are usually paid daily or weekly.
The earners of wages do not keep a long time to collect their money after they have supplied their labour and services.
If salaries and wages are attractive, worker will strive to have an opportunity to work in hat particular organization.
However, workers should ensure that they put in their best .
The management on the other hand will ensure that workers justify their pay.
A well paid staff is a happy and comfortable worker.
There are a lot of conveniences associated with good salaries.
In hospitality industry, staff salary on a similar job such as a receptionist varies from one organiza tion to another.
3.2.2 Factors Affecting Variance in Salary and Wages Turn-over – The daily, weekly and monthly sales will affect the type of salary to be paid to the workers.
If one hotel in the same location is performing better than another hotel, the one doing well may decide to pay higher in order to motivate staff to do better.
The profit margin – The profit margin declared also determines and influence the type of salary to be paid workers.
Where the profit margin is high, salary may be increase or other fringe benefits.
Profit margin is also influenced by the over heads.
If the amount of money pent on maintenance is high, the level of profit margin will fall.
NOUN 110HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.2.3 DIFFERENCES IN SALARY/WAGES Workers salary are differentiated not on age level or sex or religion but purely and strictly considered on the type of labour.
We have skill, semi- skilled, and un-skilled labour.
Skilled labour are qualified and experience for the job.
They are always at the top of the management.
The semi-skilled are supervisory level.
The salary they receive is lower than the skilled labour.
While the un-skilled labour receive the lowest.
This classification affects other motivations like loans and allowances and fringe benefits.
3.4 ALLOWANCES AND LOANS Allowance is an additional provision added to the staff salary in order to supplement his basic salary.
This is separately stated in the pay-roll sheet.
A pay-roll sheet is the analysis of staff payment, while loan is a financial assistance provided to the staff to meet up with certain emergencies or contingencies.
Loans are payable over a period of time with or without an interest.
Some establishment may charge a very little interest amount on loan while some do not charge.
However, this depends on individual’s policy.
In hospitality industry, interest is not normally charge on small loans, it is deductible over a period of time.
Such loan can be short time or long time.
A short time loan does not attract interest and it is payable within a reasonable time.
The amount involved is always small.
A long time loan attracts interest, though the interest is low.
This also depends on individual company’s policy.
Long time loan involve big money.
Such money could be used to buy cars or for building houses or for buying land or shares.
Other types of allowances to be provided for the staff in hospitality industry are: - transport allowance to enable them come to work and go home.
When vehicles are provided, staff transport allowance is reduced.
But where there is no company’ vehicles, reasonable amount of money is paid.
Over-time allowance: - An extra duty performed by staff or an additional hours spent to attend to customers pays a lot of dividends to the progress and development of the establishment.
Staff are encouraged to do overtime so that work schedule are completed with a schedule time.
Vehicle loans, refurbishing loans are also good incentive that an employer should provide to give courage and boost their work morale.
It is to be known that only the transport and house allowances, fringe benefits and if possible the overtime allowances that usually appear on the pay-roll sheet.
The long and short term loans have a separate record such as vehicles loan, house loan and refurbishing loan.
NOUN 111HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.5 BENEFITS The fringe benefits are special provisions not necessary and directly giving cash to the workers.
But staff are benefited from such provisions.
The provision are valuables and are monetary benefits.
This is another way an establishment maintains the welfare of the staff.
Some benefits involve direct cash delivery but not in a monthly basis such as annual leave bonus.
The amount is payable once a year or when the staff is proceeding on leave.
Staff benefits includes the followings: 3.5.1 Official Cars Cars are normally provided for the executive staff of the establishment to facilitate mobility and contact with people.
It is a good means of communication.
Official cars are not for the junior staff.
3.5.2 Medical facility The provision for medical treatments within the country and outside the country should be extended to staff.
Serious cases of treatment are referred to overseas.
However, the type of hospitality management which can provide these facilities are only the first class hotel and hospitals.
This is also limited to a very few executive top management staff.
At the present level of our economic development in hospitality industry, no management can afford to send his/her staff to overseas for medical treatment.
All cases of illness are referred to hospital.
Further more, hotels and hospitals usually engage consultation of private hospitals and clinics in towns where staff can be referred to for medical treatment.
This however becomes imperative in view of the rate of work hazards in hotels and hospitals.
When a staff is injured which is beyond using first aids box, the staff is quickly rushed to the hospital for immediate attention.
Medical facilities are welcome motivational factor which will boost the worker’s morale.
The small hotels or hospitals may not have sufficient fund to afford on their staff medical facilities.
The option available to them in some cases is to allow the sick staff go home and treat oneself before he can continue with the job.
NOUN 112HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 3.5.3 Off-Duty This is a day set aside for staff personal use.
Off-duty enables staff to regain all the lost energy and afford him the opportunity of resting well also attend to some pressing issues which he can not attend to while working.
However, if it becomes inevitable for the staff not to go on off-duty due to pressures from work, he forfeits the off-duty and be compensated as over time.
Staffs are entitled to one day off in a week.
In hospitals, the duty roster for the staff nurse and ward attendance differ and this is left for the matron or the house- keeper to plan.
Some Staff nurses do have two days off a week most especially if they did night duty for some days.
3.5.4 Annual leave This is a period of time a staff is completely off duty.
The period and number of days vary from one hospital to another and from one hotel to another.
Usually, a minimum of two weeks are allowed for the junior staff.
The intermediate staffs are allowed fourteen days while the senior staffs are allowed twenty eight days.
In some government establishment, the week ends are not inclusive of the number of days mentioned about.
A fourteen day annual leave will be fourteen working days which is very close to three weeks.
Annual leave are accompanied with annual leave bonus or allowance.
The allowance is payable on the day of departure or there about.
3.5.5 Casual leave An emergency leave should be allowed to the staff to solve the emergency issue.
Casual leave does not attract any remuneration and staff should not exceed the number of days indicated inside his letter of approval otherwise he may be asked not to go on off-duty to cover for the extra days spent.
3.5.6 Career Opportunity A well intentioned organization should give room for career development within the organization.
For example if there is a vacancy for the post of a supervisor.
The most senior team leader can be promoted to that position or when here is a vacancy for managerial appointment, the supervisors within the organization may be screened and assessed.
The most suitable one is selected and promoted to that office.
This is a career opportunity which every worker is vying for.
It is demoralising if a competent hand can fill the existing vacancy and somebody is brought from outside to occupy the seat.
This sometimes does not promote good working relationship and the new officer does not also enjoy the NOUN 113HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT support of an expected staff to fill the vacancy.
An appointment into a vacant position in hospitality management should be carefully considered by taking the interest of the existing staff in prime view and that is the only way staff can take up an advancement in future career.
3.5.7 Training and Induction One of the best ways to achieve efficiency, minimize wastes, prevent accidents, prevents errors, reduced mistakes and to increase productivity is to provide training exercises to the staff.
Training is a process of learning and acquisition of more ideas and knowledge.
Training will assist the staff to be more job-oriented.
The hospitality management should endeavour to provide training for the workers in order to reduce complaints and unsatisfactory services.
Too much complaint and unsatisfactory services against the staff and the management can have a serious set-back effect.
Training and induction courses will improve their old system of working to a more perfect and modern way of doing work.
Both the small, medium and big hospitality management should know that their responsibility is to provide services in a friendly, cheerful and hospitable manner.
These qualities are not in-born with them, but they have to acquire it, adapt it and leave with it through practice and training.
3.5.8 Pension, Gratuity and Death compensation Some jobs are pensionable in hospitals and hotels while some are not.
A pensionable job is the job which provide for certain percentage of salary to be paid after the service.
This is usually obtainable in government establishment.
In the private sector, this is not visible.
It is only the gratuity which is paid.
Gratuity is the sum total amount as an entitlement to say “thank you for the services rendered” while the person was working.
It is paid once and for all and that is good bye.
Death gratuity is paid to the next of kin and compensation may be paid in addition to death gratuity most especially if the staff died on active duty.
This is called occupational compensation SELF ASSESSMENT QUESTION List the types of staff motivations?
Differentiate between long term loan and short term loan?
NOUN 114HCM 101 INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit concluded our discussion on staff welfare and motivation in hospitality industry.
It is expected that by the end of this unit, leaner should be able to explain what motivation is all about and the time of motivation which an employer can provide to make staff perform duties satisfactorily.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has revealed the relevance of motivation to staff productivity in hospitality industry as a strong weapon for the realization of the company’s objectivity.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT QUESTION 1 1) Define Motivation 2) List 3 major types of motivation 3) Explain 5 of them.
7.0 REFERENCES (1) Hotel and Catering supervision (social and economic aspects of the Industry) Ken Gale.Published by Pitman ISBN 0273 028162 1984 Personal Industrial Skill Experiences at (1) De- friendship motel as “Motel Manager” (1985 – 1990), Kano.
(2) Motel ha mirage as “General Manager” (1990 – 1995), Kano NOUN 115
