 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: HCM 231 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD AND BEVERAGE PRODUCTION 1 1  COURSE GUIDE HCM 231: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD AND BEVERAGE PRODUCTION 1 Course Writer/Developer: Adenike Olusola Lawal Olabisi Onabanjo University, Yewa Campus, Ogun State Course Editor: Mrs. Florence Uchendu NOUN Lagos.
Programme Leader: Dr (Mrs.) A. O. Fagbemi School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Mr. S. O. Israel-Cookey School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
2  HCM 231: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD AND BEVERAGE PRODUCTION 1 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Food and Beverage Production looks into some of the attributes that the personnel working in the food and beverage industry must possess as service personnel, service outlet and explain hospital tray service and food and beverage service outlet, it explains airline tray service and the rail service as food and beverage service outlet.
It further explains the roles of fast food, cafeteria and public houses ad food and beverage service outlet, it also explains interpersonal skills such as dealing with incidents, spillages, returned food, lost property, illness, alcohol overconsumption, unsatisfactory appearance of children.
It explains sales manager and also function sales in food and beverage service production.
COURSES CONTENTS The course contents consist of types of sales promotion, staffing in Food industry, beverage operation, advertising and merchandizing as types of sales promotion, types of advertising, interpersonal skill and food outlets (hotels, hospitals, tray-service, fast food, cafeteria, public houses).
COURSE AIMS The aims of this course are to expose the learner to Food and beverage production, food and beverage methods and types of personnel, interpersonal skills, food and beverage service outlets.
The aims shall be achieved through the following: 3 (cid:31) Explaining of personal selling as regards sales promotion (cid:31) Defining sales promotion (cid:31) Explaining the three types of sales promotion (cid:31) Defining sale advertising in food and beverage service (cid:31) Explaining merchandizing in food and beverage service (cid:31) Description of what sales manager is (cid:31) Explaining the term customer service (cid:31) Discussing the Food and beverage service method and how it is grouped and how it is grouped under five customer processes.
(cid:31) Defining interpersonal skills (cid:31) Explaining how customers are addressed COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the broad aims as set above, the course is divided into Units and each of the separate unit of the course also has its objectives at the beginning of the unit to help you focus better.
Once you have successfully completed this course, it is expected that you will have a vivid understanding of the concept termed food and beverages.
Upon completion of this course HCM 231 – Food and Beverage Production I you will be able to: i.
Describe advertizing as a type of sales promotion ii.
Describe merchandizing as a type of sales promotion iii.
Define personal selling iv.
Explain who a sales manager is v. Define the term interpersonal skill.
vi.
Identify various interpersonal skills vii.
Explain the peculiarity of each interpersonal skills viii.
Explain the functions of personnel in a food and beverage service production.
ix.
Identify some attributes expected of a personnel in food and beverage production.
x.
Define a Hotel 4 xi.
Explain in details characteristics of a Hotel xii.
Explain the attributes of hospital tray service in food and beverage service production.
STRUCTURE OF THE COURSE The course you are studying has modules with units which you are expected to study carefully.
These are: 1.
MODULE 1 UNIT 1: Sales Promotion: Basic Description UNIT 2: Sales Promotion: Advertising Mechanizing UNIT 3: Sales Promotion: Personal Selling UNIT 4: Sales promotion: Sales Manager and function sales 2.
MODULE 2 UNIT 1: Food and Beverage service methods UNIT 2: Interpersonal skills: Basic Description, Addressing customers UNIT 3: Interpersonal skills, dealing with incidents, spillages, returned food etc.
UNIT 4: Interpersonal skills: dealing with customers with special needs 3.
MODULE 3: UNIT 1: Food and beverage service Personnel (Part A) UNIT 2: Food and Beverage Service Personnel (Part B) UNIT 3: Attributes of food and beverage service personnel (Part A) UNIT 4: Attributes of food and beverages service personnel (Part B) 4.
MODULE 4: UNIT 1: Food and beverage Service Outlets (Hotels) UNIT 2: Food and beverage service outlets (hospital tray service) UNIT 3: Food and beverage service outlets (Airline tray service and rail service) UNIT 4: Food and beverage service outlets (Fast foods, cafeteria and public houses) Each study unit as enumerate above shall take you about three hours of intensive study.
Each unit starts with an introduction to it, the objectives and what you are expected to gain as knowledge and then the main content.
The main content aside from having the details of the 5 course unit shall give you some self-assessment exercise (SAEs) and self-assessment questions (SAQs).
It is highly recommended that you study the unit carefully, do all the SAEs and the SAQs to be able to assess your ability yourself before your contact with your facilitator.
The unit has also conclusion, summary and tutor-marked assignments (TMAs).
You are again required to practice the TMAs to further your understanding and greater comprehension of the course.
There are texts and references for further reading and broader understanding.
By following these guidelines, your learning objectives and expectations will be greatly achieved.
ASSIGNMENT Each unit shall have at least two to three assignments.
You are expected to attempt all as you complete studying this unit.
TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT (TMAs) By doing the Tutor-marked Assignments, you are assessing your comprehension ability of the unit and also getting yourself ready for the final examinations.
The TMAs, which form part of your final grade are expected to be turned in to your tutor/facilitator at the study centre for grading.
At the end of the sources, you will be expected to write the final examination.
The score you make in the examination together with that of your submitted TMAs will form your final score/grade.
EXAMINATION The final examination for the course will be of two to three hours duration and has the value of 70% and the continuous assessment- 30%.
All areas of the course will be examined and it is very important you read through the whole course material as many times as possible, you might find it useful to review your self-tests, TMA assignments and comments on them before the exam period.
SUMMARY 6 The Course introduction to food and beverage Production 1 (HCM 231) has tried to expose you to food and beverages method, food service outlets, food and beverage services, personnel and interpersonal skill also methods of production in food and service beverage outlet.
FINAL ADVICE Organize how to manage your time.
Do everything to stick to it.
The major reason many students fail is that they take things for granted and delay in taking decisions, only to be rushing unnecessarily towards exam period.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, do not waste time to let your tutor know before it is too late to help you.
When you are confident and satisfied that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then move on to the next unit.
Proceed, unit by unit, through the course, pacing your studies and making the whole exercise easy for yourself.
Wishing you a happy and enjoyable reading time.
7 HCM 231: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD AND BEVERAGE PRODUCTION 1 Course Writer/Developer: Mrs. Adenike Olusola Lawal Olabisi Onabanjo University, Yewa Campus, Ogun State Course Editor: Mrs. Florence Uchendu NOUN Lagos.
Programme Leader: Dr (Mrs.) A. O. Fagbemi School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Mr. S. O. Israel-Cookey School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
8 HCM 231: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD AND BEVERAGE PRODUCTION I TABLE OF CONTENTS MODULE 1 ………………………………………………………………………………………………………1 UNIT 1 SALES PROMOTION: BASIC DESCRIPTION……………….…………………….….…………1 UNIT 2 SALES PROMOTION: ADVERTISING, MERCHANDIZING……………………………………4 UNIT 3 SALES PROMOTION: PERSONAL SELLING…………………………………..….……………10 UNIT 4 SALES PROMOTION: SALES MANAGER AND FUNCTION SALES………………..………13 MODULE 2 ………………………………………………………………………………………………………16 UNIT 1 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE METHODS…………………………………………………16 UNIT 2 INTERPERSONAL SKILLS: I …………………………………………………………….…………25 UNIT 3 INTERPERSONAL SKILLS: II ……………………………………………………………....……..28 UNIT 4 INTERPERSONAL SKILLS: III ………………………………………………………………………36 MODULE 3……………………………………………………………………………………………………39 UNIT 1 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE PERSONNEL: I..………………………………………….39 UNIT2 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE PERSONNEL:II…………………………………….………43 UNIT3 ATTRIBUTES OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE PERSONNEL:I…………………….….48 UNIT 4 ATTRIBUTES OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE PERSONNEL:II…………………..….52 MODULE4………………………………………………………………………………………………..……55 UNIT1 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE OUTLETS (HOTELS) ………………………………..…… 55 UNIT 2 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE OUTLETS (HOSPITAL TRAY SERVICE)…………….... 58 UNIT 3 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE OUTLETS (AIR LINE TRAY SERVICE AND RAIL SERVICE)……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
61 UNIT 4 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE OUTLETS (FAST FOODS, CAFETERIA AND PUBLIC HOUSES)……………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 64 9 MODULE 1: UNIT 1 SALES PROMOTION: BASIC DESCRIPTION CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT IS SALES PROMOTION?
3.2 TYPES OF SALES PROMOTION 3.3 SALES PROMOTION IN THE FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: Among the business strategies aimed at maximizing turnovers is sales promotion.
Often times, many producers lack in this area, hence the poor marketability of their products.
To sell products in a highly competitive market requires extra skill at promoting sales.
This is very vital in the food industry.
This unit explains the definition of sales promotion as it relates to food and beverage service.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: The objectives of this unit are to: (i) Define sales promotion (ii) Describe briefly the types of sales promotion we have in the food and beverage service 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT IS SALES PROMOTION?
Sales promotion is one of the seven aspects of the promotional mix.
(the other six parts of the promotional mix are advertising, personal selling, direct marketing, publicity/public relations, corporate image and exhibitions.)
Media and non-media marketing communication are employed for a pre-determined, limited time to increase consumer demand, stimulate market demand or improve product availability.
Examples include contests, coupons, freebies, loss leaders, point of purchase displays, premiums, prizes, product samples, and rebates 10 3.2 TYPES OF SALES PROMOTION Sales promotions can be directed at either the customer, sales staff, or distribution channel members (such as retailers).
Sales promotions targeted at the consumer are called consumer sales promotions.
Sales promotions targeted at retailers and wholesale are called trade sales promotions.
Some sale promotions, particularly those ones with unusual methods, are considered gimmicks by many.
Sales promotion includes several communication activities that attempt to provide added value or incentives to consumers, wholesalers, retailers, or other organizational customers to stimulate immediate sales.
These efforts can attempt to stimulate product interest, trial, or purchase.
Examples of devices used in sales promotion include coupons, samples, premiums, point-of-purchase (POP) displays, contests, rebates, and sweepstakes.
Sales promotion is any initiative undertaken by an organisation to promote an increase in sales, usage or trial of a product or service (i.e.
initiatives that are not covered by the other elements of the marketing communications or promotions mix).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Define sales promotion, and cite its types.
3.3 SALES PROMOTION IN THE FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE In food and beverage service, sales promotion involves activities designed to promote regular sales.
It is also concerned with promoting temporary sales, encourage increased business at slack periods such as Mondays, early evenings and during January/February.
Examples of such activities include: (cid:31) Offering meal (deal) packages, for example, free wine (or a ‘buy one get a second free’ deal), or offering a free soup or starter as part of the meal package.
(cid:31) Developing customer loyalty schemes.
Special product sales may also be used to increase sales by promoting particular products such as: (cid:31)Festival promotions or links with local, regional or national celebrations (cid:31)Wine and spirit promotions (possibly in association with suppliers) (cid:31)Children’s menus (cid:31)Diabetic menus (cid:31)‘Taste of England menus etc (cid:31)Products to complement specific calendar dates etc 11 Three types of sales promotion are particularly useful for food service operations: (cid:31)Sales promotion through advertising, concerned with contacting and informing the existing, or potential market of a business, providing information on the products available and encouraging buying.
(cid:31) Sales promotion through merchandising, related mainly to point-of-sale promotion.
Its main role is to improve the average spend per head of the customer.
However, it is also used to promote particular services or goods.
(cid:31)Sales promotion through personal selling refers to the ability of the staff in a food and beverage operation to actively contribute to the promotion of sales.
4.0 CONCLUSION: In the food and beverage service, it is possible to maximize profit through proper sales promotion.
It can be either through customers sales promotion or trade sales promotions.
Sales promotion through advertising is concerned with contacting and informing the existing, or potential market of a business, providing information on the products available and encouraging buying.
5.0 SUMMARY: Sales promotion involves activities designed to promote regular sales.
It can come in forms of advertising, merchandising and personal selling.
This unit explains the definition of sales promotion as it relates to food and beverage service.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS: Explain sales promotion as it relates to food and beverage service.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Page.
18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and StroughronEducational.
A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and its effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme.
Pg.
23-54.
12 MODULE 1 UNIT 2: SALES PROMOTION: ADVERTISING AND MERCHANDIZING CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ADVERTISING 3.1.1 Types of Advertising 3.1.1.1 Consumer publications 3.1.1.2 Television advertising / Music in advertising 3.1.1.3 Infomercials 3.1.1.4 Radio advertising 3.1.1.5 Online advertising 3.1.1.6 Press advertising 3.1.1.7 Billboard advertising 3.1.1.8 Mobile billboard advertising 3.1.1.9 In-store advertising 3.1.1.10 Coffee cup advertising 3.1.1.11 Street advertising 3.2 MERCHANDISING 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: Communication is very essential for product sales.
When properly designed and executed, the attention of customers is usually captured for consistent and persistent patronage.
This often helps to boost sales and profitability.
Prominent forms of the communication strategies are advertisement and merchandising.
This unit explains the meaning of advertising and merchandizing as types of sales promotion OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Describe advertising as a type of sales promotion ii.
Describe merchandizing as a type of sales promotion 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ADVERTISING Advertising is a form of communication used to encourage or persuade an audience (viewers, readers or listeners) to continue or take some new actions.
Most commonly, the desired result is to drive consumer behaviour with respect to a commercial offering, although political and ideological advertising is also common.
The purpose of advertising may also be to reassure employees or shareholders that a company is 13 viable or successful.
Advertising messages are usually paid for by sponsors and viewed via various traditional media; including mass media such as newspaper, magazines, television commercial, radio advertisement, outdoor advertising or direct mail; or new media such as websites and text messages.
Commercial advertisers often seek to generate increased consumption of their products or services through "Branding," which involves the repetition of an image or product name in an effort to associate certain qualities with the brand in the minds of consumers.
Non- commercial advertisers who spend money to advertise items other than a consumer product or service include political parties, interest groups, religious organizations and governmental agencies.
Nonprofit organizations may rely on free modes of persuasion, such as a public service announcement (PSA).
Advertisement is an encapsulated communication about a product (good/services), it is a clearly designed, concise, aesthetically appealing and content wise accurate communiqué intended to effectively persuade the target audience (viewers/listeners/readers) to arrive at a decision as desired by the advertiser often concerning the product (goods/service).
Advertisement also is used to inform a mass of audience about various socially relevant factors such as employment, upcoming events, contests or elections or a host of other such events.
Now newer media of advertisements are emerging and growing.
Internet based media like social networks, web portals, trade portals etc.
are some of the examples.
Marketing managers conceptualise special event simply to coercively communicate product related sales communications.
Normally the advertisements are prepared in such a way that it attracts the attention of the intended parties easily.
Thoughtfully constructed copy (words/diction of an advertisement), interesting visual or pictures, attractive colours and designs, and a uniquely arrived at theme, the central steam of thought, etc.
arouse interest of the customers, and help to retain the interest.
Persuasive elements of the advertisement drive the customers towards a strong desire to possess the product.
This finally leads them toward buying or possessing the product.
Professional managers don’t construe this as the final point in advertising.
They proceed for an extra mile to ensure the initial trial becomes a success and ensures repeated clientele.
3.1.1 Types of Advertizing Virtually any medium can be used for advertising.
Commercial advertising media can include wall paintings, billboards, street furniture components, printed flyers and rack cards, radio, cinema and television adverts, web banners, mobile telephone screens, shopping carts, web pop ups, skywriting, bus stop benches, human billboards, magazines, newspapers, town criers, sides of buses, banners attached to or sides of airplanes ("logojets"), in-flight advertisements on seatback tray tables or overhead storage bins, taxicab doors, roof mounts and passenger screens, musical stage shows, subway platforms and trains, elastic bands on disposable diapers, doors of bathroom stalls, stickers on apples in supermarkets, shopping cart handles (grabertising), the opening section of streaming audio and video, posters, and the 14 backs of event tickets and supermarket receipts.
Any place an "identified" sponsor pays to deliver their message through a medium is advertising.
3.1.1.1 Consumer publications: This involves the directories (Yellow pages, Thompson’s), guides, business publications, executive travel publications, technical and professional publications, journals and other magazines (including local free ones).
3.1.1.2 Television advertising / Music in advertising The TV commercial is generally considered the most effective mass-market advertising format, as is reflected by the high prices TV networks charge for commercial airtime during popular TV events.
3.1.1.3 Infomercials An infomercial is a long-format television commercial, typically five minutes or longer.
The word "infomercial" combining the words "information" & "commercial".
The main objective in an infomercial is to create an impulse purchase, so that the consumer sees the presentation and then immediately buys the product through the advertised toll-free telephone number or website.
Infomercials describe, display, and often demonstrate products and their features, and commonly have testimonials from consumers and industry professionals.
3.1.1.4 Radio advertising Radio advertising is a form of advertising via the medium of radio.
Radio advertisements are broadcast as radio waves to the air from a transmitter to an antenna and a thus to a receiving device.
Airtime is purchased from a station or network in exchange for airing the commercials.
While radio has the limitation of being restricted to sound, proponents of radio advertising often cite this as an advantage.
Radio is an expanding medium that can be found not only on air, but also online.
3.1.1.5 Online advertising Online advertising is a form of promotion that uses the Internet and World Wide Web for the expressed purpose of delivering marketing messages to attract customers.
Online ads are delivered by an ad server.
Examples of online advertising include contextual ads that appear on search engine results pages, banner ads, in text ads, Rich Media Ads, Social network advertising, online classified advertising, advertising networks and e-mail marketing, including email spam.
3.1.1.6 Press advertising Press advertising describes advertising in a printed medium such as a newspaper, magazine, or trade journal.
This encompasses everything from media with a very broad readership base, such as a major national newspaper or magazine, to more narrowly targeted media such as local newspapers and trade journals on very specialized topics.
A form of press advertising is classified advertising, which allows private individuals or companies to purchase a small, 15 narrowly targeted ad for a low fee advertising a product or service.
Another form of press advertising is the Display Ad, which is a larger ad (can include art) that typically run in an article section of a newspaper.
3.1.1.7 Billboard advertising Billboards are large structures located in public places which display advertisements to passing pedestrians and motorists.
Most often, they are located on main roads with a large amount of passing motor and pedestrian traffic; however, they can be placed in any location with large amounts of viewers, such as on mass transit vehicles and in stations, in shopping malls or office buildings, and in stadiums.
3.1.1.8 Mobile billboard advertising Mobile billboards are generally vehicle mounted billboards or digital screens.
These can be on dedicated vehicles built solely for carrying advertisements along routes preselected by clients, they can also be specially equipped cargo trucks or, in some cases, large banners strewn from planes.
The billboards are often lighted; some being backlit, and others employing spotlights.
Some billboard displays are static, while others change; for example, continuously or periodically rotating among a set of advertisements.
Mobile displays are used for various situations in metropolitan areas throughout the world, including: Target advertising, one-day, and long-term campaigns, Conventions, Sporting events, Store openings and similar promotional events, and big advertisements from smaller companies.
3.1.1.9 In-store advertising In-store advertising is any advertisement placed in a retail store.
It includes placement of a product in visible locations in a store, such as at eye level, at the ends of aisles and near checkout counters (aka POP—Point Of Purchase display), eye-catching displays promoting a specific product, and advertisements in such places as shopping carts and in-store video displays.
3.1.1.10 Coffee cup advertising Coffee cup advertising is any advertisement placed upon a coffee cup that is distributed out of an office, café, or drive-through coffee shop.
This form of advertising was first popularized in Australia, and has begun growing in popularity in the United States, India, and parts of the Middle East.
3.1.1.11 Street advertising This type of advertising first came to prominence in the UK by Street Advertising Services to create outdoor advertising on street furniture and pavements.
Working with products such as Reverse Graffiti, air dancer's and 3D pavement advertising, the media became an affordable and effective tool for getting brand messages out into public spaces.
16 In addition to the above, it is always worth considering the use of mailing lists to advise existing customers of special events etc.
Retaining existing customers is always less costly than finding new ones.
SELF ASESSMENT EXERCISE: Describe advertising as a form of communication in sales promotion 3.2 MERCHANDISING Merchandising is mainly related to point-of-sale promotion.
Its main role is to improve the average spend per head of the customer.
However, it is also used to promote particular services or goods.
Examples of food and beverage merchandising tend to be mainly visual, but may also be audio or audio-visual.
Food and beverage merchandising stimuli can include: (cid:31) Aromas (cid:31) Bulletins/black boards/floor stands (cid:31) Directional signs (cid:31) Display cards/brochures (cid:31) Displays of food and drinks (cid:31) Trolleys (sweet, liqueurs etc.)
(cid:31) Buffets/salad bars, self-service counters, bar displays, flambé work etc.
(cid:31) Drink coasters and placemats (cid:31) Facial boards and illuminated panels (cid:31) Menus, drinks and wine lists (cid:31) Posters (cid:31) Ten cards (cid:31) Other customer’s food/drink Written/printed merchandising materials should be effective.
As well as considering using images, make sure the words used are descriptive and attractive, as shown in the examples below.
(cid:31) Describing the freshness of the product: freshly prepared, pure, natural, real, freshly squeezed, handpicked each day, fresh (cid:31) Describing the environment: free range, corn fed, naming a specific location, source or a popular name, stating that foods are from a local market, home grown, or referring to ‘happy animals’ (cid:31) Describing the overall product: local flavor, traditional, warming inventive use of ingredients, house specialty, signature dish.
Note: Care should be taken in using terms such as ‘healthy’ – what may be part of a healthy diet for one person is not necessarily part of a healthy diet for another.
17 2.0 CONCLUSION: The aim of an advertisement is to increase the sales of a product introduced into the market.
The advertisement will speak about the salient features of the product on offer and the benefit the customer/consumer can derive out of the product.
It can also educate the target audience about the various other details such as the products cost, availability, usage modalities, problems that may arise while using it and the probable solutions to those problems 5.0.
SUMMARY: Advertising involves use of broadcast, print, consumer publications while merchandising on the other hand is related mainly to point-of-sale promotion.
Its main role is to improve the average spend per head of the customer.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT: i.
What is advertising in food and beverage service?
ii.
What is merchandizing in food and beverage service?
7.0.
REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Ekwueme Nneka .N.
(1997): Production of local beverages from cereal A project work in partial Fulfillment of higher national Diploma.
Yaba coll.
Of Technology Lagos Kunkee, R.E.
and R.W Coswell (1977): Table wine and Alcohol beverage Vol 1.
H.A Rose Ed.
Academic Press London.
United Nation Information children’s Emergency Fund.
(UNICEF, 1993): Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey.
Lagos National Policy for food and Nutrition (NPEN, 2001).
A policy Statement on food and Nutrition for Nigeria 18 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 SALES PROMOTION: PERSONAL SELLING CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT IS PERSONAL SELLING?
3.2 WHAT SERVICE STAFF MUST DO IN PERSONAL SELLING 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: Among the marketing strategies that promotes sales is the personal selling of products.
Most merchandising stimuli must also be supported by good personal selling techniques.
This unit therefore x-rays the purpose of personal selling in sales promotion.
Most merchandising stimuli must also be supported by good personal selling techniques.
Personal selling refers specifically to the ability of the staff in a food and beverage operation to contribute to the promotion of sales.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: I.
Define personal selling II.
Know the kind of information a staff into personal selling in sales promotion must have 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT IS PERSONAL SELLING?
Personal selling refers specifically to the ability of the staff in a food and beverage operation to contribute to the promotion of sales.
This is especially important where there are specific promotions being undertaken.
The promise of a particular type of menu or drink, a special deal or the availability of a particular service can often be devalued by the inability of the staff to fulfill the requirements as promised.
It is therefore important to involve service staff in the formulation of particular offers and to ensure that briefing and training are given so that the customer can actually experience what has been promised.
Members of staff will feel more confident about selling if they have information about the products on offer.
If staff can tell well they can sell well.
Examples of the type of information staff will need to know include: (cid:31)A description of the item (food, wine or other drink) and an explanation of how it is served (cid:31)Where the produce comes from (cid:31)What the local animals are fed on 19 (cid:31)Where the fish are caught (cid:31)Where the local fruit and vegetables are grown (cid:31)How the produce is delivered (cid:31)Where and how the local drinks are made (cid:31)What the specialties of the establishment are and their origin.
There are various ways of enhancing the product knowledge of staff, such as: (cid:31)Arranging for staff visits to suppliers (cid:31)Arranging visits to other establishments using local produce (cid:31)Seeking out supplier information (cid:31)Allowing staff to taste products (cid:31)Arranging for staff to visit local trade fairs (cid:31)Organizing training and briefing sessions for staff SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE : What is personal selling?
Also, state how a product knowledge can be enhanced 3.2 WHAT SERVICE STAFF MUST DO IN PERSONAL SELLING Within the context of personal selling, the service staff should be able to: (cid:31) Describe the food, wines and drinks on offer in an informative and appealing way, that makes the product sound interesting and desirable (cid:31) Use the opportunity to promote specific items or deals when seeking orders from the customer (cid:31) Seek information from the customer in a way that promotes sales, for example, rather than asking if a sweet is required, as which sweet is required (cid:31) Use opportunities for the sales of additional items such as extra garnishes, special sauces or accompanying drinks, such as a desert wine with a sweet course.
(cid:31) Provide a competent service of the items for sale and seek customer’s views on the acceptability of the food, drinks and the service.
4.0 CONCLUSION: Ability in personal selling is necessary for all aspects of successful food and beverage service.
The contribution of service staff to the meal experience is vital.
The service staff contribute to the customers’ perception of value for money, hygiene and cleanliness, the level of service and the perception of atmosphere that he customer experiences.
Good food and beverage service staff therefore must have a detailed knowledge of the food and beverages on offer, be technically competent, have well developed interpersonal skills and be able to work as part of a team.
20 5.0 SUMMARY: Personal selling refers specifically to the ability of the staff in a food and beverage operation to contribute to the promotion of sales.
Personal selling refers specifically to the ability of the staff in a food and beverage operation to contribute to the promotion of sales.
It is therefore important to involve service staff in the formulation of particular offers and to ensure that briefing and training are given so that the customer can actually experience what has been promised.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASIGNMENT (TMA) i.
Mention things a staff must know in personal selling 7.0.
REFERENCES: Ceserani Victor and Ronald and Foskett, D. (1996): Practical cookery Hodder and Stoughton Educational.
A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Dennis L. and John C.(2006) : Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Kunkee, R.E.
and R.W Coswell (1977): Table wine and Alcohol beverage Vol 1.
H.A Rose Ed.
Academic Press London.
United Nation Information children’s Emergency Fund.
(UNICEF, 1993): Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey.
Lagos National Policy for food and Nutrition (NPEN, 2001).
A policy Statement on food and Nutrition for Nigeria 21 MODULE 1 UNIT 4: SALES MANAGER AND FUNCTION SALES CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sales Manager 3.1.1 Function Sales 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit explains who a sales manager is and also function sales in food and beverage service production.
The sales manager is to promote the function sales in food and beverage service production.
The sales manager is to promote the function facilities of any establishment and to make the initial approaches and contact.
The sales manager also looks into the various forms of banqueting or meetings and conference, sale packages, charges for additional equipments such as projectors.
Effective management of an organization requires good expertise.
In food and beverage sector, the sales promotion requires a sales manager.
This unit explains who a sales manager is and also function sales in food and beverage service.
OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Describe who a sales manager is ii.
Describe what function sales are 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sales Manager: The main role of the sales manager is to promote the function facilities of an establishment and, where necessary, to make the initial approaches and contacts.
The sales manager must have an extensive knowledge of room specifications, size, light , switches, electric points, height of doorways, maximum floor loads and so on.
This enables him/her to respond quickly to any requests at the initial meeting with a client.
Most establishments have various forms of 22 banqueting and/or meetings and conference sales packages and these provide a range of information about the facilities available and the charges for them.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Make a description of who a sales manager is.
3.1.1 Function Sales In order to promote the sale of functions (meetings/conferences/banquets etc.)
most establishments now have banqueting and/or meetings and conference sales packages.
These range from the very simple to the elaborate and complex, packages depending on the nature of the establishment.
Examples of the content included in these types of packages are: (cid:31) Location and contact details of the establishment and the staff involved.
(cid:31) Examples and descriptions of the type of functions that can be accommodated.
(cid:31) Information on how to get to the establishment, local attractions and availability of car parking (cid:31) Examples and costs of set packages, for example, for conference delegates this might be day rates, overnight rates and meal rates (cid:31) Room plans indicating size, possible layouts, availability of services( electric sockets, telephone points) air conditioning , access points, maximum weight the floor will take etc.
(cid:31)Provision for disabled visitors (cid:31)Room hire charges (cid:31)List and description of styles of tables and chairs and other equipment available (e.g.
meeting tables, conference chairs, lounge areas, technical equipment such as public address systems, video players and TV monitors, flip chart stands and paper, lecterns, overhead, slide and data projectors, computers, white boards, blackout curtains, double glazing and sound proofing.)
(cid:31) Charges for additional equipment such as projectors etc.
(cid:31)Availability of room decoration, flowers , lighting systems (cid:31)Availability of disco, resident bands, presenters, Maters of ceremony, Toast Masters etc and also details of service methods available, such as formal table service, buffets in-room service etc.
(cid:31)Other services such as car rental, limousine services, private bus services of the establishment such as restaurants and fitness and leisure facilities (cid:31)Standard terms and conditions of bookings 23 4.0 CONCLUSION: In conclusion sales manager and function sales are discussed, it is also looked into the location and contact details of the establishments and the staff involved, Examples and descriptions of type of functions that can be accommodated.
5.0 SUMMARY: Personal selling refers specifically to the ability of the staff in the food and beverage operation to contribute to the promotion of sales.
Ability in a personal selling is necessary for all aspects of successful food and beverage service and the contribution of the service staff to the male experience is vital.
Sales manager is saddled with the responsibility to promote the function facilities of an establishment and, where necessary, to make the initial approaches and contacts.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What do you understand by the term sale of functions in food and beverage service?
7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Ekwueme Nneka .N.
(1997): Production of local beverages from cereal A project work in partial Fulfillment of higher national Diploma.
Yaba coll.
Of Technology Lagos Kunkee, R.E.
and R.W Coswell (1977): Table wine and Alcohol beverage Vol 1.
H.A Rose Ed.
Academic Press London.
United Nation Information children’s Emergency Fund.
(UNICEF, 1993): Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey.
Lagos National Policy for food and Nutrition (NPEN, 2001).
A policy Statement on food and Nutrition for Nigeria MODULE 2 UNIT 1 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE METHODS CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 24 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FACTORS GUIDING THE SERVICE OF FOOD AND BEVERAGES 3.2.
FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE SEQUENCE 3.2.1 THE SERVICE SEQUENCE 3.2.2 THE CUSTOMER PROCESS 3.2.2.1 GROUPING OF MODERN FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE 3.3 CUSTOMER SERVICE 3.4 USE OF RESOURCES IN FOOD SERVICE OPERATION 3.5 LEVEL OF CUSTOMER SERVICE IN FOOD SERVICE OPERATION 3.6 LEVEL OF SERVICE AND STANDARDS OF SERVICE IN FOOD SERVICE OPERATION 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit looks into the various service methods in food and beverage.
It looks into the sequence and the customer process.
The service of food and beverages may be carried out in many ways depending on the following factors and type of establishments, time available for the meal, Type of menu presented, sit of the establishment, type of customer to be served, Turn-over of customer expected, cost of the meal served.
All modern food and beverage service method are grouped under five customer processes.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Explain the food and beverage service sequence ii.
Describe the customer process iii.
Explain the customer service 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FACTORS GUIDING THE SERVICE OF FOOD AND BEVERAGES The service of food and beverages may be carried out in many ways depending on the following factors: (cid:31) Type of establishment (cid:31) Time available for the meal (cid:31) Type of menu presented (cid:31) Site of the establishment (cid:31) Type of customer to be served (cid:31) Turnover of custom expected 25 (cid:31) Cost of the meal served A food service operation can be seen as a simple model comprising three operating systems: 1.
Food production 2.
Beverage provision 3.
Food and beverage service Although food and beverage service was traditionally seen as primarily a delivery system, it actually consists of two separate sub-systems, operating at the same time.
These are: 1.
Food production 2.
Beverage provision 3.
Food and beverage service 3.2.
FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE SEQUENCE The food and beverage sequence involves: (cid:31)Preparation for service (cid:31)Taking bookings (cid:31)Greeting and seating/directing (cid:31)Taking food and beverage orders (cid:31)Serving of food (cid:31)Serving beverages (cid:31)Clearing during service (cid:31)Billing (cid:31)Dealing with payments (cid:31) Dish washing (cid:31)Clearing following service (cid:31)The service sequence – which is primarily concerned with the delivery of the food and beverages to the customer.
(cid:31)The customer process – which is concerned with the experience the customer undertakes to be able to order, be served, consume and have the area cleared.
3.2.1 The service sequence The service sequence is essentially the bridge between the production system, beverage provision and the ‘customer process’ (or experience).
The service sequence consists of eleven or more stages.
26 Each of these stages may be carried out by a variety of methods and these methods are detailed through the book.
The choice of method for the individual stage depends on the factors listed at the started of this section and the process that the customer is to experience.
3.2.2 The customer process The customer receiving the food and beverage product is required to undertake or observe certain requirements: this is the customer process.
Essentially, a customer enters a food service area, orders or selects his/her choice an then is served (the customer may pay either at this point or later).
Food and beverages are then consumed, following which the area is cleared.
Using this approach, five basic types of customer process can be identified.
3.2.2.1 GROUPING OF MODERN FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE All modern food and beverage service methods can be grouped under the following five customer processes.
Service method Service area Ordering/selection Service Dinning/consumption Clearing Table service Customer enter From menu By staff to At laid cover By staff and is seated customer Assisted service Customer enters From menu, buffet or Combination of Usually at laid cover By staff and is usually passed trays both staff and seated customers Self service Customer enters Customer select Customer Dining area or take By staff or items onto a tray carries away customer Single point Customer enters Orders at single Customer Dining area or take By staff or point carries away customer Specialized or in Where the From menu or Brought to the Where served By staff or situ service customer is predetermined Customer customers A.
Table service: the customer is served at a laid table.
This type of service, which includes plated service or silver service, is found in many types of restaurant, cafes and in banqueting.
B. Self-service: the customer is required to help him or herself from a buffet or counter.
This type of service can be found in cafeterias and canteens.
C. Assisted service: the customer is served part of the meal at a table and is required to obtain part through self-service from one form of display or buffet.
This type of service is found in ‘carvery’ type operations and is often used for meals such as breakfast in hotels.
It may also be used for functions.
D. Single point service: the customer orders, pays and receives the food and beverages, for instance at a counter, at a bar in licensed premises, in a fast food operation or at a vending machine.
27 E. Specialized service (or service in situ): the food and drink is taken to where the customer is.
This includes tray service in hospitals and aircraft, trolley service, home deliver, lounge and room service.
In A-D of these customer processes, the customer comes to where the food and beverage service is offered and the service is provided in areas primarily designed for that purpose, such as a restaurant or take away.
In customer process E, the service is provided in another location, where the area is not primarily designed for the purpose, for example in a guest room, lounge or hospital ward.
A particular service method, such as waiter service, requires a number of tasks and duties that are undertaken during the actual service of food and beverages.
However, there are other tasks and duties that contribute to the service.
These may be identified using the service sequence.
The level of complexity of food and beverage service in terms of staff skills, tasks and duties reduces from Group A (the most complex) to Group D. Group E contains specialized forms of service.
Note: Apart from for fast food operations, there is no particular link between a specific service method and a specific food production method.
It is also possible that the production and service may be separated by distance, time or both, as for example in off-premises catering.
Group A: Table service Service to customers at a laid cover 1.
Waiter (a) Silver/English Presentation and service of food by waiting staff, using a spoon and fork, onto a customer’s plate, from food flasks or dishes.
(b) Family Main courses plated (but may be silver served) with vegetables placed in multi- portion dishes on table for customers to help themselves, sauces offered separately.
(c) Plate/American Service of pre-plated foods to customers.
Now also widely used for banqueting.
28 (d) Butler/French Presentation of food individually to customers by food service staff for customers to serve themselves.
(e) Russian Table laid with food for customers to help themselves (this is a modern interpretation and may also sometimes be used to indicate Gueridon or Butler service).
(f) Gueridon Food served onto customer’s plate at a side table or trolley, may also include carving, jointing and fish filleting, the preparation of foods such as salads and dressings and flambage.
2.
Bar counter Service to customers seated at bar counter (often U-shaped) on stools Group B: Assisted service Combination of table service and self-service 3.
Assisted (a) Carvery Some parts of the meal are served to seated customers, other parts are collected by the customers.
Also used for breakfast service and for banqueting.
(b) Buffets Customers select food and drink from displays or passed trays, consumption is either at tables, standing or in lounge area.
Group C: Self- service Self-service of customers 4.
Cafeteria (a) Counter Customers queue in line formation past a service counter and choose their menu requirements in stages before loading them on to a tray (may include a ‘Carousel’ – a revolving stacked counter, saving space) (b) Free-flow Selection as in counter (above) but in food service area where customers move at will to random service points, customers usually exit area via a till point.
29 (c) Echelon Series of counters at angles t the customer flow within a free-flow area, thus saving space.
(d) Supermarket Island service points within a free-flow area.
Note: some ‘call order’ production may be included in cafeterias.
Group D: Single Point Service Service of customers at single point – consumed on premises or taken away 5.
Take away (a) Take away Customer orders and is served from single point, at a counter, hatch or snack stand, customers off the premises, some take-away establishments provide dining area.
(b) Drive-thru Form of take-away where customer drives vehicle past order, payment and collection points.
(c) Fast food Term originally used to describe service at a counter or hatch where customers receive a complete meal or dish in exchange for cash or ticket, commonly used nowadays to describe type of establishment offering limited range menu, fast service with dinning area, and take- away facility.
6.
Vending Provision of food service and beverage service by means of automatic retailing.
7.
Kiosks Outstation used to provide service for peak demand or in specific location may be open for customers to order and be served, or used for dispensing to staff only.
8.
Food court Series of autonomous counters where customers may either order and eat (as in 2 Bar counter, above) or buy from a number of counters and eat in separate eating area, or takeaway.
9.
Bar Term used to describe order, service and payment point and consumption area in licensed premises.
30 Group E: Specialized (or in situ) Service to customers in areas not primarily designed for service 10.
Tray Method of service of whole or part of meal on tray to Customer in situ, e.g.
at hospital beds, at aircraft seats, at train seats, also used in ODC 11.
Trolley Service of food and beverages from a trolley, away from dining area, e.g.
for office workers at their desks, for customers at aircraft seats, or at train seats.
12.
Home delivery Food delivered to customer’s home or place of work, e.g.
‘meals on wheels’, pizza home delivery, or sandwiches to offices.
13.
Lounge Service of variety of foods and beverages in lounge area e.g.
hotel lounge.
14.
Room Service of variety of foods and beverages in guest bedrooms, or in meeting rooms 15.
Drive-in Customers park motor vehicle and are served at their vehicles.
(Note: banquet/function is a term used to describe catering for specific numbers of people at specific times in a variety of dinning layouts.
Service methods also vary.
In these cases banquet/function ‘catering’ refers to the organization of service rather than a specific service method.
SELF ASSESMENT EXERCISE : All modern food and beverage service methods can be grouped under five customer processes: Discuss.
3.3 CUSTOMER SERVICE In order the meet customers’ expectations and to enhance their meal experience, a food service operation will determine the level of customer service that the customer should expect within that operation.
Customer service in food service operations can be defined as being a combination of five characteristics.
These are: 1.
Service level: the intensity of or limitations in, the individual personal attention given to customers.
2.
Service availability: for example, the opening times and variations in the menu and beverage list on offer.
31 3.
Level of standards: for example, the food and beverage quality, décor, standard of equipment being used, level of staffing professionalism.
4.
Service reliability: the extent to which the product is intended to be consistent and its consistency in practice.
5.
Service flexibility: the extent to which alternatives are available, and to which there can be variations in the standard products that are offered.
A food service operation will determine the customer service specification of operation by taking account of these five customer service factors.
3.4 USE OF RESOURCES IN FOOD SERVICE OPERATION Although a food service operation is designed to provide customer service, it must also be efficient in its use of resources.
The resources used in foods service operations are:(cid:31) Materials: food, beverages and short use equipment (such as paper napkins) (cid:31)Labour: staffing costs (cid:31)Facilities: premises and plant.
The management team must always take into account the effect that the level of business has on the ability of the operation, in order to maintain the customer service requirements, while at the same time ensuring productivity in all of the resources being used.
3.5 LEVEL OF CUSTOMER SERVICE IN FOOD SERVICE OPERATION Within food service operations the level of service in a specific operation may be defined as follows: 1.
Technical specification: refers to the food and beverage items on offer, the portion size or measure, the cooking method, the degree of cooking, the method of presentation, the cover, accompaniments, the cleanliness of items etc.
2.
Service specification: refers to two aspects: first, the procedures for service and second, the way in which the procedures are carried out.
Procedures include meeting and greeting, order taking, seeking customer comment, dealing with complaints, payment and the special needs of customers.
The method in which the service is carried out includes paying attention to the level of staff attentiveness, their tone of voice, body language etc.
Operations will usually have written statements of both technical and service specification (often called a customer service specification).
These may also be detailed in staff manuals that outline expected standards of performance.
32 3.6 LEVEL OF SERVICE AND STANDARDS OF SERVICE IN FOOD SERVICE OPERATION There can be confusion when referring to the levels of service and the standards of service: (cid:31)The level of service in food service operations can range from being very limited to complex, with high levels of personal attention.
(cid:31)The standards of service are a measure of the ability of the operation to deliver the service level it is offering.
Thus an operation might be offering low levels of service, such as a fast food operation, but may be doing this at a very high standard.
Equally, an operation may be offering a high level of service, such as a full service restaurant, but may be doing so with low standards.
4.0 CONCLUSION: This unit has carefully looked into the food and beverage service sequence, customer process and the customer service.
In order to the meet customers’ expectations and to enhance their meal experience, a food service operation will determine the level of customer service that the customer should expect within that operation.
5.0 SUMMARY: The service sequence is essentially the bridge between the production system, beverage provision and the ‘customer process’ (or experience).
The customer process involves the customer receiving the food and beverage product and is required to undertake or observe certain requirements.
Customer service in food service operations can be defined as being a combination of five characteristics such as service level, service availability, service reliability, service flexibility and level of standard.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS I. what do you understand by the term customer service II.
What is Automatic retailing 8.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006) : Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Pg.
18 – 20Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and Stroughron Educational.
A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and it’s effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND Programme Pg.
23-54 33 MODULE 2 UNIT 2: INTERPERSONAL SKILLS: I INTRODUCTION: This unit looks into the various interpersonal skills found useful in a food and beverage service centre, conversation between customers and staff override conversation between staff.
These are also noted.
OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Define the term interpersonal skills ii.
Describe addressing customers as an example of interpersonal skills 3.0 MAIN CONTENT: Interpersonal skills in food and beverage service centre is the interactions between the customer and the food and beverage service staff.
All other interactions are secondary to, and the result of, the prime interaction of customers and staff.
This has implications for the way customers are treated.
Conversation between customers and staff override conversations between staff.
When in conversation with customers, staff should not: (cid:31) Talk to other members of staff without first excusing themselves from the customer (cid:31) Interrupt interactions between customers and staff, but should wait until there is a suitable movement to catch the attention of the others member of staff so that they may excuse themselves from the customer first.
(cid:31) Serve customers while carrying on a conversation between themselves (cid:31) Talk across a room, either to each other or to customers Customers should always be made to feel that they are being cared for and not that they are an intrusion into the operation Interpersonal skills related to specific points of service The list below shows the interpersonal skills needed at particular points during the service.
(cid:31) Showing customers to their table: always lead and walk with them at their pace.
(cid:31) Seating customers: ladies first, descending in age unless the host is a lady (cid:31) Handling coats / wraps: handle with obvious care (cid:31) Handling menus / wine lists to customers: offer the list the right way round for the customer and wait for the customer to take it.
34 (cid:31) Opening and placing a napkin: open carefully, do not shake it like a duster, place it on the customer’s lap after saying excuse me to the customer.
(cid:31) Offering water or rolls: say, for example, “Excuse me sir / madam, may I offer you a bread roll?
(cid:31) Offering accompaniments: only offer them if you have them at the table.
Offering them when they are not at the table usually means “I will get them if you really want them!
(cid:31) Serving and cleaning: always say ‘Excuse me’ before serving or cleaning and ‘thank you’ after you have furnished with each customer.
(cid:31) Explaining food and beverage items: use terms the customer understands, not technical terms such as turned vegetable or pause.
Use terms that make the item sound attractive such a, case role not stew, reamed or puree potatoes not mashed.
Do not use abbreviations, for example, ‘veg’.
(cid:31) Talking to customers: only talk when standing next to them and looking at them.
Addressing customers ‘Sir’ or ‘Madam’ should be used when the customer’s name is not known, then the customer should be referred to as ‘Mr.
Smith’ or ‘Miss Jones’ etc.
first names should only be used in less former operation and where the customer has explicitly indicated that this is acceptable.
If the customer has a title, then appropriate use should be made of the correct form of address.
Greetings such as ‘ good morning’ and ‘good evening’ should be used upon receiving customers, or when the member of staff first comes into contact with the customer, for example, when lounge service staff attend people already seated in the lounge.
4.0 CONCLUSION: This unit has been able to make a definition of interpersonal skills.
Also how customers are addressed as a skill was highlighted.
Interpersonal skills in food and beverage service centre on the interactions between the customer and the food and beverage service staff.
All other interactions are secondary to, and the result of, the prime interaction of customers and staff.
5.0 SUMMARY: Interpersonal skills in food and beverage service centre on the interactions between the customer and the food and beverage service staff.
Conversation between customer and staff is very important and should be pleasant; incident must be kept and signed by those involved.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT i Define interpersonal skills ii.
Explain in what particular areas during service when interpersonal skills are needed 35 iii.
Briefly explain how customers are addressed.
7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Page 18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughron Educational.
A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and it’s effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme.
Pg.
23-54.
36 MODULE 2 UNIT 3 INTERPERSONAL SKILLS: II CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dealing with incidents 3.2Spillages 3.3Returned food 3.4 Lost property 3.5 Illness 3.6 Alcohol over-consumption 3.8Unsatisfactory appearance 3.8 Recording incidents 3.9 Dealing with children 3.10 Lost children 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit looks into certain interpersonal skills such as dealing with incidents spillages, returned food, lost property, illness, alcohol overconsumption, unsatisfactory appearance, and children.
Professional and hygienic environment, have the knowledge of food and beverages and technical ability, punctuality, local knowledge, personality, attitude to customers.
All these must be considered by food and service production staff.
OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Identify various interpersonal skills ii.
Explain the peculiarity of each of the interpersonal skills 2.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dealing with incidents When an unforeseen incident arises it must be coped with promptly and efficiently without causing any more disturbance than is necessary to any of the other customers.
Quick action will very often soothe the irate customer and ensure a return receipt to establishment.
It is worth remembering at this stage that complaints, of what ever nature, should be referred immediately to the supervisor.
Delay will not cause confusion and very often the situation may be wrongly interpreted if it is not dealt with straight away.
In the case of accidents, a report of the incident must be kept and signed by those involved.
37 3.2 Spillages If during the service of a course a few drops of sauce or roast gravy have fallen on the tablecloth, the following steps might be taken: 1.
Check immediately that none has fallen on the customer being served.
Apologize to the customer.
2.
If some has fallen on the customer’s clothing, allow the customer to rub over the stained are with a clean damp cloth.
This will remove the worst of the spillage.
3.
If it is necessary for the customer to retire to the cloakroom to remove the spillage then his/her meal should be placed on the hot plate until he returns.
4.
Depending on the nature of the spillage the establishment may offer to have the garment concerned cleaned.
5.
If the spillage has gone on the tablecloth, the Waiter should first of all remove any item or equipment that may be stained or be in their way.
6.
He/she should then mop or scrape up the spillage with either a clean damp cloth or a knife.
7.
An old menu card should then be placed on top of the table but under the tablecloth beneath the spillage area.
8.
A second menu should be placed on the tablecloth over the spillage area.
9.
A clean rolled napkin should then be brought to table and rolled completely over the spillage are.
The menu will prevent any damp from soaking into the clean napkin.
10.
Any item or equipment removed should be returned to their correct position on the table stop.
11.
Any meals taken to the hotplate should be returned and fresh covers put down where necessary.
12.
Again, apologies should be made to the customer for any inconvenience caused.
If a customer knocks over a glass of water accidentally, then the following steps might be taken: 1.
Ensure none has gone on the customer.
2.
If some of the water has fallen on the customer’s clothing then follow steps 2 and 3 above.
3.
Where possible, as this form of accident usually involves changing the table cloth, the party of customers should be seated at another table and allowed to continue their meal without delay.
38 4.
If they cannot be moved to another table then they should be seated slightly back from the table so that the Waiter can carry out the necessary procedures to rectify the fault speedily and efficiently.
5.
The customer’s meals should be placed on the hot plate to keep warm.
6.
All dirty items should be removed on a tray to the waiter’s sideboard ready to go to the wash-up area.
7.
All clean items should be removed and kept on the waiter’s sideboard for relaying.
8.
The tablecloth should be mopped with a clean absorbent cloth to remove as much of the liquid as possible.
9.
A number of old menus should be placed on the tabletop but underneath the spillage area of tablecloth.
10.
A clean tablecloth of the correct size should be brought to the table.
It should be opened out and held in the correct manner as if one were laying a tablecloth during the pre-service preparation period.
The table should then be clothed up in the usual manner except that when the clean cloth is being drawn across the table towards the waiter he/she is at the same time taking off the soiled tablecloth.
The soiled tablecloth should be removed at the same time that the clean tablecloth is being laid so that the customers cannot see the bare tabletop at any time.
The old menus will prevent any dampness penetrating to the clean tablecloth.11.
When the table has its clean tablecloth on it should be re-laid as quickly as possible.
12.
The customers should then be re-seated at the table and the meals returned to them from the hotplate.
3.3 Returned food If, for example, a customer suggests that their chicken dish is not cooked, then the following steps might be taken: 1.
Apologize to the customer 2.
The dish should be removed to the sideboard to be returned to the aboyeur at the hotplate.
3.
The customer should be offered the menu and asked if they would like another portion of the same dish or prefer to choose something else as an alternative.
4.
A special check for the new order should be written out: this shows the dish being returned and what the customer is having in its place.
5.
A fresh cover should be laid 6.
The new dish should be collected as soon as possible from the hotplate and served to the customer.
39 7.
Apologies should be made for any inconvenience caused.
8.
The waiter must ensure that the aboyeur receives the dish being returned and checks it immediately, because it may mean that he particular dish concerned has to be taken off the menu to prevent the risk of food poisoning to other customers.
9.
The policy of the establishment will dictate whether or not the customer is to be charged for the alternative dish.
3.4 Lost property If, for example, a waiter finds a wallet under a chair that has recently been vacated by a customer, the steps listed below might be taken: 1.
A check should be made immediately as to whether or not the customer has left the service area.
If he is still in the area, the wallet may be returned to him.
2.
If the customer has left the service area, the waiter should hand the wallet to the headwaiter or supervisor in charge.
3.
The supervisor or headwaiter should check with reception and the hall porter to see if the customer has left the building.
4.
If the customer concerned is a resident, then reception may ring their room, stating the wallet has been found and can be collected at a convenient time.
5.
If the customer is a regular customer, it is possible that the head waiter or receptionist may know where to contact them to arrange for them to collect the wallet.
6.
If the customer is a regular customer but cannot be contacted, the wallet should be kept in the lost property office until the customer’s next visit.
7.
If the owner has not been found or contacted immediately, the headwaiter or supervisor should list the items contained in the wallet with the waiter who found the wallet.
The list should be signed by both the headwaiter or supervisor and the waiter.
The list must be dated and also indicate where the article was found and at what time.
8.
A copy of this list should go with the wallet to the lost property office where the contents of the wallet must be checked against the list before it is accepted.
The details of the find are then entered in a lost property register.
9.
Another copy of the list should go to the hall porter in case any enquires are received concerning a wallet.
Anyone claiming lost property should be passed on to the lost property office.
10.
Before the lost property office hands over any lost property, a description of the article concerned and its contents should be asked for to ensure as far as possible that it is being returned to the genuine owner.
The office should also see proof of identity of the person claiming ownership.
40 11.
In the case of all lost property, the steps mentioned above should be carried out as quickly as possible as this is in the best interests of the establishment and causes the customer minimum inconvenience.
On receipt of lost property, the customer should be asked to sign for the article concerned, also giving their address and telephone number.
12.
Any lost property unclaimed after three months may become the property of the finder who should claim it through the headwaiter or supervisor.
3.5 Illness If a customer falls ill in your establishment then the steps below might be taken: 1.
As soon as it is noticed that a customer is feeling unwell while in the dinning room or restaurant a person in authority should be immediately called.
2.
If the customer falling ill is a woman then a female member of staff should attend to her.
3.
The person in authority must enquire if the customer needs assistance.
At the same time he/she must try to judge whether the illness is of a serious nature or not.
If in any doubt it is always better to call for medical assistance.
4.
It is often advisable to offer to take the customer to another room to see if they are able to recover in a few minutes.
It this happens their meal should be placed on the hotplate until their return.
5.
If the illness appears to be of a serious nature, a doctor, nurse or someone qualified in first aid should be called for immediately.
6.
The customer should not be moved until a doctor has examined him.
7.
If necessary the area should be screened off.
8.
Although this is a difficult situation to deal with in front of the general public, the minimum fuss should be made and service to the rest of the customers should carry on as normal.
9.
The medical person will advise whether an ambulance should be called.
10.
The customer may have had a sudden stomach upset and wish to leave without finishing the meal.
Assistance should be offered in helping the customer leave the restaurant.
11.
Payment for the part of the meal consumed and any ensuing travel costs would be according to the policy of the establishment.
41 12.
It is most important that for all accidents, minor or serious, all details are recorded in an accident book (see below).
This is in case of a claim against the establishment at a later date.
13.
If after a short period of time the customer returns and continues with the meal, a fresh cover should be laid and the meal returned from the hotplate or a new meal served.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Discuss how interpersonal skills can be used to handle incidents such as spillages, returned food, lost property and illness in the food and beveragesectors.3.6 Alcohol over-consumption If a customer is suspected of having too much to drink the following steps might be taken: 1.
If a prospective customer asks for a table and the staff believes the clients is under the influence of alcohol, they may refuse them a table, even though there may be one available.
It is not always possible, however, to recognize a customer who may prove objectionable later on.
2.
If difficulty is found in handling this type of person then assistance in removing the person from the eating area may come from other members of staff (depending on establishment policy physical contact should be avoided).
3.
If customer is suspected of being drunk this must first of all be ascertained by the headwaiter or supervisor.
4.
The customer should then be asked to leave than be allowed to become objectionable to other customers.
5.
If the customer has already consumed part of the meal but is not being objectionable then the remainder of the meal should be served in the normal fashion, but the headwaiter or supervisor must ensure no more alcoholic beverage is offered.
6.
On finishing, the customer should be watched until he have left the premises.
7.
It is always advisable to make out a report of all such incidents.
They should also be brought to the immediate attention of the restaurant manager in case of any claim at a later date concerning a particular incident.
3.7 Unsatisfactory appearance If a customer’s appearance is not satisfactory according to the policy of the establishment, the following steps might be taken: 1.
If a customer’s appearance does not meet the dress code policy of the establishment or is likely to give offence to others, then the customer should be asked to correct their dress to the approved fashion required by the establishment.2.
If the customer will not comply with the request, they should be asked to leave.
42 3.
If they have partly consumed a meal then whether they will be charged or not depends on the policy of the house and the discretion of the head waiter or supervisor.
4.
A report of this incident must be made and signed by the staff concerned.
3.8 Recording incidents It is advisable that when any incident occurs a report is made out immediately.
The basic information that should be found in the report is as follows: (cid:31)Place (cid:31)Date (cid:31)Time (cid:31)Nature of incident (cid:31)Individual, signed reports from those concerned.
(cid:31)Action taken (cid:31)Name, address and phone number of the customer involved, and also of the staff involved.
All reports should be kept in case similar incidents occur at a late date, and for future reference should the need arise.
3.9 Dealing with children If children are among the customers arriving in the food service area then take the lead on how to care for them from the parents, guardian or accompanying adults.
Where applicable, the following factors should be determined.
(cid:31) Are high chairs/seat cushions required?
(cid:31) Restrictions on the service of alcohol to minors (cid:31) Are children’s meal menus required?
(cid:31) The portion size required if items are ordered from the standard menu.
(cid:31) The provision of children’s ‘give aways’, such as crayons, colouring books etc (cid:31) For the safety of both children and others, the staff should be aware of children’s movements.
(cid:31) Should the children be older, then they should be addressed as either ‘Sir’ or ‘Madam’ 3.10 Lost children Should a child be reported lost, the steps listed below should be taken: 1.
A complete description of the lost child should be obtained: (cid:31) Male/female(cid:31) Name (cid:31) Age (cid:31) Where last seen (cid:31) Clothing worn (cid:31) Any predominant features 43 (cid:31) Colour of hair (cid:31) Whether any accessories were being carried, e.g.
a doll.
2.
Immediately inform the supervisor/security 3.
Put a constant watch on all entrances/exits 4.
Check all cloakroom/rest areas and the immediate vicinity where the child has been reported missing.
5.
Should nothing result from taking the above actions, immediately inform the police.3.0 4.0 CONCLUSION: If the interpersonal skills such as dealing with incidents spillages, returned food, lost property, illness, alcohol overconsumption, unsatisfactory appearance and children should be corrected, a good policy and preventive measures should be put in place to handle any problem that may arise along the line.
5.0 SUMMARY: Dealing with incidents, spillages, returned food, lost property, illness, alcohol overconsumption, unsatisfactory appearance and children are interpersonal skills needed to make a food and beverage service profitable.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) i.
Discuss how interpersonal skills can be used to handle alcohol overconsumption, unsatisfactory appearance, children in the food and beverage sectors.
7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Pg.
18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughronEducational.
A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and it’s effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme.
Pg.
23-54.
44 MODULE 2 UNIT 4 INTERPERSONAL SKILLS III CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Customer mobility 3.1.1 Blind and partially sighted customers 3.1.2 Customers with communication difficulties 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit looks into the interpersonal skills involving dealing with customers with special needs 2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Examine customers who need special attention ii.
Identify skills needed to take care of a food and beverage service outlets.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Customer mobility Extra awareness is needed to meet the requirements of customers who may have special needs, such as mobility difficulties.
The following considerations should be given on these occasions.
(cid:31) Offer wheelchair users places at tables where there is adequate space for maneuverability.
(cid:31) Offer wheelchair users a place out of the main thoroughfare of customer/staff movement.
(cid:31) Offer wheelchair users a place with easy access to cloakrooms, exits and fire exits.
45 (cid:31) Always ensure that menus, wine lists and the like are immediately available to any wheelchair user.
(cid:31) Never move the wheelchair without asking the customer first.
(cid:31) Crutches/walking sticks should be placed in a safe but accessible and readily available position.
(cid:31) Customers with dexterity difficulties may be assisted by first asking the customer how best they can be helped.
Assistance may include for example ensuring that all items served or placed on to the table are near to the customer, offering to fillet/bone fish and meat items and offering to cut up potato and vegetable items.
SELF ASESSMENT EXERCISE: Explain what you understand the term customer with special needs3.1.1 Blind and partially sighted customers Awareness is also required to meet the needs of those customers who may be blind or partially sighted.
The following considerations should be taken into account: (cid:31) Talk to and treat the customer with special needs as you would any other customer.
(cid:31) Remember it is ‘by touch’ that blind people see and are made aware that they are involved in what is happening around them.
(cid:31) If in doubt ask the person directly how they may best be helped.
(cid:31) Do not talk to their companions as if the person was not there (cid:31) Offer to read menus or wine and drink lists.
(cid:31) Immediately prior to taking the customer’s order, a gentle touch on the hand or arm will attract their attention to you.
(cid:31) Offer to fillet/bone fish and meat items (cid:31) Offer to cup potato and vegetable items should it be necessary.
(cid:31) Never overfill cups, glasses, or soup bowls.
(cid:31) Should you feel it appropriate, use bowls instead of plates for specific food items, but always ask the customer first.
(cid:31) Ask if you should describe where the food items are on the plate.
Use the clock method to explain the location of food on a plate, for example, 6 o’clock for meat, 10 to 10 for vegetables, 10 past 2 for potatoes.
3.1.2 Customers with communication difficulties Be aware of communication difficulties that may arise when, for example, customers are deaf or hard of hearing or have little understanding of the English language.
In such cases the steps shown below may be helpful.
46 (cid:31) Speak directly to the customer (cid:31) Stand in such a position that the customer is able to see your face clearly.
(cid:31) Speak normally but more distinctly (cid:31) Describe food/drink items in simple, precise and plain language.
(cid:31) Seat customers away from possible excessive noise, as this is most uncomfortable for customers wearing hearing aids.
(cid:31) Always read back the food or drink order received to confirm all requests.
(cid:31) Listen attentively to what is being said to you to ensure you understand the customer’s requirements.
4.0 CONCLUSION: The interpersonal skills needed to take care of customers with special needs have been highlighted.
Be aware of communication difficulties that may arise when, for example, customers are deaf or hard of hearing or have little understanding of the English language.
In such cases the steps shown below may be helpful.
5.0 SUMMARY: Customers who have mobility problems, communication difficulties and sight problems need special attention which include offering wheelchair users places at tables where there is adequate space for maneuverability, offering wheelchair users a place out of the main thoroughfare of customer/staff movement; talking to and treat the customer with special needs as you would any other customer; remembering it is ‘by touch’ that blind people see and are made aware that they are involved in what is happening around them; speaking directly to the customer, and standing in such a position that the customer is able to see your face clearly.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss on the interpersonal skills needed to handle customers who have mobility problems, communication difficulties and sight problems ii.
Describe what step to be considered in setting up a service outlets taking note the possibilities of customers with communication difficulties 7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
LondonHouston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Pg.
18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughronEducational.
A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and its effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme.
Pg.
23-54.
47 MODULE 3 UNIT 1 : STAFF SELECTION: FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE PERSONNEL I CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Selection Of Food And Beverage Manager 3.2 Selection Of Restaurant Manager / Supervisor 3.3selection Of Reception Headwaiter, 3.4selection Of Headwaiter/Maitre D’hotel/Supervisor 3.5selection Of Station Headwaiter/Section Supervisor 3.6selection Of Station Waiter/Chef De Rang 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit looks into the various personnel in a food and beverage service.
The personnel include the food and beverage manager, restaurant manager/supervisor, Reception headwaiter, Headwaiter/maitre d’hotel/supervisor , Station headwaiter/section supervisor, Station waiter OBJECTIVES It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to:i.
Determine some of the personnel in a food and beverage service ii.
Identify their functions 2.0 MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 SELECTION OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE MANAGER Depending on the size of the establishment, the food and beverage manager is either responsible for the implementation of agreed policies or for contributing to the setting of catering policies.
The larger the organization the less likely the manager is to be involved in policy setting.
In general, managers are responsible for: 48 (cid:31) Ensuring that the required profit margins are achieved for each food and beverage service area, in each financial period.
(cid:31) Updating and compiling new wine lists according to availability of stock, current trends and customer needs (cid:31) Compiling in liaisons with the kitchen, menus for the various food service areas and for special occasions.
(cid:31) The purchasing of all materials, both food and drink (cid:31) Ensuring that quality in relation to selling price (cid:31) Departmental training and promotions, plus the maintenance of the highest professional standards.
(cid:31) Employing and dismissing staff (cid:31) Holding regular meetings with section heads to ensure all areas are working effectively, efficiently and are well co-ordinated.
3.2 SELECTION OF RESTAURANT MANAGER / SUPERVISOR The restaurant manager or supervisor has overall responsibility for the organization and administration of particular food and beverage service areas.
These may include the lounges, room service (in hotels), restaurants and possibly some of the private banqueting suites.
It is the restaurant manager who sets the standards for service and is responsible for any staff training that may be required, either on or off the job.
He/she may make out duty rosters, holiday lists and hours on and off duty, and contribute to operational duties (depending on the size of the establishment) so that all the service areas run efficiently and smoothly.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Explain in the details the selection of the following personnel, stating their functions: Food and beverage manager, restaurant manager/supervisor.
3.3 SELECTION OF RECEPTION HEADWAITER The reception headwaiter is responsible for accepting bookings and for keeping the booking dairy up to date.
He/she will reserved tables and allocate these reservations to particular stations.
The reception headwaiter greets guests on arrival and takes them to the table and seats them.
49 3.4 SELECTION OF HEADWAITER/MAITRE D’HOTEL/SUPERVISOR The headwaiter has overall charge of the staff team and is responsible for seeing that all the duties necessary for the pre-preparation for service are efficiently carried out and that nothing is forgotten.
The headwaiter will aid the reception headwaiter during the service and will possibly take some orders if the station waiter is busy.
He/she helps with the compilation of duty rosters and holiday lists, and may relieve the restaurant manager or reception headwaiter on their days off.
3.5 SELECTION OF STATION HEADWAITER/SECTION SUPERVISOR The station headwaiter has the overall responsibility for a team of staff serving a number of sets of tables (which may be anything from four to eight in number), from one sideboard.
Each set of tables under the station headwaiter’s control is called a station.
The station headwaiter must have a good knowledge of food and wine and its correct service, and he able to instruct other members of the staff.
He/she will take the order (usually from the host) and carry out all the service all the table with the help of the chef de rang, who is in command of one station.
3.6 SELECTION OF STATION WAITER/CHEF DE RANG The chef de rang must be able to carry out the same work as the station headwaiter and relieve him on days off.
The chef de rang will normally have had less experience than the station headwaiter.
Both the chef de rang and the station headwaiter must work together as a team to provide an efficient and speedy service.
3.0 CONCLUSION: The various personnel in a food and beverage service have been highlighted.
Depending on the size of the establishment, the food and beverage manager is either responsible for the implementation of agreed policies or for contributing to the setting of catering policies.
The larger the organization the less likely the manager is to be involved in policy setting.
5.0 SUMMARY: The food and beverage manager, restaurant manager/ supervisor, Reception headwaiter, Headwaiter/maitre d’hotel/ supervisor, Station headwaiter/section supervisor, and Station waiter are among the various personnel needed in a food and beverage service.
4.0 TUTOR –MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss the selection of the following: Reception headwaiter, Headwaiter/maitre d’hôtel/supervisor, Station headwaiter/section supervisor, and Station waiter.
ii.
Discuss the importance of personnel/staff selection in setting up a service outlet.
50 8.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Pg.
18 – 20Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughronEducational.
A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and its effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme.
Pg.
23-54.
51 MODULE 3 UNIT 2 : STAFF SELECTION: FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE PERSONNEL II CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 ASSISTANT STATION WAITER/DEMI-CHEF DE RANG 3.2WAITER/SERVER/COMMIS DE RANG 3.3 TRAINEE COMMIS/DEBARRASEUR/APPRENTICE 3.4 CARVET/TRANCHEUR, 3.5FLOOR SERVICE STAFF/CHEF D’ETAGE/FLOOR WAITER 3.6LOUNGE STAFF/CHEF DE SALE 3.7 WINE BUTLER/WINE WAITER/SOMMELIER 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION; This unit looks into the functions of Assistant station waiter, Waiter, debarrasseur, Carvet/trancheur, floor service staff/chef d’etage/floor waiter, Lounge staff, Wine butler, cocktail bar staff, buffet assistant, cashier, counter assistant in a food and beverage service 2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i. determine the other types of personnel in a food and beverage service ii.
Determine the functions of such personnel in a food and beverage service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 ASSISTANT STATION WAITER/DEMI-CHEF DE RANG The demi-chef de rang is the person next in seniority to the chef de rang and assists where necessary.
52 3.2 WAITER/SERVER/COMMIS DE RANG The commis de rang acts by instruction from the chef de rang.
He/she mainly fetches and carries, may do a little service of either vegetables or sauces, offers rolls, places plates upon the table and so on, and helps to clear the tables after each course.
During the pre-preparation period some of the cleaning and preparatory tasks will be carried out by the commis de rang.
3.3 TRAINEE COMMIS/DEBARRASEUR/APPRENTICE The debarrasseur is the ‘learner’, having just joined the food service staff, and possibly wishing to take up food service as a career.
During the service this person will deep the sideboard well filled with equipment and may help to fetch and carry items as required.
The debarrasser would carry out certain of the cleaning tasks during the pre-preparation periods.
He/she may be given the responsibility of looking after and serving hors-d’oeuvre, cold sweets or assorted cheeses from the appropriate trolleys.
3.4.
CARVET/TRANCHEUR, The carver is responsible for the carving trolley and the carving of joints at the table as required.
The carver will plate up each portion with the appropriate accompaniments.
3.5 FLOOR SERVICE STAFF/CHEF D’ETAGE/FLOOR WAITER The floor service staffs are often responsible for a complete floor in an establishment or, depending on the size of the establishment, a number of rooms or suites.
Floor service of all meals and beverages throughout the day is normally only offered by a first-class establishment.
In smaller establishments floor service may be limited to early morning teas and breakfasts with the provision of in-room mini bars and tea and coffee facilities.
If full floor service is in operation, the staff will consist of a head floor waiter with the appropriate number of floor waiters working for him.
These teams of staff are then responsible for the service of all meals and beverages (alcoholic and nonalcoholic) in rooms.
A thorough knowledge of food and drink, and their correct service, is therefore essential.
The importance of good liaison and co-operation with the housekeeping staff cannot be over- emphasized here.
The floor service staff would normally work from a floor pantry or from a central kitchen with all food and drink reaching the appropriate floor and the required room by lift and in a heated trolley.
3.7 LOUNGE STAFF/CHEF DE SALE Lounge staff may deal with lounge service as a specific duty only in a first-class establishment.
In a smaller establishment it is usual for members of the food service staff to take over these duties on a rota basis.
The lounge staffs are responsible for the service of morning coffee, afternoon teas, aperitifs and liqueurs before and after both lunch and dinner, and any coffee required after meals.
They would be responsible for setting up the lounge in the morning and maintaining its cleanliness and presentation throughout the day.
53 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE : Differentiate extensively between the followings Assistant station waiter, Waiter, Debarrasseur, Carvet/Trancheur, Floor Service Staff/Chef d’etage/floor waiter, Lounge staff, 3.8 WINE BUTLER/WINE WAITER/SOMMELIER The sommelier is responsible for the service of all alcoholic drinks during the service of meals.
The sommelier must also be a sales person.
This employee should have a thorough knowledge of all drink to be served, of the best wines to go with certain foods, and of the licensing laws in respect of the particular establishment and area.
3.9 COCKTAIL BAR STAFF The person who works on the cocktail bar must be responsible and well versed in the skills of shaking and stirring cocktails.
He should have a thorough knowledge of all alcoholic and non-alcoholic drinks, the ingredients necessary for the making of cocktails and of the licensing laws.
3.10 BUFFET ASSISTANT/BUFFET CHEF/CHEF DE BUFFET The chef de buffet is in charge of the buffet in the room, its presentation, the carving and portioning of food and its service.
This staff member would normally be a member of the kitchen team.
3.11 CASHIER The cashier is responsible for billing and taking payments, or making ledger account entries for a food and beverage operation.
This may include making up bills from food and drink checks or, alternatively, in a cafeteria, for example, charging customers for their selection of items on a tray.
3.12 Counter assistants Counter assistants are found in cafeterias where they would stock the counter and sometimes serve or portion food for customers.
Duties may also include some cooking of call order items.
3.13 TABLE CLEARERS Again, table clearers can be found in seating areas where the service is not waiter service.
These people are responsible for clearing table using trolleys specially designed for the stacking of crockery, glassware, cutlery, etc.
3.14 FUNCTION CATERING/BANQUETING STAFF In establishments with function catering facilities there would normally be a certain number of permanent staff.
These would include the banqueting manager, one or two assistant banqueting managers, one or two banqueting headwaiters, a dispense person and a secretary to the banqueting manager.
All other banqueting staff required is normally engaged on a casual basis.
In small establishments where there are fewer functions the manager, the 54 assistant manager and the headwaiter would undertake the necessary administrative and organizational work.
3.15 EXAMPLES OF STAFFING REQUIREMENTS FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF FOOD SERVICE OPERATION Medium class hotel Cafeteria Hotel manager Catering manager Assistant manager Supervisors Head waiter Assistant supervisor Waiter Counter service hands Wine waiter Clearers Cashier Cashier Department store Industrial food service/welfare catering Catering manager Catering manager Assistant catering manager Assistant catering manager Supervisor Supervisors Assistant supervisors Assistant supervisors Cashier Steward/butler Dispense bar staff Counter service staff Wine waiting staff Clearers Waiting staff Cashiers Popular price restaurant Restaurant manager/supervisor Waiting staff Dispense bar assistant 4.0 CONCLUSION: This unit has been able to treat the functions of Assistant station waiter, Waiter, debarrasseur, Carvet/trancheur, Floor service staff/chef d’etage/floor waiter, Lounge staff, Wine butler, cocktail bar staff, buffet assistant, cashier, counter assistant, Table clearers and Function catering staff in a food and beverage service.
55 5.0 SUMMARY: In a food and beverage service, among the other personnel equally very important are the assistant station waiter, Waiter, debarrasseur, Carvet/trancheur, Floor service staff/chef d’etage/floor waiter, Lounge staff, Wine butler, cocktail bar staff, buffet assistant, cashier, counter assistant, table clearers and function catering staff.
6.0.
TUTOR MARKED ASIGNMENT: I. Differentiate extensively between the followings: Wine butler, cocktail bar staff, buffet assistant, cashier, counter assistant, table clearers and function catering staff in a food and beverage service.
7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Page 18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service Hodder and stroughron EducationalA division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and its effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme Page 23-54 56 MODULE 3 UNIT 3: ATTRIBUTES OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE PERSONNEL I CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 1.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 A professional and hygienic appearance 3.2 Knowledge of food and beverages and technical ability 3.3Punctuality 3.4Local knowledge 3.5Personality 3.6 Attitude to customers 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 9.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit looks into some of the attributes that the personnel working in a food and beverage service must possess, A professional and hygienic appearance, knowledge of food and beverages and technical ability.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: The objectives are to: i.
Identify some attributes expected of a personnel in a food and beverage service ii.
Discuss the attributes expected of a personnel in a food and beverage service 3.0 MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 A professional and hygienic appearance How you look and the first impressions you create are more often than not seen as a reflection of the hygiene standards of your establishment and the quality of service to come.
All staff should be aware of the factors listed below and it is their individual responsibility to ensure that they are put into practice.
57 (cid:31) Staff should be clean and should use deodorants (but not strong smelling ones).
(cid:31) Aftershave and perfumes should not be too strong (as this may have a detrimental effect on the customer’s palate).
(cid:31) Sufficient sleep, an adequate and healthy intake of food and regular exercise is essential for good health and the ability to cope with the pressures and tress of work.
(cid:31) Particular attention should be paid to the hands.
They must always be clean, free of nicotine stains and with clean, well-trimmed nails.
(cid:31) Men should normally be clean-shaven or with any moustache or beard neatly trimmed.
(cid:31) Women should only wear light make-up.
If nail varnish is worn then it should be clear.
(cid:31) Earrings should not be worn with the possible exception of studs/sleepers.
(cid:31) Uniform should be clean, starched as appropriate and neatly pressed.
All buttons must be present.
(cid:31) Hair must be clean and well groomed.
Long hair must be tied up or back to avoid hairs falling into foods and drinks and to avoid repeated handling of the hair.
(cid:31) Shoes must be comfortable and clean, and of a plain, neat design.
(cid:31) Fashion is not as important here as safety and foot comfort.
(cid:31) Teeth should be brushed immediately before coming on duty.
(cid:31) Cuts and burns should be covered with waterproof dressings.
(cid:31) Any colds or other possible infections should be reported immediately.
(cid:31) Hands should be washed immediately after using the toilet, smoking or dealing with refuse.
Hot water and soap must be used.
(cid:31) Staff should try to avoid any mannerisms they may have, such as running their f ingers through their hair, chewing gum, or scratching their face.
(cid:31) Excessive jewellery should not be worn.
The establishment policy should be followed.
3.2 Knowledge of food and beverages and technical ability The staff must have sufficient knowledge of all the items on the menu and wine and drink lists in order to advise and offer suggestions to customers.
In addition, they must know how to serve correctly each dish on the menu, what its accompaniments are, the correct cover, and the make-up of the dish and its garnish.
For beverage service the staff should know how to 58 serve various types of wine and drink, in the correct containers (e.g.
glasses, cups) and at the right temperature.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Explain in details the following attributes needed in a food and beverage service: professional and hygienic appearance, Knowledge of food and beverages 3.3 Punctuality Punctuality is all-important.
If staff are continually late on duty it shows a lack of interest in their work and a lack of respect for the management and customers.
3.4 Local knowledge In the interest of customers the staff should have certain knowledge of the area in which they work so they may be able to advise the guests on the various forms of entertainment offered, the best means of transport to places of interest and so on.
3.5 Personality Staff must be tactful, courteous, good humoured and of an even temper.
They must converse with the customer in a pleasing and well-spoken manner and the ability to smile at the right time pays dividends.
3.6 Attitude to customers The correct approach to the customer is of the utmost importance.
The staff must not be servile, but should anticipate the customer’s needs and wishes.
A careful watch should be kept on customers at all times during the service without staring.
Care should always be taken when dealing with difficult customers.
(There is really no such thing as a ‘difficult’ customer – they are normally people whom one is uncertain how to deal with).
Staff should never argue with customers as this will only aggravate the situation – all complaints should be referred to someone in authority in the food service area.
4.0 CONCLUSION: The attributes needed of any personnel in a food and beverage service have been highlighted.
How you look and the first impressions you create are more often than not seen as a reflection of the hygiene standards of your establishment and the quality of service to come.
The correct approach to the customer is of the utmost importance.
The staff must not be servile, but should anticipate the customer’s needs and wishes.
6.0 SUMMARY: The attributes of the personnel should include professional and hygienic appearance, Knowledge of food and beverages and technical ability, punctuality, local knowledge, personality, and attitude to customers are vital.
59 7.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT: i.
Explain in details the following attributes needed in a food and beverage service: Technical ability, punctuality, local knowledge, personality, and attitude to customer 8.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd London Page 18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughron Educational A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH United Nation Information Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF, 1993): Multiple Indicator Cluster survey.
Lagos National policy for food and Nutrition for Nigeria 60 MODULE 3 UNIT 4 : ATTRIBUTES OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE PERSONNELII CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 1.1Honesty 1.2 Loyalty 1.3 Conduct 1.4Sales ability 1.5Sense of urgency .
3.6 Customer satisfaction 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit looks into the other attributes needed in food and beverage service personnel.
A good memory is an asset to food and beverage service staff.
It may help them in various ways in their work if they know the likes and dislikes of customers, where they like to sit in the food service area, what are their favorite drinks, and so on.
OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Identify some other attributes expected of a personnel in a food and beverage service ii.
Discuss the other attributes expected of a personnel in a food and beverage service 2.0 MAIN CONTENT A good memory is an asset to food and beverage service staff.
It may help them in various ways in their work if they know the likes and dislikes of customers, where they like to sit in the food service area, what are their favourite drinks, and so on.
61 2.1 Honesty This is all important for the staff in dealings with both the customer and the management.
If there is trust and respect in the triangle of staff, customer and management relationships, then there will be an atmosphere of work which encourages efficiency and a good team spirit among the food and beverage service operators.3.2 Loyalty The staff’s obligations and loyalty are firstly to the establishment in which they are employed and its management.
3.3 Conduct Staff conduct should be impeccable at all times, especially in front of customers.
The rules and regulations of an establishment must be followed and respect shown to all senior members of staff.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Discuss why it is necessary for the personnel in food service to possess good attributes 3.4 Sales ability The staff reflects the image of the establishment.
They are sales people and must therefore have a complete knowledge of all forms of food and drink and their correct service, and so be able to contribute to personal selling and merchandising.
3.5 Sense of urgency In order for the establishment to generate the maximum amount of business over the service period, with as high a net profit as possible, staff must develop a sense of urgency.
3.6 Customer satisfaction The food and beverage service staff must see that the guests have all they require and are completely satisfied.
The ability to anticipate a customer’s needs is of great importance.
If a customer is comfortable in their surroundings then this is because of the warm and friendly atmosphere in the food service area, and the team spirit among the waiting staff.
3.7 Complaints Staff should have a pleasant manner and show courtesy and tact, an even temper and good humour.
They should never show their displeasure even during a difficult situation.
Staff should never argue with a customer and if they are unable to resolve a situation, it should be referred immediately to a senior member of the team who will be able to calm the guest and put right any fault.
Remember, loss of time in dealing with complaints only makes the situation worse.
62 4.0 CONCLUSION: This unit has highlighted certain other attributes needed of any personnel in a food and beverage service.
The food and beverage service staff must see that the guests have all they require and are completely satisfied.
The ability to anticipate a customer’s needs is of great importance.
5.0 SUMMARY: Attributes such as honesty, loyalty, conduct, sales ability, sense of urgency, complaints, customer satisfaction are equally needed as attributes for personnel in a food and beverage service.
The food and beverage service staff must see that the guests have all they require and are completely satisfied.
The ability to anticipate a customer’s needs is of great importance.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss the following attributes necessary for the personnel in a food and beverage industry : honesty, loyalty, conduct, sales ability, sense of urgency, complaints ,customer satisfaction are equally needed as attributes for personnel in a food and beverage service.
7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Page 18 – 20.
Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughron Educational A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and its effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme Page 23-54.
63 MODULE 4 UNIT 1 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE OUTLETS: HOTELS CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HOTEL DESCRIPTION 4.0 CONCLUSION 6.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit looks into hotel as a food and beverage service outlet.
Hotels were vital centers of local community life in American cities and towns.
Their role as important public spaces was in part a continuation of traditional uses of taverns, one that was further amplified by hotels' conspicuous architecture, central location, and spacious and inviting interiors.
Merchants and other businesspeople continued to use hotel space for offices, commercial exchanges, and accommodations, but the popular uses of hotels far transcended their economic function.
Well-appointed hotel parlors and ballrooms were favoured venues for card parties, cotillions, and other sociable events that involved seeing and being seen in refined public settings.
OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Define a hotel in food and service production ii.
Explain the characteristics of a hotel 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HOTEL DESCRIPTION A hotel is an establishment that provides paid lodging on a short-term basis.
The provision of basic accommodation, in times past, consisting only of a room with a bed, a cupboard, a small table and a washstand has largely been replaced by rooms with modern facilities, including en-suite bathrooms and air conditioning or climate control.
Additional common features found in hotel rooms are a telephone, an alarm clock, a television, a safe, a mini-bar with snack foods and drinks, and facilities for making tea and coffee.
Luxury features include air-conditioner, bathrobes and slippers, a pillow menu, twin- 64 sink vanities, and jacuzzi bathtubs.
Larger hotels may provide additional guest facilities such as a swimming pool, fitness center, business center, childcare, conference facilities and social function services.
Hotel development also involved diversification of hotel types.
Most early hotels had been large urban luxury establishments, but newer variants quickly emerged.
Resort hotels, designed to accommodate the rising tide of tourists, were built in scenic rural landscapes far from the cities where the hotel form had been born.
Commercial hotels, more simply furnished and less expensive than the luxury variant, served the growing ranks of traveling salesmen and other commercial workers set in motion by the burgeoning economy.
Railroad hotels were built at regular intervals along track lines to provide passengers and crews with places to eat and rest in the decades before the introduction of sleeping cars.
Residential hotels, dedicated to the housing needs of families increasingly unable to afford private houses in expensive urban real estate markets, served as the prototypes for apartment buildings.
And a frontier hotel form, characterized by wood construction, whitewash, and tiered porches, was built in hundreds of new settlements where travelers and lumber were common but capital was scarce.
These and other hotel types soon far outnumbered luxury hotels, though the latter variety received the most attention from journalists, authors, and printmakers, and therefore tended to stand for all hotels in the popular imagination.
Hotels were vital centers of local community life in American cities and towns.
Their role as important public spaces was in part a continuation of traditional uses of taverns, one that was further amplified by hotels' conspicuous architecture, central location, and spacious and inviting interiors.
Merchants and other businesspeople continued to use hotel space for offices, commercial exchanges, and accommodations, but the popular uses of hotels far transcended their economic function.
Well-appointed hotel parlors and ballrooms were favored venues for card parties, cotillions, and other sociable events that involved seeing and being seen in refined public settings.
By the same token, voluntary associations ranging from debating societies to ethnic brotherhoods and charitable organizations regularly hired hotel assembly rooms and dining halls for their meetings and banquets.
Hotels also became major loci of political activity.
Political parties and factions often set up their headquarters in hotels, where they held caucuses and made nominations.
Hotels served as important public forums, a fact revealed by the large number of published images of political figures making speeches from hotel windows and balconies, hobnobbing in lobbies, and raising toasts in crowded halls In a hotel is usually found a hotel manager or hotelier.
He is such a person who holds a management occupation within a hotel, motel, or resort establishment.
Management titles and duties vary by company.
In some hotels the title hotel manager or hotelier may solely be referred to the General Manager of the hotel.
65 Small hotels may have a small management team consisting of only two or three managers while larger hotels may often have a large management team consisting of various departments and divisions.
The size and magnitude of a hotel management structure varies significantly depending on the size and function of the hotel.
A small hotel normally consists of a small core management team consisting of the General Manager and a few key department managers that directly handle day-to-day operations.
In the contrary, a large full service hotel often operates more similar to a large corporation with an executive board headed by the General Manager and consisting of key directors that serve as heads of individual hotel departments, each department normally consists of subordinate line-level managers and supervisors that handle day to day operations.
4.0 CONCLUSION: The definition and characteristics of hotels have been highlighted.
In a hotel is usually found a hotel manager or hotelier.
He is such a person who holds a management occupation within a hotel, motel, or resort establishment.
Management titles and duties vary by company.
In some hotels the title hotel manager or hotelier may solely be referred to the General Manager of the hotel.
Small hotels may have a small management team consisting of only two or three managers while larger hotels may often have a large management team consisting of various departments and divisions.
5.0 SUMMARY: A hotel is an establishment that provides paid lodging on a short-term basis.
The provision of basic accommodation, in times past, consisting only of a room with a bed, a cupboard, a small table and a washstand has largely been replaced by rooms with modern facilities, including en-suite bathrooms and air conditioning or climate control.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS i.
Make a detailed description of what hotels are ii.
What is hotel management structure?
7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Page 18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughron Educational A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and its effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme Page 23-54 66 MODULE 4 UNIT 2: FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE OUTLETS: HOSPITAL TRAY SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HOSPITAL TRAY SERVICE 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: In the catering service, patients are often placed on prescribed foods.
This service is called Hospital tray service as a food and beverage service outlet.
Hospital tray service represents the catering service rendered to patients in the hospital.
Such foods and beverages are specifically prescribed and modified to manage the health conditions of the patients.
Hospital catering services have major foodservice goals, as all meals should reach the patient quickly, look attractive and be of specific nutritional value.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Define an hospital tray service ii.
Explain in details the attributes of hospital tray service 3.0 MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 HOSPITAL TRAY SERVICE Hospital tray service represents the catering service rendered to patients in the hospital.
Such foods and beverages are specifically prescribed and modified to manage the health conditions of the patients.
Hospital catering services have major foodservice goals, as all meals should reach the patient quickly, look attractive and be of specific nutritional value.
Patients in hospital often have special dietary needs and their likes and dislikes are also of importance.
They may also have particular needs because of their medical condition.
Menu order forms are used to take orders from patients in the main wards of hospitals.
The menu contains a choice for lunch, dinner and breakfast and is given to each patient the day before.
The patient marks off their requirements for lunch, dinner and breakfast for the following day.
They may 67 also indicate on the card whether they require a large or small portion.
The menus are then collected and sent to the catering manager.
When the menu cards have been collected, menu reader terminals are used to scan the hand marked menu cards.
The menu reader terminals are used to transmit food and beverage requirements to production areas, print records and control the individual meal assembly for the hospital conveyor systems.
The menu reader terminals can be interfaced with computer systems for dietary and recipe analysis.
There are a number of commercially available tray services used in hospital catering.
Individual trays are made up on a conveyor system according to the patients’ pre-ordered requirements.
Various methods are used to keep the food hot or cold, ranging from the heated or chilled pellet method to specially insulated trays.
Trays, once completed, are transported to the wards in ambient cabinets.
At service time, depending on the type of dish, extra portions are available in case they are required.
Beverages may be added at ward sites before presentation to the patient.
The advantages of this system are as follows: (cid:31) The patient is able to select the meal items required from a menu (cid:31) Over the period of a week or a fortnight, the patient has a wide and varied selection of dishes from which to choose (cid:31) Patients receive their meal presented appetizingly on the plate and at the correct temperature (cid:31) Labour and administration costs can be reduced (cid:31) Time originally spent in the ward plating up meals may now be used for other duties.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Differentiate between hotels and hospital tray service 4.0 SUMMARY: in Hospital tray service, Patients in hospital often have special dietary needs and their likes and dislikes are also of importance.
They may also have particular needs because of their medical condition.
The menu reader terminals can be interfaced with computer systems for dietary and recipe analysis.
There are a number of commercially available tray services used in hospital catering.
Individual trays are made up on a conveyor system according to the patients’ pre-ordered requirements.
Various methods are used to keep the food hot or cold, ranging from the heated or chilled pellet method to specially insulated trays.
5.0 CONCLUSION: Hospital tray service represents the catering service rendered to patients in the hospital.
Such foods and beverages are specifically prescribed and modified to manage the health conditions of the patients.
68 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENTS i.
Describe in details the concept of hospital tray service as a component of food and beverage service outlet.
ii.
Give 5 examples of hospital tray services around you.
7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers.
London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd London.
Page 18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughron Educational A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and its effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme.
Pg.
23-54.
69 MODULE 4 UNIT 3: FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE OUTLETS : AIRLINE TRAY SERVICE AND RAIL SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 AIRLINE TRAY SERVICE 3.2 RAIL SERVICE 4.0 CONCLUSION5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit focuses on the airline tray service and the rail service as food and beverage service outlets.
For economy and tourist flights all meals tend to be of the same size, with identical portions.
The meals are arranged in individual portion containers, sealed, chilled and then stored until required.
The economy or tourist class meal is often served on a plastic or melamine tray and uses disposable place mats, cutlery, tableware and napkins, together with disposable glasses for drinks required.
OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Identify the attributes of air line tray service ii.
Identify the attributes of rail service 2.0 MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 AIRLINE TRAY SERVICE This involves the catering service rendered in an airline.
Most airlines now operate using a catering commissary.
A commissary is a term used to cover the catering, cabin requirements, bonded stores, cleaning and other passenger requirements.
It is now accepted that on many short – haul routes, only snack type meals or sandwiches and beverages are offered.
For some operators, the provision of food and beverages is provided for by an additional charge to the customer.
On long – haul flights, airlines provide a more extensive service of food and beverage.
The airline will provide dishes to meet its passengers’ particular needs, for example, meals that meet religious requirements, as well as meals for vegetarians, children and invalids.
70 Service on airlines is often a combination of trolley service, as used for beverages, and tray service with the trays being distributed from the trolley in which they are stacked.
For economy and tourist flights all meals tend to be of the same size, with identical portions.
The meals are arranged in individual portion containers, sealed, chilled and then stored until required.
The economy or tourist class meal is often served on a plastic or melamine tray and uses disposable place mats, cutlery, tableware and napkins, together with disposable glasses for drinks required.
Business and first class passengers will often receive a food and beverage service equivalent to that of a first class hotel or restaurant and there is little portion control.
The first class service may offer joints of meat that are served from a trolley as it moves up the aisle, and served with the appropriate garnish.
This, combined with the use of fine bone china, glassware and silver plated table ware, creates an atmosphere of content and well being while the meal is being served.
Great use is also made of pre-portioned foods, such as salt, pepper, mustards, sugars, cream, cheeses, dry biscuits and preserves.
When all the food has been prepared, the required quantities of each dish are placed on trays.
These are often put into hot cupboards and kept hot until transported to the plane, or chilled and stored inn the catering unit until required to be re-heated on board the aircraft.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Describe in details airline tray service 3.2 RAIL SERVICE A rail service involves the catering service rendered in trains.
Food and beverage operations on trains generally fall into one of three categories: (cid:31) Conventional restaurant (cid:31) Kiosk (take away) (cid:31) Trolley service operations On sleeper services a limited type of room service is provided.
However, all these services are provided on the move and away from the home base and suppliers.
The logistics of providing on– train catering are therefore similar in organization to off – premises catering.
Rail catering has also been seen in the introduction of a tray service system, similar to airlines.
The food and drink is served on trays to passengers at their seat, rather than in a restaurant car where tables are laid as in a restaurant.
3.0 CONCLUSION: The attributes of airline tray service and rail service have been highlighted.
Business and first class passengers will often receive a food and beverage service equivalent to that of a first class hotel or restaurant and there is little portion control.
The first class 71 service may offer joints of meat that are served from a trolley as it moves up the aisle, and served with the appropriate garnish.
5.0 SUMMARY: This involves the catering service rendered in an airline.
Most airlines now operate using a catering commissary.
A commissary is a term used to cover the catering, cabin requirements, bonded stores, cleaning and other passenger requirements.
While a rail service involves the catering service rendered in trains Food and beverage operations on trains generally fall into one of three categories such as conventional restaurant, kiosk and trolley service operations 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS i.
Explain in details what rail service is in food and beverage service production ii.
Explain a commissary in Airway and rail service 7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd London.
Page 18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughron EducationalA division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and its effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND programme Page 23-54.
72 MODULE 4 UNIT 4: FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE OUTLETS: FAST FOOD, CAFETERIA, PUBLIC HOUSES CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FAST FOOD 3.2 CAFETERIA 3.3 PUBLIC – HOUSES 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit examines the roles of fast food, cafeteria and public houses as food and beverage service outlets.
A fast food centre is originally used to describe service at a counter or hatch where customers receive a complete meal or dish in exchange for cash or ticket.
Outlets may be stands or kiosks, which may provide no shelter or seating, or fast food restaurants.
OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Examine fast food centre as food and beverage service outlet ii.
Examine cafeteria as food and beverage service outlet iii.
Examine public house as food and beverage service outlet 3.0 MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 FAST FOOD This is a term originally used to describe service at a counter or hatch where customers receive a complete meal or dish in exchange for cash or ticket, commonly used nowadays to describe type of establishment offering limited range menu, fast service with dining area, and take-away facility.
Outlets may be stands or kiosks, which may provide no shelter or seating, or fast food restaurants (also known as quick service restaurants).
Franchise operations which 73 are part of restaurant chains have standardized foodstuffs shipped to each restaurant from central locations.
Here, the food can be prepared and served very quickly.
While any meal with low preparation time can be considered to be fast food, typically the term refers to food sold in a restaurant or store with preheated or precooked ingredients, and served to the customer in a packaged form for take-out/take-away.
The term "fast food" was recognized in a dictionary by Merriam– Webster in 1951.
Modern commercial fast food is often highly processed and prepared in an industrial fashion, i.e., on a large scale with standard ingredients and standardized cooking and production methods.
It is usually rapidly served in cartons or bags or in a plastic wrapping, in a fashion which minimizes cost.
In most fast food operations, menu items are generally made from processed ingredients prepared at a central supply facility and then shipped to individual outlets where they are reheated, cooked (usually by microwave or deep frying) or assembled in a short amount of time.
This process ensures a consistent level of product quality, and is key to being able to deliver the order quickly to the customer and eliminate labor and equipment costs in the individual stores.
Because of commercial emphasis on speed, uniformity and low cost, fast food products are often made with ingredients formulated to achieve a certain flavor or consistency and to preserve freshness.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What is fast food as a food and beverage service outlet?
3.2 CAFETERIA This is primarily self – service with customers choosing selection from a counter or counters in varying designs and layouts.
Originally developed for the industrial feeding market but now seen in a variety of sectors.
The Cafeteria can be divided into four types Counter- where customers queue in line formation past a service counter and choose their menu requirements in stages before loading them on a tray Free- flow – this involves selection as inn a counter (above) but in food service area where customers move at will to random service points customers usually exit area via a till point.
Echelon - this involves series of counters at angles to customers flow within a free- flow area, thus saving space Supermarket – this is an island service points 3.3 PUBLIC – HOUSES These are licensed places primarily for drinking alcoholic beverages.
May be simply a serving bar with standing room for customers or may have more plush surroundings 74 incorporating the offer of a variety of foods.
These can range from plated dishes through to establishments offering full restaurant service.
4.0 CONCLUSION: This unit has been able to highlight the differences between fast food, cafeteria and public- houses as food and beverage outlets 5.0 SUMMARY: A fast food centre is originally used to describe service at a counter or hatch where customers receive a complete meal or dish in exchange for cash or ticket.
Outlets may be stands or kiosks, which may provide no shelter or seating, or fast food restaurants (also known as quick service restaurants).Cafeteria on the other hand is primarily self – service with customers choosing selection from a counter or counters in varying designs and layouts.
Public - houses are licensed places primarily for drinking alcoholic beverages.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENTS i. what is cafeteria as a food and beverage service outlet?
ii.
What are public – houses as food and beverage service outlet.
7.0 REFERENCES: Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers London Houston S. O. and Glenesk N. (1982): The professional Service of Food and Beverage.
Beastford Academic and Education Ltd. London.
Pg.
18 – 20 Luhcrap.
D. Cousins, J. and smith, R (2002): food and Beverage service.
Hodder and stroughronEducational.
A division of Hodder Headline Plc 338 Euston Road, London NWI 3BH Onyike N. (1995): The role of hotels classification and its effect on the growth of the Hospitality Industry in Nigeria.
A Research Project work for HND Programme.
Pg.
23-54.
75
