 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: HCM 136 COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES II 1 COURSE GUIDE HCM 136: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES II Course Writer/Developer: Adenike Olusola Lawal Olabisi Onabanjo University, Yewa Campus, Ogun State Course Editor: Mrs. Florence Uchendu Programme Leader: Dr (Mrs.) A. O. Fagbemi School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Mr. S. O. Israel-Cookey School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
HCM 136: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD AND BEVERAGES SERVICES II 2 INTRODUCTION The food and beverages industry is all companies involved in processing raw food material packaging and distributing them.
This includes fresh prepared foods as well as packaged foods and alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages and product meant for human consumption, aside from pharmaceuticals, passes through this industry, it also x-rays the meaning of food and beverage industry.
It describes types, composition, trends, and history of food and beverage Industry.
COURSE CONTENTS The course contents consist of Basic definitions and descriptions of Food and Beverages, Staffing procedure in the Food and service industry, Basic technical skills needed for food and beverages.
Food and beverage service area and equipment, staff development in the food industry.
COURSE AIMS The aims of this course are to expose the learner to basic definitions of food and beverages in food industry, it explains the meaning of food and beverages services and the various types of food service operation.
It also looks briefly on how to be successful in food and beverages services.
The aims shall be achieved through the following (cid:31) Describing the food in its entirety and its forms consumed by human.
(cid:31) Describing beverage and its various types.
(cid:31) Explaining the terminologies used in beverages (cid:31) Describing in details the areas that have to do with Food and Beverage industry.
(cid:31) Discussing the compository history trends and future outlook of food and beverage industry.
3 COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the broad aims as set above, the course is divided into Units and each of the separate unit of the course also has its objectives at the beginning of the unit to help you focus better.
Once you have successfully completed this course, it is expected that you will have a vivid understanding of the concept termed food and beverages.
Upon completion of this course HCM 136 – Food and Beverage Service II you will be able to: i.
Describe food in its entirety and its forms consumed by humans ii.
Describe beverage and its various types iii.
Define the term Food and Beverage industry iv.
Describe the history of food and beverage industry v. Describe the trends and composition of food and beverage industry.
vi.
Explain the meaning of food and beverage service vii.
Describe the various types of food service operation viii.
Determine the various sectors in food and beverage ix.
Determine the purpose of the food service operation in the sectors x.
Determine the historical summary of the sectors.
xi.
Explain the technical skills needed to enhance sales in food and beverage xii.
Describe the examples of the applications of the skills.
STRUCTURE OF THE COURSE The course you are studying has modules with units which you are expected to study carefully.
These are 4 1.
MODULE 1 UNIT 1: Food and beverages: basic definitions and descriptions UNIT 2: Food service industry UNIT 3: Description of food and beverage service UNIT 4: Food and beverage sectors 2.
MODULE 2 UNIT 1: Dispense Bar UNIT 2: Drinks and wines in bar operation UNIT 3: Work staff in Bar operation UNIT 4: Service of alcoholic drinks 3.
MODULE 3: UNIT 1: Staffing procedure in the food industry UNIT 2: Staff development in the food industry UNIT 3: Basic Technical Skills needed for food and beverage UNIT 4: Interpersonal skills needed for food and beverage 4.
MODULE 4: UNIT 1: Food and beverage service area and equipment (SECTION A): STILL ROOM UNIT 2: Food and beverage service area and equipment (SECTION B): SILVER ROOM OR PLATE ROOM UNIT 3: Food and beverage service and area equipment (SECTION C): WASH-U UNIT 4: Food and beverage service area and equipment 5 (SECTION D): HOT PLATE Each study unit as enumerate above shall take you about three hours of intensive study.
Each unit starts with an introduction, the objectives and what you are expected to gain as knowledge and then the main content.
The main content aside from having the details of the course unit shall give you some self- assessment exercise (SAEs) and self-assessment questions (SAQs).
It is highly recommended that you study the unit carefully, do all the SAEs and the SAQs to be able to assess your ability yourself before your contact with your Facilitator.
The unit has also conclusion, summary and Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs).
You are again required to practice the TMAs to further your understanding and greater comprehension of the course.
There are texts and references for further reading and broader understanding.
By following these guidelines, your learning objectives and expectations will be greatly achieved.
ASSIGNMENT Each unit shall have at least two to three assignments.
You are expected to attempt all as you complete studying this unit TUTOR MARKED ASSESSMENT (TMAs) Your doing the Tutor-marked Assignments, you are assessing your comprehension ability of the unit and also getting yourself ready for the final examinations.
The TMAs, which form part of your final grade are expected to be turned in to your tutor/facilitator at the study centre for grading.
At the end of the sources, you will be expected to write the final examination.
The score you make in the examination together with that of your submitted TMAs will form your final score/grade.
6 EXAMINATION The final examination for the course will be of two to three hours duration and has the value of 70% and the continuous assessment- 30%.
All areas of the course will be examined and it is very important you read through the whole course material as many times as possible, you might find it useful to review your self-tests, TMA assignments and comments on them before the exam period.
SUMMARY The Course, Introduction to Food and Beverage Services II(HCM 136) has tried to expose you to food and beverages: basis definition and descriptions, food service industry, drink and wine in the bar, work staff in the bar, work staff operation, staffing procedure in the food service industry, food and beverage service area and equipment also basic technical skills needed for food and beverage.
FINAL ADVICE Organize how to manage your time.
Do everything to stick to it.
The major reason many students fail is that they take things for granted and delay in taking decisions, only to be rushing unnecessarily towards exam period.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, do not waste time to let your tutor know before it is too late to help you.
When you are confident and satisfied that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then move on to the next unit.
Proceed, unit by unit, through the course, pacing your studies and making the whole exercise easy for yourself.
Wishing you a happy and enjoyable reading time.
7 HCM 136: INTRODUCTION TO FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES II Course Writer/Developer: Adenike Olusola Lawal Olabisi Onabanjo University, Yewa Campus, Ogun State Course Editor: Mrs. Florence Uchendu Programme Leader: Dr (Mrs.) A. O. Fagbemi School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Mr. S. O. Israel-Cookey School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
8 HCM 136: INTRODUCTIONS TO FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICES II TABLE OF CONTENTS MODULE 1 ……………………………………………………………………………………………………...1 Unit 1 Food and Beverages: basic definitions and descriptions…………………………………………….1 Unit 2 Food service industry…………………………………………………………………………………….9 Unit 3 Description of food and beverage service…………………………………………….………………14 Unit 4 Food and beverage sectors………..………………………..………………………………………….19 MODULE 2………………………………..…………………………………………………………………….. 23 Unit 1 Dispense Bar……………………………………..……………………………………………..………..29 Unit 2 Drinks and wines in bar operation……………………………………..……………………………….35 Unit 3 Work staff in Bar operation………………………………………………………………………………33 Unit4 Service of alcoholic drinks……………………………………………………..…………………………38 MODULE 3……………………………………………………………………………………………………….42 Unit 1 Staffing procedure in the food service industry……………………………………………………….42 Unit 2 Staff development in the food industry………………………………………..………………………46 Unit 3 Basic Technical Skills needed for food and beverage……………………………………………….50 Unit 4 Interpersonal skills needed for food and beverage ………………………………………………….57 MODULE 4……………………………………………………………………………………………………….61 Unit 1 Food and beverage service area and equipment I: STILL ROOM………………………………...61 9 MODULE 1 UNIT 1: FOODS AND BEVERAGES: BASIC DEFINITIONS CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FOOD 3.2 TERMS USED TO DESCRIBE FOOD 3.2.1 JUNK FOOD 3.2.2.
FAST FOOD 3.2.3 COMFORT FOOD 3.2.4 OTHER DESCRIPTION OF FOOD 3.3 BEVERAGE 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSESSMENT (TMAs) 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: The necessity to have knowledge about food and beverages is very essential in the food industry.
Adequate knowledge in food and beverage will help to have ideas on the nutritional benefits.
Food, like oxygen, is a necessity of life.
The human body requires food as a source of energy, growth and replacement of tissues.
Food also supplies substances which help to regulate the reactions involved in these processes.
There are many types of foods among which are the junk foods, comfort foods and fast foods.
The beverage on the other hand is any liquid suitable for drinking and has terminologies such as milk, chocolate, soft drinks, tea, alcohol to mention a few 2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Describe food in its entirety and its forms consumed by humans ii.
Describe beverage and its various types 10 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is food?
Food is any substance consumed to provide nutritional support for the body.
It is usually of plant or animal origin, and contains essential nutrients, such as carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, or minerals.
The substance is ingested by an organism and assimilated by the organism's cells in an effort to produce energy, maintain life, or stimulate growth.
Almost all foods are of plant or animal origin.
Cereal grain is a staple food that provides more food energy worldwide than any other type of crop.
Maize, wheat, and rice - in all of their varieties -account for 87% of all grain production worldwide.
Other foods not from animal or plant sources include various edible fungi, especially mushrooms.
Fungi and ambient bacteria are used in the preparation of fermented and pickled foods like leavened bread, alcoholic drinks, cheese, pickles, kombucha, and yogurt.
Another example is blue-green algae such as Spirulina.
Inorganic substances such as baking soda and cream of tartar are also used to chemically alter an ingredient.
Many plants or plant parts are eaten as food.
There are around 2,000 plant species which are cultivated for food, and many have several distinct cultivars.
Seeds of plants are a good source of food for animals, including humans, because they contain the nutrients necessary for the plant's initial growth, including many healthful fats, such as Omega fats.
In fact, the majority of food consumed by human beings are seed-based foods.
Edible seeds include cereals (maize, wheat, rice, et cetera), legumes (beans, peas, lentils, et cetera), and nuts.
Oilseeds are often pressed to produce rich oils - sunflower, flaxseed, rapeseed (including canola oil), sesame, et cetera.
Seeds are typically high in unsaturated fats and, in moderation, are considered a health food, although not all seeds are edible.
Large seeds, such as those from a lemon, pose a choking hazard, while seeds from apples and cherries contain a poison (cyanide).
Fruits are the ripened ovaries of plants, including the seeds within.
Many plants have evolved fruits that are attractive as a food source to animals, so that animals will eat the fruits and excrete the seeds some distance away.
Fruits, therefore, make up a significant part of the diets of most cultures.
Some botanical fruits, such as tomatoes, pumpkins, and eggplants, are eaten as vegetables.
(For more information, see list of fruits.)
11 Vegetables are a second type of plant matter that is commonly eaten as food.
These include root vegetables (potatoes and carrots), leaf vegetables (spinach and lettuce), stem vegetables (bamboo shoots and asparagus), and inflorescence vegetables (globe artichokes and Animals are used as food either directly or indirectly by the products they produce.
Meat is an example of a direct product taken from an animal, which comes from muscle systems or from organs.
Food products produced by animals include milk produced by mammary glands, which in many cultures is drunk or processed into dairy products (cheese, butter, et cetera).
In addition, birds and other animals lay eggs, which are often eaten, and bees produce honey, a reduced nectar from flowers, which is a popular sweetener in many cultures.
Some cultures consume blood, sometimes in the form of blood sausage, as a thickener for sauces, or in a cured, salted form for times of food scarcity, and others use blood in stews such as civet16 Some cultures and people do not consume meat or animal food products for cultural, dietary, health, ethical, or ideological reasons.
Vegetarians do not consume meat.
Vegans do not consume any foods that are or contain ingredients from an animal source.
Traditionally, food was obtained through agriculture.
With increasing concern in agribusiness over multinational corporations owning the world food supply through patents on genetically modified food, there has been a growing trend toward sustainable agricultural practices.
This approach, partly fueled by consumer demand, encourages biodiversity, local self-reliance and organic farming methods.
Major influences on food production include international organizations (e.g.
the World Trade Organization and Common Agricultural Policy), national government policy (or law), and war.
In popular culture, the mass production of food, specifically meats such as chicken and beef, has come under fire from various documentaries, most recently Food, Inc, documenting the mass slaughter and poor treatment of animals, often for easier revenues from large corporations.
Along with a current trend towards environmentalism, people in Western culture have had an increasing trend towards the use of herbal supplements, foods for a specific group of person (such as dieters, women, or athletes), functional foods (fortified foods, such as omega-3 eggs), and a more ethnically diverse diet.
Several organisations have begun calling for a new kind of agriculture in which agro-ecosystems provide food but also support vital ecosystem services so that soil fertility and biodiversity are maintained rather than compromised.
According to the International Water Management Institute and UNEP, well- managed agroecosystems not only provide food, fibre and animal products, they 12 also provide services such as flood mitigation, groundwater recharge, erosion control and habitats for plants, birds fish and other animals.
3.2 Terms Used To Describe Food 3.2.1 Junk food: This is an informal term applied to some foods that are perceived to have little or no nutritional value (i.e.
containing "empty calories"); to products with nutritional value, but which also have ingredients considered unhealthy when regularly eaten; or to those considered unhealthy to consume at all.
The term was coined by Michael Jacobson, Director of Center for Science in the Public Interest, in 1972.
Junk foods are typically ready-to-eat convenience foods containing high levels of saturated fats, salt, or sugar, and little or no fruit, vegetables, or dietary fiber; and are considered to have little or no health benefits.
Common junk foods include salted snack foods like chips (crisps), candy, gum, most sweet desserts, fried fast food and carbonated beverages (sodas)[2] as well as alcoholic beverages.
High-sugar cereals, particularly those targeted at children, such as Froot Loops, are also classified as junk food.
3.2.1.1 Health effects of junk foods A study by Paul Johnson and Paul Kenny at the Scripps Research Institute (2008) suggested that junk food consumption alters brain activity in a manner similar to addictive drugs like cocaine or heroin.
After many weeks with unlimited access to junk food, the pleasure centers of rat brains became desensitized, requiring more food for pleasure.
After the junk food was taken away and replaced with a healthy diet, the rats starved for two weeks instead of eating nutritious fare.
[6] A 2007 British Journal of Nutrition study found that mothers who eat junk food during pregnancy increased the likelihood of unhealthy eating habits in their children.
A report published in the Journal of the Federation of America suggests that babies of mothers with a high-sugar and high-fat diet while pregnant are more prone to junk food themselves.
The study was conducted on rats and suggests that "infants whose mothers eat excessive amounts of high-fat, high-sugar junk foods when pregnant or breastfeeding are likely to have a greater preference for these foods later in life."
A 2008 report suggests that mothers who eat junk food while pregnant or breast-feeding have children who are more prone to obesity.
The children are also more prone to diabetes, raised cholesterol, and high blood fat.
13 3.2.2 Fast food This is the term given to food that can be prepared and served very quickly.
While any meal with low preparation time can be considered to be fast food, typically the term refers to food sold in a restaurant or store with preheated or precooked ingredients, and served to the customer in a packaged form for take- out/take-away.
The term "fast food" was recognized in a dictionary by Merriam–Webster in 1951.
Outlets may be stands or kiosks, which may provide no shelter or seating, or fast food restaurants(also known as quick service restaurants).
Franchise operations which are part of restaurant chains have standardized foodstuffs shipped to each restaurant from central locations.
Modern commercial fast food is often highly processed and prepared in an industrial fashion, i.e.
on a large scale with standard ingredients and standardized cooking and production methods.
It is usually rapidly served in cartons or bags or in a plastic wrapping, in a fashion which minimizes cost.
In most fast food operations, menu items are generally made from processed ingredientsprepared at a central supply facility and then shipped to individual outlets where they are reheated, cooked (usually by microwave or deep frying) or assembled in a short amount of time.
This process ensures a consistent level of product quality, and is key to being able to deliver the order quickly to the customer and eliminate labour and equipment costs in the individual stores.
Because of commercial emphasis on speed, uniformity and low cost, fast food products are often made with ingredients formulated to achieve a certain flavour or consistency and to preserve freshness.
3.2.3 Comfort foods Comfort foods may be consumed to positively pique emotions, to relieve negative psychological effects or to increase positive feelings.
The term was first used, according to Webster's Dictionary, in 1977.
One study divided college-students' comfort-food identifications into four categories (nostalgic foods, indulgence foods, convenience foods, and physical comfort foods) with a special emphasis on the deliberate selection of particular foods to modify mood or affect, and indications that the medical-therapeutic use of particular foods may ultimately be a matter of mood-alteration.
The identification of particular items as comfort food may be idiosyncratic, though patterns are detectable.
In one study of American preferences, "males preferred warm, hearty, meal-related comfort foods (such as steak, casseroles, and soup), while females instead preferred comfort 14 foods that were more snack related (such as chocolate and ice cream).
In addition, younger people preferred more snack-related comfort foods compared to those over 55 years of age."
The study also revealed strong connections between consumption of comfort foods and feelings of guilt.
Comfort food consumption has been seen as a response to emotional stress, and consequently, as a key contributor to the epidemic of obesity in the United States.
The provocation of specific hormonal responses leading selectively to increases in abdominal fat is seen as a form of self medication.
Further studies suggest that consumption of comfort food is triggered in men by positive emotions, and by negative ones in women.
The stress effect is particularly pronounced among college-aged women, with only 33% reporting healthy eating choices during times of emotional stress.
For women specifically, these psychological patterns may be maladaptive.
A therapeutic use of these findings includes offering comfort foods or "happy hour" beverages to anorectic geriatric patients whose health and quality of life otherwise decreases with reduced oral intake.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Differentiate between junk food, comfort food and fast food 3.2.
4 Other Descriptions of Food: i. leftovers - food remaining from a previous meal; "he had leftovers for dinner last night" ii.
fresh food, fresh foods - food that is not preserved by canning or dehydration or freezing or smoking iii.
convenience food - any packaged dish or food that can be prepared quickly and easily as by thawing or heating iv.
chocolate - a food made from roasted ground cacao beans v. baked goods - foods (like breads and cakes and pastries) that are cooked in an oven vi.
loaf - a quantity of food (other than bread) formed in a particular shape; "meat loaf"; "sugar loaf"; "a loaf of cheese" vii.
meat - the flesh of animals (including fishes and birds and snails) used as food viii.
alimentary paste, pasta - shaped and dried dough made from flour and water and sometimes egg ix.
health food - any natural or prepared food popularly believed to promote good health x. breakfast food - any food (especially cereal) usually served for breakfast garden truck, green goods, green groceries, produce - fresh fruits and vegetable grown for the market 15 xi.
coconut, coconut meat - the edible white meat of a coconut; often shredded for use in e.g.
cakes and curries xii.
dika bread - somewhat astringent paste prepared by grinding and heating seeds of the African wild mango; a staple food of some African peoples xiii.
fish - the flesh of fish used as food; "in Japan most fish is eaten raw"; "after the scare about foot-and-mouth disease a lot of people started eating fish instead of meat"; "they have a chef who specializes in fish" xiv.
seafood - edible fish (broadly including freshwater fish) or shellfish etc xv.
butter - an edible emulsion of fat globules made by churning milk or cream; for cooking and table use xvi.
yoghourt, yoghurt, yogurt - a custard-like food made from curdled milk xvii.
cheese - a solid food prepared from the pressed curd of milk xviii.
slop - (usually plural) weak or watery unappetizing food or drink; "he lived on the thin slops that food kitchens provided" xix.
solid - matter that is solid at room temperature and pressure.
3.3 BEVERAGE This is any liquid suitable for drinking Terminologies used to describe beverage: (cid:31) milk (a white nutritious liquid secreted by mammals and used as food by human beings) (cid:31) cider; cyder (a beverage made from juice pressed from apples) (cid:31) chocolate; cocoa; drinking chocolate; hot chocolate (a beverage made from cocoa powder and milk and sugar; usually drunk hot) (cid:31) fruit crush; fruit juice (drink produced by squeezing or crushing fruit) (cid:31) fruit drink (a sweetened beverage of diluted fruit juice) (cid:31) mate (South American tea-like drink made from leaves of a South American holly called mate) (cid:31) soft drink (nonalcoholic beverage (usually carbonated)) (cid:31) coffee; java (a beverage consisting of an infusion of ground coffee beans) (cid:31) tea (a beverage made by steeping tea leaves in water) (cid:31) tea-like drink (a beverage that resembles tea but is not made from tea leaves) (cid:31) fizz (an effervescent beverage (usually alcoholic)) (cid:31) smoothie (a thick smooth drink consisting of fresh fruit pureed with ice cream or yoghurt or milk) (cid:31) refresher (a drink that refreshes) (cid:31) wish-wash (any thin watery drink) (cid:31) portion (a medicinal or magical or poisonous beverage) (cid:31) alcohol; alcoholic beverage; inebriant; intoxicant (a liquor or brew containing alcohol as the active agent) (cid:31) hydromel (honey diluted in water; becomes mead when fermented) 16 (cid:31) oenomel (wine mixed with honey) (cid:31) near beer (drink that resembles beer but with less than 1/2 percent alcohol) (cid:31) ginger beer (carbonated slightly alcoholic drink flavoured with fermented ginger) (cid:31) mixer (club soda or fruit juice used to mix with alcohol) (cid:31) cooler (an iced drink especially white wine and fruit juice) (cid:31) drinking water (water suitable for drinking or portable water) 4.0 CONCLUSION: This unit carefully expatiated on the basic definitions of food and beverage.
Also, health effects of consuming some sorts of foods are explained.
Forms of food and beverages are also mentioned.
5.0.
SUMMARY: The basic definition of food is any substance consumed to provide nutritional support for the body.
It is usually of plant or animal origin, and contains essential nutrients, such as carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, or minerals.
The substance is ingested by an organism and assimilated by the organism's cells in an effort to produce energy, maintain life, or stimulate growth.
Some consumer it as fast food, junk food and common food with implications on the health of the consumers.
Beverage is also described as any liquid suitable for drinking and also can exist in diverse forms for consumption 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Discuss in details what you understand by the term beverage and its forms of consumption by humans.
7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. %37 Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London.
17 MODULE 1 Unit 2: FOOD AND BEVERAGE INDUSTRY CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 FOOD AND BEVERAGE INDUSTRY 3.2 INDUSTRY COMPOSITION OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE INDUSTRY 3.3 HISTORY OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE INDUSTRY 3.4 TRENDS OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE INDUSTRY 3.5 FUTURE OUTLOOK OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE INDUSTRY 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: The concept of food and beverage industry is discussed in this unit.
It describes the types, composition, trends and history of Food and Beverage Industry.
Food has been processed for nearly as long as it has been used.
In early times, humans used to dry or smoke meat or other foodstuff in order to preserve it for longer periods of time.
Salt preservation was also very common in the diet of sailors and soldiers during those times.
Food processing essentially remained unchanged until the 19th century with the invention of canning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Define the term food and beverage industry ii.
Describe the history of food and beverage industry iii.
Describe the trends and composition of food and beverage industry 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Food and beverage industry The food and beverages industry is all companies involved in processing raw food materials, packaging, and distributing them.
This includes fresh, prepared 18 foods as well as packaged foods, and alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages.
Any product meant for human consumption, aside from pharmaceuticals, passes through this industry.
The food industry is a complex, global collective of diverse businesses that together supply much of the food energy consumed by the world population.
Only subsistence farmers, those who survive on what they grow, can be considered outside of the scope of the modern food industry.
The food industry includes: (cid:31) Regulation: local, regional, national and international rules and regulations for food production and sale, including food quality and food safety, and industry lobbying activities (cid:31) Education: academic, vocational, consultancy (cid:31) Research and development: food technology (cid:31) Financial services insurance, credit (cid:31) Manufacturing: agrichemicals, seed, farm machinery and supplies, agricultural construction, etc.
(cid:31) Agriculture: raising of crops and livestock, seafood (cid:31) Food processing: preparation of fresh products for market, manufacture of prepared food products (cid:31) Marketing: promotion of generic products (e.g.
milk board), new products, public opinion, through advertising, packaging, public relations, etc.
(cid:31) Wholesale and distribution: warehousing, transportation, logistics 3.2 Composition Of Food And Beverage Industry: Deriving from the agriculture industry in our definition, the food and beverage industry is divided into two major segments.
Those two segments are production and distribution of edible goods.
Production includes the processing of meats and cheeses and the creating of soft drinks, alcoholic beverages, packaged foods, and other modified foods.
The production segment of this industry excludes foods that were directly produced via farming and other forms of agriculture, as those are encompassed by our definition of the agriculture industry.
Distribution involves transporting the finished food product into the hands of customers.
The industry is much more focused on technology and mechanical manipulation of raw foods to create more value-added food products than the agricultural industry.
Under our definition of these industries, grocery stores are excluded as they are considered a retail store by our definition.
Distribution includes companies that ship food to retail outlets, restaurants, or directly to consumers.
19 3.3 History of food and beverage industry: Food has been processed for nearly as long as it has been used.
In early times, humans used to dry or smoke meat or other foodstuff in order to preserve it for longer periods of time.
Salt preservation was also very common in the diet of sailors and soldiers during those times.
Food processing essentially remained unchanged until the 19th century with the invention of canning by Nicholas Appert and pasteurization by Louis Pasteur.
Both of these innovations changed the way that food was processed into a longer lasting food product that was canned or bottled.
During wartime, the food and beverage industry shifted, as food is often a precious commodity.
Prices were determined by availability and regulation.
Most countries involved in World War II rationed food and regulated prices in order to stabilize the economy.
This increased innovation in the food processing segment with the inventions of food coloring, juice concentrates, artificial sweeteners, and more advanced preservatives, such as sodium benzoate.
These innovations led to the current food processing market in place today with convenience foods, such as frozen TV dinners and instant meals, prepared snacks, and other instantly available foods.
The food distribution segment of this industry is fairly new.
Prior to the industrial revolution, consumers typically ate what foods were available to them in their regional market.
Foods were processed from these markets and used for journeys out of them.
With the increased transportation of the industrial revolution, such as railroads and barges, as well as the concurrent rise in technology such as canning, it became feasible to transport food from one regional market for sale in another.
Today, the industry segment has evolved even further due to increased transportation technology such as airplanes Self – Assessment Exercise: Discuss the Composition of Food and Beverage and Its History 3.3 Trends of food and beverage industry: Due to the recent economic meltdown, consumers are looking to save as much money as possible.
One major way that consumers are doing so is by purchasing more generic foods and making their own meals, not going out to eat.
This is causing food processing companies to become more innovative to decrease the cost of goods sold, attract more customers, and increase profit margins.
The large amount of obesity in the world has a major effect on the food and beverage industry.
There has been an increase in demand for health foods and more informative nutritional labeling.
Both of these trends have caused companies to release lower calorie foods and to better control how their brand is 20 viewed.
Companies want to be viewed as a healthy brand and are promoting activities, such as youth sports, that show this healthy image.
There also is mention of a tax on foods known to lead to obesity in order to curb customers’ usage of them.
Rising costs of factors of production are a major factor to this industry as well.
Since commodity prices went up in the past year, food companies have had to increase prices of the final product as well.
With the economic collapse, this affected them two-fold, as consumers were less likely to want or even have the money to pay the higher prices.
Fortunately, commodity costs have been decreasing in the last few months, which forecasts a lower final price for the products in this industry is to come.
The industry also has to deal with their reputation, as there have been incidents of unsafe food being released in the past.
These outbreaks have to major potential consequences: loss of consumer confidence and increased regulation.
Already, research has shown that consumers do not trust their food suppliers as much as they used to and nearly half of them have switched brands in the past year, either to save money or because they believe the new food will be safer.
Government control of the food process has increased with the passage of new laws as well.
3.4 Future outlook of food and beverage industry : The food and beverage industry has seen their profit margins decrease recently.
However, due to the falling cost of commodities, these margins should increase in the coming years.
Food is a necessary part of life and will always be needed.
Those are some reasons why this industry has an above average future outlook.
In addition, corporate and brand reputations are expected to become increasingly important, as consumers are trying to stretch their dollar further and competition is increasing.
With the increase in competition, the only way companies can separate themselves from others is by brand recognition.
Consumers are now very concerned with the reputation of a company, or their brand image, with respect to the safety and quality of product.
Increased innovation in the industry will lead to newer, healthier products and lower production costs, both of which should increase profit margins.
4.0 CONCLUSION: This unit has explained the basic meaning of food and beverage industry.
It has also touched the history, composition, trends and future outlook of the industry.
The food distribution segment of the industries.
Prior to the industrial revolution, consumers typically ate what foods were available to them in their regional market.
Foods were processed from these markets and used for journeys out of them.
5.0 SUMMARY: The food and beverage industry is all companies involved in processing raw food materials, packaging, and distributing them.
This includes 21 fresh, prepared foods as well as packaged foods, and alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages.
Any product meant for human consumption, aside from pharmaceuticals, passes through this industry.
The food and beverage industry is divided into two major segments: production and distribution of edible goods.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Describe in details the areas that have to do with food and beverage industry?
ii.
Discuss the composition, history, trends and future outlook of food and beverage industry.
7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. 37 Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London 22 MODULE 1 Unit 3.
DESCRIPTION OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 BASIC DEFINITION OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE 3.2 TYPES OF FOOD SERVICE OPERATION 3.3 EXAMPLES OF TYPES OF FOOD SERVICE OPERATION 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the food industry, it is very much pertinent to have an overall view of what a food and beverage service is.
A knowledge of what is required to be successful in the food and beverage service is necessary.
Working in food and beverage service offers a wealth of opportunity for professional development and advancement for those committed to the hospitality industry and to working in food and beverage service, a fulfilling, exciting and enjoyable career awaits.
This unit explains the meaning of food and beverage service and the various types of food service operation.
It also looks briefly on how to be successful in food and beverage service 2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Explain what the meaning of food and beverage service is ii.
Identify the various types of food service operation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic definition of food and beverage service Food and beverage service is the essential link between the customers and the menu, beverages and other services on offer in an establishment.
The server is the main point of contact between the customers and the establishment and 23 plays an important role in a profession with increasing national and international status.
The skills and knowledge of food and beverage service, and therefore careers, are transferable between establishments, sectors and throughout the world.26 To be successful in food and beverage service requires: (cid:31) Sound product knowledge (cid:31) Well developed interpersonal skills (cid:31) A range of technical skills, and (cid:31) The ability to work as part of a team 3.2 Types of Food Service Operation The industry provides millions of meals a day in a wide variety of types of food service operation.
1.
Food: Can include a wide range of styles and cuisine types.
These can be classified by country for example, traditional British or Italian; by type of cuisine for example, oriental; or a particular specialty such as fish, vegetarian or health food.
2.
Beverage: It includes all alcoholic and non-alcoholic drinks.
Alcoholic beverages include wines and all other types of alcoholic drink such as cocktails, beers and cider, spirits and liqueurs.
Non-alcoholic beverages include bar beverages such as minerals, water, juices, squashes and aerated water, as well as tea, coffee, chocolate, milk and milk drinks and also proprieting drinks such as Bovril.
Food and beverage (or food service) operations include, for example, various types of restaurants (bistros, brasseries, coffee – shops, first class / fine dinning, function rooms, tray service operations, lounge service operations, home deliver operations for hotel guests.
Some examples of the types of operation are given in Table.
Self assessment Exercise: Make a definition of food and beverage service, and a description of the types of food service operation.
3.3 Examples Of Types Of Food Service Operation Types of operations Description 1.
Bistro: Often a smaller establishment, with check table cloths, bentwood chairs, cluttered décor and friendly informal staff.
Tends to offer honest, basic and robust cooking.
24 2.
Brasserie: This is generally a largish, styled room, with a long bar, Normally serving one – plate items rather than formal meals (though some offer both).
Often it is possible just to ware a drink, coffee or just a snack.
Service by waiters often in traditional style of long aprons and black waist coats.
3.
New ware brasserie (Gastrodome) Slick modern interior design, coupled with similar approaches to contemporary cuisine and service.
Busy and bustling and often large and multileveled.
4.
Coffee shop: similar to brasserie – style operations, often themed.
May be open all day and serve all meal types from breakfast through to supper.
5.
First class restaurant: Tend to be formal fine dinning restaurants with classical preparation and presentation of food and offering a high level of table (silver, queridon and / or plated) service.
Often associated with classic / haute cuisine.
6.
Restaurant: Term used to cover a wide variety of operation price, level and type of service, décor, styles, cuisines and degree of choice varies enormously across the range of types of operation.
Service range from full table service to assisted service such as in carver –style operations.
7.
Ethnic Restaurant: Indian, oriental, Asian, Spanish, Greek, Italian, Creole and Cajun are just some of the many types of ethnic cuisine available with establishments tending to reflect ethnic origin.
Many of the standard dishes are now appearing within a range of other menu types.
8.
Themed Restaurant: Often international in orientation, for example, Kelandic hot rock with food prepared and cooked at the table, ‘Benihana’ oriental them, again with food prepared and cooked at table.
Also includes themes such as jungle, rain forest or music / opera, where waiting staff perform as well as serve.
25 9. International Destination Restaurant Often Michelin-starred fine dinning restaurants, offering a distinctive personality, cuisine, ambiance, beverage and service.
Usually table service at various levels but mostly personal and attentive.
Generally considered as the home of gastronomy.
Expensive but value laden.
10.
Health Food and Vegetarians: Increasing specialization of operations into vegetarians and / Restaurants.
or health foods (though vegetarian food is not necessarily health), to meet life style needs as well as dietary requirements.
11.
Cafeteria: Primarily self-service with customer choosing selection from a counter or counters in varying designs and layouts.
Originally developed for the industrial feeding market but now seen in a variety of sectors.
12.
Popular Catering and fast Food outlets Developed from table service tea shops and café’s through to steak house, and now incorporating snack bars, kiosks, diners, take away and cafeterias, with modern – day burger, chicken and fish concepts, and with ethnic foods also being incorporated meeting the needs of all day meal taking (grazing) and also the need for ‘grab and go’ service, especially for the leisure, industrial and travelling markets.
13.
Public houses: Licensed environment primarily for drinking alcoholic beverages.
May be simply a serving bar with standing room for customers or may have more plush surroundings incorporating the offer of a variety of foods.
These can range from simple plated dishes through to establishment offering full restaurant service (sometimes called gastropubs).
14.
Wine bars: Often a mixture of bar and brasserie – style operation, commonly wine theme, serving a variety of foods.
26 4.0.
CONCLUSION: food and beverage service is essential as a link between the customers and the menu, beverages and other services on offer in an establishment.
This unit has been able to let you briefly what food and beverage service means and the various types of food service operation.
5.0 SUMMARY: Food and beverage service is described as the essential link between the customers and the menu, beverages and other services on offer in an establishment.
The operations of the food and beverage service includes bistro, brasserie, coffee shops, restaurants ,wine bars etc 6.0.
TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT I.
What is food and beverage service?
ii.
Describe in details the various examples of types of food and beverage service 7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. %37 Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 27 MODULE 1 Unit 4 FOOD AND BEVERAGE SECTORS CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 SECTORS OF THE FOOD SERVICE INDUSTRY 4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 CONCLUSION 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: There are various sectors for food and beverages.
They are naturally to provide food , fast foods and drinks.
However, it is expedient for us to have a deep knowledge of the names by which we can identify them .
such sectors include the hotels and tourist centres, restaurants and retail shops.
This unit examines the various sectors in the food and beverage.
such sectors are to serve as avenues where people can patronize to satisfy their appetite for food and beverage.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Explain the various sectors in food and beverage ii.
Identify the purpose of the food service operation in the sectors iii.
Explain the historical summary of the sectors.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT: There are a wide variety of sectors such as hotels, independent and chain restaurants.
Popular catering, pubs and wine bars, fast food, leisure attractions and banqueting.
There are also sectors where food and beverages are provided as part of another business.
These include transport catering, welfare, clubs, education, industrial feeding and the armed forces.
28 3.1 Sectors of the Food service Industry.
Industry Sector Purpose of the food service Historical summary UK terminology operation 1.
Hotels and other Provisions of food and drink Developed from inns.
Supported Tourist accommodation together with accommodation by developments in transport and services.
increases in business and leisure – related tourism.
2 Restaurants including Provision of food and drinks, Grew out of hotel Conventional and specialist generally at a high price with restaurants(which were originally Operations high levels of service highly forward) through chefs wishing to start their own business.
3 Popular catering including Provision of food and drink, Developed from ABC and lyons cafes, pizza, grills, generally at low / medium concepts has gone through specialist coffee shops, price with limited levels of various phrases.
More recently road side restaurants and service and often high highly influenced by the USA.
steak houses customer through put.
4 Fast food including Provision of food and drink in Grew from combination of popular McDonalds and Burger king highly specialized catering and take away, heavily environment, characterized by influenced by USA concepts, high investment, high labour highly sophisticated meal costs and vast customer packaging and marketing through put.
5.
Take away including ethnic, spuds, Fast provision of food and Developed in UK from original fish KFC, snacks, fish and chips, drink and chip concepts.
Influenced by sandwich bars, kiosks.
USA and trends in food tastes.
6.
Banqueting / conferencing / Provision of range scale food Originally associated with hotels exhibitions and drink alongside services but has now become major sector such as conferencing in its own right.
7.
Retails store Provision of food and drink as Developed originally from an adjunct to retail provision prestigious stores wishing to provides food and drink as part of the retailing experience 8. Leisure attractions such as theme Provision of food and drink to Increases in leisure have made parks, museums, galleries, people engaged in another profit from food and drink cinemas and theatres pursuit attractive to leisure and amenity providers.
9.
Motor way service stations Provision of food and drink Born in UK in 1960s with the together with petrol and other advent of motor way building.
retail services, often in Influenced by USA and become isolated locations specialized because of government regulations on provision of food service operations, retail and fuel as well as location.
10.
Industrial Catering either Provision of food and drink to Born out of recognition that better in-house operation or through people at work – fed workers work better.
catering / food service contractors Boosted in UK by legislation during first and second world wars.
29 Further developed by worker unions wanting to preserve conditions and the emergence of professional contract caterers / food service operators.
11 Welfare Catering Provision of food and drinks to Regulated and given substantial people in Colleges, boost in the UK by the creation of Universities the welfare state in 1948. and the forces and to people Maintained now through public through established social social conscience.
need 12 Licensed trade including public Provision of food and drink in Developed in UK from inns also houses, wine bars, licensed clubs an environment dominated by origin of steak houses, e.g.
1960s and members’ clubs.
licensing requirement Berni Inns.
13.
Transport catering Provision of food and drink to Grew out of the need to meet the Including railways, people on the move demands of travelling public.
airlines and marine Originally services were of high levels, reflecting the type of traveler.
Eventually changed to meet the needs of a wide range of travelers 14.
Outdoor catering (ODC) Provision of food and drink Developed through need to (or off – premises catering or away from home base and provide services at special event catering) suppliers usually associated events.
The term ODC is with a major event.
misleading as little of this catering actually takes place outside.
Self Assessment Exercise: Describe the historical picture of hotels and tourist centres, restaurants, catering centres and fast food centres 4.0 CONCLUSION: Many benefits accrue from the diverse sectors in the food and beverage service.
These include: provision of food and drink together with accommodation services.
Provision of food and drinks, generally at a high price with high levels of service.
Provision of food and drink, generally at low / medium price with limited levels of service and often high customer through put.The various sectors available in food and beverage have been highlighted.
5.0 SUMMARY: The various sectors in food and beverage industry include hotels, independent and chain restaurants.
Others are popular catering, pubs and wine bars, fast food, leisure attractions and banqueting.
There are also sectors where food and beverages are provided as part of another business.
These include transport catering, welfare, clubs, education, industrial feeding and the armed forces.
30 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT I.
Explain briefly the meaning of food and beverage sector II.
Discuss the purpose and historical background of the various sectors of food and beverage operation 7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. 37 Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London33 31 MODULE 2 Unit 1: DISPENSE BAR CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 BASIC DEFINITION OF A DISPENSE BAR 3.2 EQUIPMENT IN A DISPENSE BAR 3.2.1 MAIN EQUIPMENT ITEMS IN A DISPENSE BAR 3.2.2 OTHER EQUIPMENT ITEMS IN A DISPENSE BAR 3.2.3 FOOD ITEMS IN A DISPENSE BAR 3.2.4 EXAMPLES OF COCKTAIL BAR EQUIPMENT 3.2.5 GLASS WARE IN A BAR 3.3 PLANNING OF A BAR 3.4 SITTING IN A BAR 3.5 AREA DIMENSION OF A BAR 3.6 LAYOUT OF A BAR 3.7 PLUMBING AND POWER IN A BAR 3.8 SAFETY AND HYGIENE IN A BAR 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: It is a common phenomenon for wines and other alcohol drinks to be sold and served in any food service area often This unit examines the term ‘dispense bar’ and the equipment found therein as well.
Beverage control.
All alcoholic drinks are usually served by the member of the service team often know as a sommelier or wine butler, unless it is the custom for the food service waiter to serve their own customers with the wine and drinks they require.
In order to carry out efficiently the service of all forms of wine and drink requested, the bar should have available all the necessary equipment for making cocktails, decanting wine, serving wine correctly, making fruit cups and so on.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Explain the term dispense bar ii.
Mention the various things found in the dispense bar 32 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic definition of a bar The term ‘dispense bar’ refers to any bar situated within a food and beverage service area that dispenses wine or other alcoholic drinks which are to be served to a customer consuming a meal or using a lounge area.
However, in many establishments, because of the planning and layout, wine and other alcoholic drinks for consumption with a meal are sometimes dispensed from bars situated outside the food and beverage service area itself – in other words, from one of the public bars.
All drinks dispensed must be checked for and controlled in some way.
Taking customer food and beverage orders.
Beverage control.
All alcoholic drinks are usually served by the member of the service team often know as a sommelier or wine butler, unless it is the custom for the food service waiter to serve their own customers with the wine and drinks they require.
3.2 Equipment is a dispense bar In order to carry out efficiently the service of all forms of wine and drink requested, the bar should have available all the necessary equipment for making cocktails, decanting wine, serving wine correctly, making fruit cups and so on.
The equipment should include the following items.
3.2.1 Main items (cid:31) Cocktail shaker: the ideal utensil for mixing ingredients that will not normally blend together well by stirring.
A three-part utensil (cid:31) Boston shaker: consists of two cones, one of which overlaps the other to seal in the ‘mix’.
Made of stainless steel, glass or plated silver.
The mix is strained using a Hawthorn strainer.
(cid:31) Mixing glass: like a glass jug without a handle, but has a lip.
Used for mixing clear drinks which do not contain juices or cream.
(cid:31) Strainer: there are many types, the most popular being the Hawthorn.
This is a flat spoon shaped utensil with a spring coiled round its edge.
It is used in conjunction with the cocktail shaker and mixing glass to hold back the ice after the drink is prepared.
A special design is available for use with liquidizers and blenders.
(cid:31) Bar spoons: for use with the mixing glass when stirring cocktails.
The flat ‘muddler’ end is used for crushing sugar and main in certain drinks.
(cid:31) Bar liquidized or blender: used for making drinks that require pureed fruit.
(cid:31) Drink mixer: used for drinks that do not need liquidizing especially those containing cream or ice cream.
If ice is required, use only crushed ice.
33 3.2.2 Other Items Examples include: (cid:31) Assorted glasses (cid:31) Ice buckets and stands (cid:31) Wine baskets (cid:31) Water jugs (cid:31) Assorted bitters: peach, orange, angostura (cid:31) Cutting board and knife (cid:31) Coasters (cid:31) Refrigerator (cid:31) Cork extractor (cid:31) Soda siphons (cid:31) Coloured sugars (cid:31) Sink unit (cid:31) Glass washing machine (cid:31) Optics/spirit measures (cid:31) Wine measures (cid:31) Cooling trays (cid:31) Bottle opener (cid:31) Ice crushing machine (cid:31) Ice pick (cid:31) Ice making machine (cid:31) Drinking straws (cid:31) Cocktail sticks (cid:31) Carafes (cid:31) Wine and cocktail lists (cid:31) Glass cloths, napkins and service cloths (cid:31) Small ice buckets and tongs (cid:31) Muslin and funnel (cid:31) Lemon squeezing machine (cid:31) Strainer and funnel (cid:31) Service salvers (cid:31) Wine knife and cigar cutter (cid:31) Bin (cid:31) Hot beverage maker 3.2.3 Food items Examples include: (cid:31) Olives (cid:31) Worcestershire sauce (cid:31) Salt and pepper (cid:31) Nutmeg (cid:31) Angostura bitters 34 (cid:31) Caster sugar (cid:31) Maraschino cherries (cid:31) Tabasco sauce (cid:31) Cinnamon (cid:31) Cloves (cid:31) Cube sugar (cid:31) Demerara sugar 3.2.4 Examples of cocktail bar equipment 1.
Cocktail shaker, 2.
Botton shaker 3.
Mixing glass with bar spoon 4.
Hawthorn strainer 5.
Jug strainer insert 6.
Mini whisk 7.
Straws 8.
Ice crusher 9.
Juice press 10.
Ice bucket and tongs Examples of bar equipments: 1.
Bottle coaster 2.
Champagne star 3.
Wine bottle holder 4.
Vacu-pump 5.
Wine bottle openers 6.
Champagne bottle stoppers 7.
Wine funnel 8.
Wine bottle foil cutter 10.
Champagne cork strip 11.
Wine cork extractor 12.
Appetizer bowls and cocktail stick holder 13.
Measures on drip tray 14.
Cutting board and knife 15.
Cigar cutters 16.
Bottle stoppers 17.
Bottle pourer 18.
Crown cork opener 19.
Mini juice press (cid:31) Eggs (cid:31) Mini (cid:31) Orange (cid:31) Coconut cream (cid:31) Cream (cid:31) Cucumber (cid:31) Lemon (cid:31) Lime Self Assessment Exercise: Explain the main equipment items in a bar 3.2.5 Glass ware 35 The choice of the right glass is a vital element if the cocktail is to be invitingly presented.
Well designed glassware combines elegance, strength and stability, and should be fine rimmed and of clear glass.
All glassware should be clean and well polished.
3.3 Planning of the bar There are certain essentials necessary in the planning of every bar.
They are factors that should be given prime considerations when planning for a fixed bar or when setting up a temporary bar for a particular function, as follows: 3.4 Sitting in a Bar A major factor is the sitting of the bar.
The position should be chosen so that the bar achieves the greatest possible number of sales 3.5 Area dimension in a bar The bar staff must be given sufficient area or in which to work and move about.
There should be a minimum of 1m (3ft 3 in) from the back of the bar counter to the storage shelves and display cabinets at the rear of the bar.
3.6 Layout Very careful consideration must be given, in the initial planning, to the layout of the bar.
Adequate storage must be provided, in the form of shelves, cupboards and racks, for all the stock required and equipment listed.
Everything should be easily to hand so that the bar staff do not have to move about more than necessary to provide easy and efficient service.
3.7 Plumbing and power It is essential to have hot and cold running water for the glass washing.
Power is necessary for the cooling trays, refrigerator and ice-making machines.
3.8 Safety and hygiene Great care must be observed to ensure that the materials used in the make-up of the bar are hygienic and safe.
Flooring must be non-slip.
The bar top should be of a material suited to the general décor that is hard wearing, easily wiped down and has no sharp edges.
The bar top should be of average working height – approximately 1.m (3 ft .
3m) and a depth across the top from the bar to the service side of about 1.6m (20 in).
4.0 CONCLUSION: In any dispense bar, all the equipment play significant roles at determining a good patronage.
The planning, dimension, safety and hygiene all have important roles at determining the productivity.
The basic definition of a dispense bar and the things commonly found in it have been well discussed.
36  5.0 SUMMARY: Dispense bar refers to any bar situated within a food and beverage service area that dispenses wine or other alcoholic drinks which are to be served to a customer consuming a meal or using a lounge area.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT I.
Write on the planning of a bar and its sitting arrangement, area dimension, layout, plumbing and power and safety and hygiene of a bar 7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. 37 Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London MODULE 2 37 Unit 2 : DRINKS AND WINES IN BAR OPERATION CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MEANING OF A BAR 3.2 BAR AND COCKTAIL LISTS 3.3 RESTAURANT WINE LISTS 3.4 AFTER MEAL LISTS 3.5 BANQUETING WINE LISTS 3.6 ROOM SERVICE DRINKS LISTS 3.7.
CONTENTS OF WINE AND DRINK LISTS 3.8 LISTING OF WINES 3.8.1 GEOGRAPHICAL LISTING FOR WINES 3.8.2 LISTING WINES BY TYPE 3.8.3.
LISTING WINES BY GRAPE 3.9 GENERAL INFORMATION REQUIRED 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: Drinks and wines are generally listed in bar operation in different ways.
It is therefore necessary to be conversant with the methods of listings.
For example, a visit to a dispense bar may show some wines listed geographically, by type or by grape.
The contents of such wines may also differ from one another.
In another development, there can also be cocktail list restaurant wine lists, after meal lists and banqueting lists.
This unit therefore examines the lists of items used in bar operation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Explain the list of drinks sold in a bar ii.
Describe the types of wines sold in a bar 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is the meaning of a bar?
The word bar here is the term used to describe order, service and payment point and consumption area in licensed premises.
3.2 Bar and cocktail lists 38 There may range from a basic standard list offering the common everyday aperitifs such as Sherries, vermouths, bitters, a solution of spirits with mixers; beers and soft drinks, together with a limited range of cocktails, to a very comprehensive list offering a good choice in all areas.
The actual format and content will be determined by the style of operation and clientele that the establishment wishes to attract.
Depending on this, the emphasis may be in certain areas, such as: (cid:31) Cocktails: traditional or fashionable (cid:31) Malt whiskies (cid:31) Beers (cid:31) New world wines Non-alcoholic drinks, 3.3 Restaurant wine lists These may take various formats such as (cid:31) A full and very comprehensive list of wines from all countries, with emphases on the classic areas such as B or deaux / burgundy plus a fine wine / prestige selection (cid:31) A middle f the road, traditional selection for example, some French, German and Italian wines, together with some New world wines (cid:31) A small selection of well-known or branded wines – a prestige list (cid:31) Predominantly wines of one particular country 3.4 After meal drinks lists (digestives) These lists are often combined with the wine list – although occasionally they are presented as a separate liqueur list.
The list should offer a full range of liqueurs, together with possibly a specialist range of brandies and / or a specialist range of malt whiskies.
Vintage and late Bottled vintage (LBV) port may also be offered here.
In addition a range of specialty liqueur / spirit coffees might also be included.
3.5 Banqueting wine lists The length of the list will generally depend on the size of operation.
In most instances there is a selection of popular wine names / styles on offer.
There would be a range of prizes from house wines to some wines to suit all customer preference.
In some instances the banqueting wine lists is the same as the restaurant wine list.
3.6 Room service drinks lists There may be a mini-bar in the room, or the room service menu may offer a choice from a standard bar list.
The range of wines offered is usually limited and prices will range according to the type of establishment.
3.7 Contents of wine and drink lists 39 The content of wine and drink lists are commonly listed on the order in which they may be consumed.
(cid:31) Aperitifs – which alongside sparkling and still wines can include a range of aromatized wines, fortified wines and natural spring and mineral waters.
(cid:31) Cocktails (cid:31) Spirit and associated mixers (aerated waters) (cid:31) Wines – sparkling and still (cid:31) Beers, aerated waters and squashes (cid:31) Digestives – which as well as liqueurs may also include brandies, malt whiskies, ports, other fortified wines, sweet rabble wines and vin doux naturals (cid:31) Specialty coffees and cigars may also be included in lists SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Differentiate between cocktail lists, restaurant lists, after meal drink lists and banqueting lists 3.8 Listing of wines Wines are usually listed on three main ways: 1.
Listing wines by place of origin (geography) 2.
Listing wines by type 3.
Listing wines by grape 3.8.1 Geographical listing for wines The traditional approach is to list wines by geographical area.
Within this approach the wines are presented by country or region, such as for instance France, or Australasia (which includes Australia and New Zealand), and then within that area by area.
It is also usual to have the wines presented under each country region or area with the white wines first, followed by the rose wines and then the red wines.
Using this approach the listing of wines within a wine list might be.
1.
Champagne 2.
France 3.
Germany 4.
Italy 5.
Spain 6.
Portugal 7.
England 8.
Other European wines 9.
Australia 10.
The Americas (USA and south America) 11.
Australasia 12.
South Africa 13.
Other world wines 14.
House wines 40 To help the customers choose a wine and to enable staff to make recommendations, it can be useful for each of the groups of wines to be listed from the lighter wines to more full wines.
3.8.2 Listing wines by type A modern approach is to have wines listed by type (cid:31) Sparkling wines (cid:31) White wines (cid:31) Rose wines (cid:31) Red wines (cid:31) Dessert wines The wines can then e listed under each type of wine in three main ways.
1.
Country by country 2.
Region by region (similar to the geographical listing described above) 3.
By the style of the wine If the wines are to be listed by type and by style, then the wines could be presented under, for instance, the headings: (cid:31) Sparkling (cid:31) Rose wines (cid:31) White wines (cid:31) Graphy whites (cid:31) Grassy fruity whites (cid:31) Richer whites (cid:31) Red wines (cid:31) Fruity reds (cid:31) Claret style reds (cid:31) Herby-spicy res To help the customer choose a wine and to enable staff to make recommendations.
It is useful for each of the groups of wines to be listed in order from the lighter wines to the more full wines.
The chart given.
3.8.3 Listing wines by grape If the wines are to be listed by grapes then one approach could be to list the grapes in alphabetical order.
Under each heading the wines made with that grape are listed, as well as the principal blends that are made with that grape as the predominant grape when the wines are listed under the heading ‘other white grapes’ or ‘other red grapes’ then the grapes of the wine should also be listed next to the name of the wine.
White (cid:31) Chardonnay 41 (cid:31) Chenin blanc (cid:31) Gewurztraminer (cid:31) Pinot blanc (cid:31) Pinot Gris / Pinot grigio (cid:31) Rieshing (cid:31) Sauvignon blanc (cid:31) Semillon (cid:31) Other white grapes Red grapes (cid:31) Cabernet Sauvignon (cid:31) Gamay (cid:31) Merlot (cid:31) Pinot Noir (cid:31) Sangiovese (cid:31) Shiraz/Syrah (cid:31) Tempranillo (cid:31) Zinfandel (cid:31) Other red grapes.
To help the customers choose a wine and to aid staff on making recommendations, it is useful for each of the groups of wines to be listed in order from the lighter wines to the more full wines.
3.9 General information required It is usual to give information on wine and drink lists that help the customer in making decisions and also the staff in making recommendations.
This information is shown below.
Wines (cid:31) Bin number (cid:31) Name of wine (cid:31) County and area of origin (cid:31) Quality indication (e.g AOC, QMP etc) (cid:31) Shipper (cid:31) Chateav/estate bottled (cid:31) Varietal (grape typels) (cid:31) Vintage (cid:31) Alcoholic strength (cid:31) ½ bottle, bottle, magnum (cid:31) Price (cid:31) Supplier (cid:31) Descriptive notes as appropriate.
42 (cid:31) Other drinks (cid:31) Type of drink, for example, juice, whisky, gin, sherry (cid:31) Style (sweet, dry etc) (cid:31) Description, for example for cocktails (cid:31) Alcoholic strength as appropriate (cid:31) Descriptive notes as appropriate 4.0.
CONCLUSION: This unit has been able to let you know the basic definition of a bar, and also the various wines and drinks commonly found in the bar .
A full and very comprehensive list of wines from all countries, with emphases on the classic areas such as B or deaux / burgundy plus a fine wine / prestige selection.
A middle f the road, traditional selection for example, some French, German and Italian wines, together with some New world wines.
A small selection of well-known or branded wines – a prestige list.
Predominantly wines of one particular country 5.0 SUMMARY: A bar is the term used to describe order, service and payment point and consumption area in licensed premises.
In a bar, drinks and wines of different sorts are available.
Examples of such include the restaurant wine, after meal drinks (digestives), banqueting wine, bar and cocktail drinks and wines and the Room service drinks lists 6.0.
TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT I.
Define a bar?
ii.
Categorize wines and drinks as regards a bar 7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London42 MODULE 2: 43  Unit 3 WORK STAFF IN BAR OPERATION CONTENTS 1.0.
INTRODUCTION 2.0.
OBJECTIVES 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
BAR PERSON 3.2.
STILL ROOM STAFF 3.3.
BUFFET OR COUNTER STAFF 4.0.
CONCLUSION 5.0.
SUMMARY 6.0.
TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0.
REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION; Different categories of staff work in any bar operation service.
Each of these staff has one specific function or the other.
Such staff include the bar person, still room staff, buffet or counter staff.
Moreover, the overall duty of all these staff members is to see to an achievement of a high level of profitability, pleasing customers and to ensure proper adherence to the rules and regulations that govern a normal bar business operation 2.0.
OBJECTIVES.
It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Identify the category of staff working inside a bar ii.
Explain the functions of each staff working inside a bar 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT The category of staff working in a bar include the bar person, still room staff, buffet and counter staff.
There functions are spelt out accordingly: 3.1 Bar Person: A bar person is saddled with the following functions: 1.
All working surfaces to be wiped down 2.
Ensure that all equipment is washed, dried and put away in its correct place for future use 3.
Make sure all glass ware is washed, rinsed, dried and then stored correctly.
4.
Empty the bottle trolley and waste bin.
Replace the bin liner in the waste bin.
5.
Place surplus orange / lemon slices on to plates and cover with cling film.
Store in the chilling unit or fridge 6.
Sweep and mot the floor 7.
Return the liqueur trolley to the bar 44 8.
Drain the glass – washing machine 9.
Turn off the chiller lights 10.
Complete the control system 11.
Replenish bar stock 12.
Make the bar secure 13.
Check area of responsibility with head waiter / Supervisor 3.2.
Still room staff.
It is the duty of the still room staff to : 1.
Ensure the correct storage of such food items as bread, butter, milk, teabags and ground coffee.
2.
Wipe down all working surfaces 3.
Clean and tidy the will room fridge and cheek its working temperature 4.
Cheek that all equipment is left clean and stored in its correct place 5.
Left over foods to be placed into clean containers and stored correctly 6.
All surplus accompaniments to be store correctly in proprietary jars and their lids to be wipe down.
7.
Switch off applicable electrical appliance 8.
Make sure all carrying trays are wipe down and stacked correctly 9.
All surplus tea pots / coffee pots etc.
to be stored in the appropriate storage area 10.
Check area of responsibility with the head waiter / Supervisor or the person taking over the area, prior to learning.
Self Assessment Exercise: How does a bar person differ from a still room staff in a bar operation?
3.3 Buffet or Counter staff: In a bar operation, a buffet or counter staff must: 1.
Turn off the electricity supply to the list – food and cold food counter 2.
Clear the hot – food counter and cold-food counters and return all left over food to the kitchen.
3.
Turn off the power supply to the oven at the wall 4.
Clear the oven of any remaining food 5.
Important, write down on the day sheet the number of portions of each type of regenerated that is left over as waste.
This exercise is essential for portion control monitoring and gives an indication of the popularity or otherwise of any one particular dish.
Hand in the daily sheet to the supervisor who will then prepare a consumption sheet to show what was taken out and what is now left.
This will then be entered into the sales analysis book.
6.
Clean all service utensils such as serving spoons, ladles, fish slices, knives and trays that have been used during the course of the day in hot food preparation and service wipe them dry.
45 7.
Return all cleaned and dried service utensils to the appropriate storage placed ready the next days use.
8.
Check the stock of plates needed for the next days service of food.
4.0 CONCLUSION: The overall target of a bar person, still room staff and a buffet or counter staff in a bar operation is to see to the high degree of profitability, good patronage and success in a bar operation.
The bar person list the bar and cocktail in the range from a basic standard list offering the common fruits such as cherries, vermouths, bitters, a solution of spirits with mixers; beers and soft drinks, together with a limited range of cocktails, to a very comprehensive list offering a good choice in all areas.
5.0 SUMMARY: The staff working in a bar include bar person.
Still room staff and buffet and counter staff.
The traditional approach is to list wines by geographical area.
Within this approach the wines are presented by country or region, such as for instance France, or Australasia (which includes Australia and New Zealand), and then within that area by area.
It is also usual to have the wines presentes under each country region or area with the whites wines first, followed by the rose wines and then the red wines.
Using this approach the listing of wines within a wine list might be.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What are the functions of a buffet staff?
7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London 46 MODULE 2 UNIT 4 SERVICE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES CONTENT 1.0.
INTRODUCTION 2.0.
OBJECTIVES 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
SERVICE OF APERITIFS 3.2.
SERVICE OF COCKTAILS 3.3.
SERVICE OF WINES 3.4.
SERVICE OF WINES 3.4.1.
POURING OF WINES 4.0.
CONCLUSION 5.0.
SUMMARY 6.0.
TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 8.0REFRENCES 1.0.
INTRODUCTION: In any bar operation business, there are basic technical skills required to serve drinks and wines.
The cocktail/dispense bar may be said to be the shop window of an establishment as it is often the meeting point of customers prior to business and social events.
The first impressions given here are therefore of prime importance in gaining further sales.
The presentation of the bar personnel, together with a well – stocked, organized and efficiently run bar, are essential to give a good service to the customer.
The bar personnel must have good technical skills, product knowledge, social skills and must be able to work as part of a team, in order to meet the needs of the customers.
This unit therefore examines how alcoholic beverages are served in bars.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Identify the various types of alcoholic beverages served in the bars ii.
Examine how the alcoholic beverages are served 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
Service of Aperitifs The term aperitif covers a wide range of drinks that may be served before a meal.
Aperitifs may be offered at the table once the customers have been seated, or may be offered in the; lounge/reception area.
3.2.
SERVICE OF COCKTAILS Cocktails should always be served well chilled in an appropriately sized glass with the correct garnish, straw and umbrella, according to the policy of the 47 establishment.
Many cocktails are served in the traditional V- shaped cocktail glass but, if the cocktail is a long dink, then a larger glass such as Slim jim will be better suited.
The key consideration here should be the total presentation of the cocktail as seen visually by the customers.
3.3.
SERVICE OF WINES The sommelier or wine waiter should be able to advise and suggest wines to the host as required.
The means that the wine waiter must have a good knowledge of the wines contained within the wine list and be able to identify examples of wines that will pair well with the menu dishes.
Immediately the food order has been taken, the wine list should again be presented to the host so that they may order wine for their party to accompany the meal they have ordered.
There are six key aspects to be taken into consideration when serving wines 1.
The wine waiter must be able to describe the wines and their characteristics honestly bluffing should be avoided.
2.
Always serve the wine before the food.
Avoid waiting too long to serve the food after the wine has been served.
3.
Serve wines properly temperatured- it is better to tell the customer that the wine is not at the right temperature for service, rather than resorting to quick heating or cooling methods as these can damage the wine.
4.
Treat wine with respect and demonstrate a high level of technical skill, supported by the use of high quality service equipment.
As the customer is paying for the wine and the service, they therefore have the right to expect their chosen wine to be treated with care.
5.
Do not overfill glasses.
Fill glasses to the right level, usually to the widest art of the bowl or to two- thirds full, whichever is the lesser.
Sparkling wine served in a flute is usually filled to about two – thirds to three – quarters of the glass.
Doing so helps the wine to be better appreciated and looks better too.
6.
Avoid unnecessary topping up – it does not sell more wine and it often irritates customers.
Another reason for being cautious about topping up wine glasses is that the customer may be driving.
If the wine is constantly topped up the customer may not notice how much they are consuming.
In general, it is preferable to ask the customer about topping up their wine.
SELF – ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: List six aspects taken into consideration in serving a wine.
48 3.4.
Service of beer Beer should be served at a temperature of 12.5 – 15.50C, with lagers generally cooler than other beers at 8.0 - 10.50C.
Many different varieties of bottled beers are also served chilled.
Draught beer, on its route from the keg/cask to the pump, often passes through a chilling unit 3.4.1.
Pouring beers Draught or bottled beer should be poured slowly down the inside of the glass, with the glass held at a slight angle.
This is especially important where a beer may produce a large head if it is not poured slowly and carefully, for example, Guinness or stouts.
Draught beers should have a small head on them, and the bar person should ensure that he/she serves the correct quantity of beer with a small head, and not a large head to make up the quantity required.
A beer in a good condition will have the head, or froth of the beer, clinging to the inside of the glass as the beer is drunk (this is sometimes called lace on the glass) For bottled beers, the neck of the bottled should not be placed in the beer when pouring, especially where two bottles are being held and poured from the same hand.
If a bottled beer has sediment, a little beer must be left in the base of the bottle to ensure that the sediment does not go into the poured beer.
4.0 CONCLUSION: Knowing how to serve aperitifs, cocktails, wines, and beers is very essential in the service of alcoholic beverages in a bar operation system.
Each of this service requires different expertise which will have one effect or the other depending on how the service is rendered.
Beer should be served at a temperature of 12.5 – 15.50C, with lagers generally cooler than other beers at 8.0 - 10.50C.
Many different varieties of bottled beers are also served chilled.
Draught beer, on its route from the keg/cask to the pump, often passes through a chilling unit 5.0 SUMMARY: Aperitifs, cocktails, wines and beers are found in bars.
The ways they are served differ from one to the other.
The sommelier or wine waiter should be able to advise and suggest wines to the host as required.
The means that the wine waiter must have a good knowledge of the wines contained within the wine list and are able to identify examples of wines that will pair well with the menu dishes.
Immediately the food order has been taken, the wine list should again be presented to the host so that they may order wine for their party to accompany the meal they have ordered 49 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT I.
Discuss in details the service of beers and cocktails 7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. Lagos, Molete Ibadan Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London 50  MODULE 3 Unit 1: STAFFING PROCEDURE IN THE FOOD SERVICE INDUSTRY CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0.
OBJECTIVES 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT.
3.1.
SALES MANAGER 3.2.
BANQUETING /CONFERENCE MANAGER 3.3.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE STAFF 3.4.
BANQUETING/FUNCTION HEADWAITER 3.5.
DISPENSE BAR STAFF 3.6.
BANQUETING HEAD WINE WAITER 3.7.
PERMANENT SERVICE STAFF 3.8.
CASUAL STAFF 3.9.
PORTERS 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0.
REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: This unit examines the various staff that makes up a food service industry.
The functions of the staff are also important as such will determine the success, profitability and sustainability of the industry.
In larger establishments there is generally a small number of permanent staff dealing solely with functions, this often includes a sales manager, banqueting / function manager, assistant managers, banqueting / function head waters, service staff, technical staff and porters together with an administration office.
In smaller establishments, where there is fewer function, the manager, assistant and food and beverage service staff undertake the administrative and organizational work as part of their regular duties.
2.0.
OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Mention the various staff working in a food service industry ii.
Explain the functions of the staff working in a food service industry 51 3.0.
MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 Sales Manager The main role of the sales manager is to promote the function facilities of an establishment and, where necessary, to make the initial approaches and contacts.
The sales manager must have an extensive knowledge of room specifications, size, light switches, electric points, height of door ways, maximum floor loads and so on.
This enable him / her to respond quickly to any requests at the initial meeting with a client.
Most establishment have various forms of banqueting and / or meeting and conference sales packages and these provide a range of information about the facilities available and the charges for them.
3.2.
Banqueting / Conference Manager The banqueting / conference manager is responsible for all administration, including meeting prospective clients and discussing the arrangements for the menu, table plans costs, wines, band, toast master and so on.
He / She must communicate to all the departments concerned the date of a function, number expected and any other details that might be required by a particular department.
3.3.
Administration Office Staff The administration staff works with the managers and are responsible for handling all incoming and out going mail, ensuring that information about a function is passed to the relevant internal departments and for record keeping.
The administrative staff handles inquiries and may make provisional bookings for functions ensuring the details are entered on the function booking form.
3.4.
Banqueting / Function Headwaiter The banqueting / function headwaiter is in charge of the function rooms plus the organization required preparing the rooms for various functions.
He / She may also be responsible for engaging staff on a casual basis, to cover the various duties at a function.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: How does a sales manager differ from other staff in a food service industry 3.5.
Dispense Bar Staff The dispense bar staff are responsible for the allocation of bar stock for the various functions, setting up the bars, organization of the bar staff, control of stock and cash during service and service and stock taking after a function has taken place.
They are also responsible for restocking the function bars.
52 3.6.
Banqueting Head Wine Waiter The banqueting head wine waiter may work in conjunction with the dispense bar staff and is often responsible for organizing and employing (if on a casual basis) the banqueting wine waiters.
He / She will allocate the wine waiter’s stations, give them floats if there are cash wines and discuss the service with them.
3.7.
Permanent Service Staff The permanent service staffs are usually experienced staff who can turn their hand to any job concerning functions and banqueting.
They generally do most of the wise-en-place before the function (the laying of tables).
3.8.
Casual Staff Casual staff are brought in on a part-time basis to work at the functions as needed.
3.9.
Porters There are generally a number of porters on the permanent function staff.
They are essential members of staff as there is often a great deal of work involved in preparing room layouts before and after functions.
4.0 CONCLUSION: the various staff that can boost the performance in food and beverage industry have been highlighted.
The main role of the sales manager is to promote the function facilities of an establishment and, where necessary, to make the initial approaches and contacts.
The sales manager must have an extensive knowledge of room specifications, size, light switches, electric points, height of door ways, maximum floor loads and so on.
This enable him / her to respond quickly to any requests at the initial meeting with a client most establishment have various forms of banqueting and / or meeting and conference sales packages and these provide a range of information about the facilities available and the charges for them 5.0 SUMMARY: The staff working in a food service industry include a sales manager, banqueting / function manager, assistant managers, banqueting / function head waters, service staff, technical staff and porters together with an administration office.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT i. list the various staff working in a food service industry ii.
Discuss in details the various functions of the staff working in a food service industry 53 7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London 54 MODULE 3 Unit 2 : STAFF DEVELOPMENT IN THE FOOD SERVICE INDUSTRY CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Staff training 3.2 Terms used in staff training 3.2.1 Job 3.2.2 Task 3.2.3 Job specification 3.2.4 Syllabus 3.2.5Training programme 3.2.6.
Training manual 4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 CONCLUSION 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: In any business organization, staff members are usually encouraged to undergo training with a view to enhancing good quality output, mental alertness and profitability.
In the food industry, staff need to get more acquainted to job analysis, description and specification.
This unit treats the terms used in staff development in a food and service industry.
3.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Identify the implications of staff development via training ii.
Explain the terms used in staff training 4.0 MAIN CONTENT: 3.1 Staff Training ‘Training’ is the systematic development of people.
The general objectives of training are to: (cid:31) Increase the quantity and quality of out put by improving employee skills (cid:31) Reduce accidents (cid:31) Increase the return to the employee in personal rewards, such as increase pay, recognition and other benefits which the employee wants from the job.
55 (cid:31) Make the operation more profitable by reducing the amount of equipment and material required to produce or sell in a given unit.
(cid:31) Make it possible for the supervisor to spend less time correcting mistakes and more time in planning.
(cid:31) Minimize turn over of staff because of inadequate skills (cid:31) Improve morale and achieve a more satisfactory working environment.
(cid:31) Enable new employee to meet their job requirements and enable experienced employees to accept transfers, adept to new methods, increase efficiency and adjust to changing needs (cid:31) Encourage willingness, loyalty, interest and the desire to excel.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Explain why it is necessary for a staff working in a food service centre to undergo training and development.
3.2 TERMS USED IN STAFF TRAINING 3.2.1 Job All the tasks carried out by a particular employee in the completion of prescribed duties, within the setting of a particular working environment.
(cid:31) Job analysis The process of examining a job to identify its compound parts and the circumstances in which it is performed.
This would normally require an examination of: (cid:31) The purpose of the job – What it exists for and what key results are expected from it.
(cid:31) The setting of the job – the physical, organizational and social condition of the job.
(cid:31) The main tasks that have to be performed in order to achieve, the results – What the employee does.
(cid:31) The resources or facilities available to the employee – What people, equipment, services etc.
(cid:31) Job Description A broad statement of the purpose, scope, duties and responsibilities of a particular job.
This would normally include the following: (cid:31) Job title (cid:31) Purpose and scope of job (cid:31) To whom responsible (cid:31) Place of work (cid:31) For whom responsible (cid:31) Main duties 56 (cid:31) Main characteristics and working conditions (cid:31) Key performance measures.
3.2.2 Task An identifiable element of a job, by means of which a specific result is achieved.
(cid:31) Task Identification The process of identifying and grouping the task that make up a job.
(cid:31) Task Analysis The detailed and systematic examination of the skills used by an experienced worker in performing a task to the required standard.
(cid:31) Job Specification A detailed statement of the tasks involved in a job, the standards required and the corresponding knowledge and skill involved.
3.2.3.
Syllabus A statement of what a trainee needs to learn, based on the comparison between the job specification and his / her present knowledge and competence.
3.2.4.
Training Programme A broad outline of training that indicates the stages or sequence of the training and the time allowed for each part.
3.2.5 Training Manual This is a guide for the training staff and trainees that specify the points to be covered in training, standards to be achieved, methods of instruction to be used, equipment and materials required, forms and records to be kept and any tests or targets which have to be achieved.
These manuals are sometimes called ‘standards of performance manuals’.
4.0 CONCLUSION: The various training methods for staff that can boost the performance in food and beverage industry have been highlighted.
A broad statement of the purpose, scope, duties and responsibilities of a particular job.
This would normally include the following: Job Title, Purpose and scope of job, To whom responsible, Place of work, For whom, responsible,Main duties, Main characteristics and working conditions, Key performance measures 5.0 SUMMARY: Among the reasons why staff development is necessary in a food service centre are that it Increases the quantity and quality of out put by improving employee skills reduce accidents ,increases the return to the 57 employee in personal rewards, such as increase pay, recognition and other benefits which the employee wants from the job, make the operation more profitable by reducing the amount of equipment and material required to produce or sell in a given unit and makes it possible for the supervisor to spend less time correcting mistakes and more time in planning.
It also minimizes turn over of staff because of inadequate skills, improves morale and achieve a more satisfactory working environment, enables new employee to meet their job requirements and enable experienced employees to accept transfers, adept to new methods, increase efficiency and adjust to changing needs, and encourages willingness, loyalty, interest and the desire to excel.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT i. discuss the terms used in staff training in a food service centre 7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London 58 MODULE 3 UNIT 3: BASIC TECHNICAL SKILLS NEEDED FOR FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTENTS 1.
INTRODUCTION 2.
OBJECTIVES 3.
MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
BASIC TECHNICAL SKILLS 3.1.1 HOLDING AND USINGN A SERVICE SPOON AND FORK 3.1.2 CARRYING PLATES 3.1.3 USING A SERV ICE SALVER 3.1.4 CARRYING GLASSES 3.1.5 CARRYING CLEAN CUTLERY 3.1.6 CARRYING CUPS AND SAUCERS 3.1.7 SILVER SERVING VEGETABLES 3.1.8 USING A SERVICE PLATE 3.1.9 CARRYING CLEAN CUTLERY 3.1.10 CLEANING SIDE PLATES AND KNIVES 3.1.11 CRUMBING DOWN 3.1.12 CLEANING ACCOMPANIMENT 3.1.13 CARRYING GLASSES 3.1.13.1.
CARRYING BY HAND 3.1.13.2.
CARRYING GLASSES ON A SERVICE SALVER 3.1.14 CARRYING TRAYS 4.0.
SUMMARY 5.0.
CONCLUSION 6.0.
TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0.
REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: The food and beverage sector is a peculiar area where basic technical skills play significant roles in profitability and customers’ patronage.
Such skills deal with how staff can utilize service equipments, carry plates, use a service salver, service plates , glasses and use large trays.
This unit x-rays the basic skills needed for food and beverage.
Such skills are needed for improved customer patronage and overall profitability.
2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i. determine the technical skills needed to enhance sales in food and beverage ii.
Identify the examples of the applications of the skills 59 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Technical skills There are six basic technical food and beverage service skills.
There are identified below together with examples of their application.
Technical Skill Examples of Application 1 Holding and using a service spoon and For the service of food at a customer’s table, fork and other service equipment especially for silver service and for serving at a buffet 2 Carrying plates When placing and clearing plate from a customer’s table 3.
Using a service salver (round tray) For carrying glasses, carrying tea and coffee services, as an under liner for entrée dishes and for potato and vegetable dishes.
4.
Using a service plate For carrying items to and from a table, including clean cutlery, clearing side plates and knives.
Crumbing down, clearing accompaniments.
5.
Carrying glasses Carrying clean glasses by brand or on 8 salver and for cleaning dirty glasses from a service area.
6.
Carrying and using large trays For bringing equipment or food and beverage items to the service area and for cleaning used equipment from the service area.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Define technical skills and give examples of the application 3.1.1 Holding and using a service spoon and fork Expertise in this technique can only be delivered with practice.
The purpose of the service spoon and fork is to enable the waiter to serve food from a flat or dish on to the customer’s plate quickly and to present the food on the plate well.
(cid:31) The service fork should be positioned above, or on top of the service spoon (cid:31) The key to developing this skill is the locking of the ends of the service spoon and fork with the small finger and the third finger, as illustrated.
(cid:31) The spoon and fork are maneuvered with the thumb and the index and second fingers.
Using this method food items may be picked up from the serving dish in between the service spoon and service fork.
(cid:31) Alternatively, the service fork may be turned to mould with the shape of the items being served, for example, when serving bread rolls.
There are occasions where two service forks may be used, for example when serving fillets of fish, as this makes the service of this food items easier.
60 When using a serving spoon and fork for serving at a sweet or cheese trolley or at a buffet or guerdon, the spoons, scoops, small sauce ladles and larger soup ladles.
3.1.2 Carrying plates Clean plates can be carried in a stack, using both hands, or using a tray.
When carrying clean plates which are to be placed on the customer’s table, a single hand is used to hold the plates (usually the left hand) and the right hand is used to place the plates at each cover on the customer’s table.
If the plates are not then the plates are held with a service cloth placed on the palm of the left hand.
A separate service cloth is then used on the right hand to hold the hot plates when placing them in front of the customer.
When carrying plates of pre-plates foods and when cleaning plates, from a customer’s table, a single hand is used to hold the plates (usually the left hand) and the right hand is used to place and remove plates from the customer’s table.
Special hand positions are used as follows: (cid:31) The initial hand position for the first plate.
Care must be taken to ensure that the first plate is held firmly as succeeding plates are building up from here.
The second plate will rest firmly on the fore arm and the third and fourth finger.
(cid:31) The second plate positioned on the left (holding) hand.
To be able to clear properly ensures efficiency, avoid the possibility of accident and creates the minimum of inconvenience to customers.
Well-developed cleaning techniques enable more to be cleared, in less time and in fewer journeys between sideboard or workstation and the customers table.
In addition clearing properly allow for the stacking of dirties neatly and safely at the sideboard or workstation.
3.1.3 Using a service salver A service salver is a round, normally silver or stainless steel tray (but now also sometimes of wood or plastic).
A napkin (folded flat) is placed on the tray to help prevent items shipping on the tray as they are being carried.
There are also special non-ship mats that are now used instead of napkins.
The service salver may be used to: (cid:31) Carry clean glasses to and from dirty glasses from a customer’s table.
(cid:31) Carry clean cutlery to and from a customer’s table (cid:31) Place clean cutlery on the table (cid:31) Place clean cups and saucers on the table (cid:31) Provide an under flat when silver serving vegetables.
61 3.1.4 Carrying glasses When carrying clean glasses on the service salver they should be placed the right way up to reduce risk of them topping over.
When being placed on the table, the waiter should hold the salver in the left hand behind the customer and then place the glass at the top right – hand corner of the cover and the right way up the waiter should only hold glasses by the stem to ensure that the bowl of the wine glass is not touched, otherwise: finger marks will be left on the glass bowl.
3.1.5 Carrying clean cutlery When placing clean cutlery on a table or removing it, the items can be carried on a service salver.
This is more efficient, hygienic and safer, and generally more professional, than carrying these items in bunches in the hands.
The blades of the knives should be placed under the arch in the middle of the forks, and if carrying sweet spoons and forks, the prongs of the fork should go under the arch in the middle of the spoon.
The reason for this is to help hold the items steady on the service salver.
Bearing in mind that the handles of the cutlery are generally the heaviest parts, this method prevents them sliding about too much.
3.1.6.
Carrying cups and saucers Tea and coffee cups are carried using a service salver, by stacking the saucers, cups and teaspoons separately.
Then before placing the cup, saucers and teaspoons on the table, the cup is put into a saucer, together with a teaspoon, and then the while service is placed at front of the customer.
This is a speedier and safer method (especially when larger numbers are involved) than carrying individual cups saucers, and teaspoons to the table one by one.
Cups and saucers are placed on the table at the right hand side of the customer.
The reason for this is that the beverage will most likely be serviced from the right.
This avoids stretching across the front of the customers when laying the beverage service or when serving the beverage.
3.1.7 Silver serving vegetables When silver serving vegetables and potatoes at the table, an under flat should be used to hold either one large vegetable dish or a number of smaller ones, depending on the customers orders.
The purpose of the under flat is to: (cid:31) Add to the presentation of the food being served (cid:31) Give the waiter more control when using the service spoon and fork to serve the vegetables from the vegetable dish on to the customer’s place.
(cid:31) Provide greater protection on case of spillage, therefore not detracting from the presentation of the food in the plate or the overall table presentation.
62 (cid:31) Give the waiter added protection against heat and possible spillage on the uniform.
3.1.8 Using a Service Plate A service plate is a joint plate with a napkin upon it.
It has a number of uses during the meal service: (cid:31) For placing or removing clean cutlery from the table (cid:31) For cleaning side plates and side knives (cid:31) For crumbing down after the main course, or any other stage of the meal if necessary (cid:31) For cleaning accompaniments from the table as and when necessary.
3.1.9.
Carrying clean cutlery When placing on, or removing, clean cutlery from a table, the items can be carried on a service plate.
The reasons for these are the same as given under using a service salver above.
3.1.10 Cleaning side plates and knives When cleaning dirty side plates and side knives from the customer’s table, the use of a service plate means that the waiter was a larger area on which to stack the side knives and any debris using the wind positions, the side plates may be stacked above the service plate and all the debris in a separate pile, together with the side knives laid flat upon the service plate.
This is a much safer and speedier method, especially when larger numbers are involved.
3.1.11 Crumbing down To freshen up the appearance of a table after the main course had been consumed and all the dirty items of equipment cleaned from the table, a procedure known as “crumbing down” is used.
The waiter brushes any crumbs and other debris lying on the table cloth onto the service plate, with the aid of either the folded service cloth or a small brush designed for the purpose.
There are also metal crumbs that can be used.
3.1.12 Cleaning accompaniment The service plate is also used to clear such items as the cruet, cayenne pepper, pepper mill or other accompaniments, which may not already be set on an under plate.
3.1.13 Carrying glasses There are two basic methods of carrying glasses in the food and beverage service areas by hand or on a service salver.
63 3.1.13.1 Carrying by hand Wine goblets should be positioned between alternate fingers as far as is possible.
The wine goblets should only be carried in one hand, allowing the other hand to remain free to steady oneself in case of emergencies.
Provides a close up of the wine goblets held in one hand and shows how the base of each glass over raps the next hand.
This method allows wine goblets that are already polished to be handled.
They can be carried about the room and set in their correct position on the table without the bowl of the glass being touched.
3.1.13.2.
Carrying glasses on a service salver The method of carrying clean wine goblets about the restaurant using the services salver.
A service cloth can be placed underneath the salver on the palm of the hand to allow the service salver to be rotated more easily in order to remove each wine goblet in turn by the base and to set it on the table.
Indicate the use of the service salver for cleaning dirty wine goblets from the table.
The first dirty wine goblet cleaned should be placed on the service salver nearest to the server.
As the dirties are cleared, they should be placed on the service salver to ensure a better and more even distribution of weight to lessen the likelihood of accidents occurring.
Glass racks are often used to carry glasses during the setting up of functions.
These racks enable the transportation of glasses in bulk once they have washed and polished at a central point.
3.1.14 Carrying trays Trays are used for: (cid:31) Carrying food from the kitchen to the restaurant sideboard (cid:31) Service in rooms and lounges (cid:31) Clearing from sideboards (cid:31) Cleaning from tables (when the customer is not seated at the table) (cid:31) Carrying equipment The correct method of holding and carrying an oblong ray is to position the tray length ways onto the fore arm and to support it by holding the tray with the other hand.
4.0 CONCLUSION: The various technical skills that can boost the performance in food and beverage industry have been highlighted.
The permanent service staff are usually experienced staff who can turn their hand to any job concerning functions and banqueting.
They generally do most of the wise-en-place before the function (the laying of tables).
64 5.0 SUMMARY: Technical skills include how to hold and use a service spoon and fork and other service equipment, Carrying plates, glasses, cups and saucers, etc in a food and beverage centre 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT I. Enumerate any 6 technical skills you know and discuss extensively on each.
7.0 REFERENCES: Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London 65 MODULE 3 UNIT 4: INTERPERSONAL SKILLS NEEDED FOR FOOD AND BEVERAGE CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT ARE INTERPERSONAL SKILLS 3.2 INTERPERSONAL SKILLS RELATED TO SPECIFIC POINTS OF SERVICE 3.3 ADDRESSING CUSTOMERS 3.4 DEALING WITH INCIDENTS 4.0 SUMMARY 5.0 CONCLUSION 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: Apart from technical skills needed for profitability and good customers’ patronage in a food and beverage sector, there are also certain interpersonal skills that play vital significant roles.
Such skills are related to specific points of service, addressing customers and dealing with incidents.
This unit focuses on certain interpersonal skills expected to be possessed by workers in a food and beverage centre.
1.1 OBJECTIVE: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Explain the skills needed by the workers in food and beverage centres for interactions between themselves and customers 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 WHAT ARE INTERPERSONAL SKILLS?
Interpersonal skills in food and beverage service centre on the interactions between the customer and the food and beverage service staff.
All other interactions are secondary to, and the result of, the prime interaction of customers and staff.
This has implications for the way customers are treated.
Conversation between customers and staff override conversations between staff.
When in conversation with customers, staff should not: (cid:31) Talk to other members of staff without first excusing themselves from the customer 66 (cid:31) Interrupt interactions between customers and staff, but should wait until there is a suitable movement to catch the attention of the others member of staff so that they may excuse themselves from the customer firs.
(cid:31) Serve customers while carrying on a conversation between themselves (cid:31) Talk across a room, either to each other or to customers.
Customers should always be made to feel that they are being cared for and not that they are an intrusion into the operation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE : Define the term ‘interpersonal skills’ 3.2 INTERPERSONAL SKILLS RELATED TO SPECIFIC POINTS OF SERVICE The list below shows the interpersonal skills needed at particular points during the service.
(cid:31) Showing customers to their table: always lead and walk with them at their pace.
(cid:31) Seating customers: ladies first, descending in age unless the host is a lady (cid:31) Handling coats / wraps: handle with obvious care (cid:31) Handling menus / wine lists to customers: offer the list the right way round for the customer and wait for the customer to take it.
(cid:31) Opening and placing a napkin: open carefully, do not shake it like a duster, place it on the customer’s lap after saying excuse me to the customer.
(cid:31) Offering water or rolls: say, for example, “Excuse me sir / madam, may I offer you a bread roll?
(cid:31) Offering accompaniments: only offer them if you have them at the table.
Offering them when they are not at the table usually means “I will get them if you really want them!
(cid:31) Serving and cleaning: always say ‘Excuse me’ before serving or cleaning and ‘thank you’ after you have furnished with each customer.
(cid:31) Explaining food and beverage items: use terms the customer understands, not technical terms such as turned vegetable or pause.
Use terms that make the item sound attractive such a, case role not stew, reamed or puree potatoes not mashed.
Do not use abbreviations, for example, ‘veg’.
(cid:31) Talking to customers: only talk when standing next to them and looking at them.
3.3 ADDRESSING CUSTOMERS ‘Sir’ or ‘Madam’ should be used when the customer’s name is not known, then the customer should be referred to as ‘Mr.
Smith’ or ‘Miss Jones’ etc.
first names should only be used in less former operation and where the customer has 67 explicitly indicated that this is acceptable.
If the customer has a title, then appropriate use should be made of the correct form of address.
Greetings such as ‘good morning’ and ‘good evening’ should be used upon receiving customers, or when the member of staff first comes into contact with the customer, for example, when lounge service staff attend people already seated in the lounge.
3.4 DEALING WITH INCIDENTS When an unforeseen incident arises it must be coped with promptly and efficiently without causing any more disturbance than is necessary to any of the other customers.
Quick action will very often soothe the irate customer and ensure a return receipt to establishment.
It is worth remembering at this stage that complaints, of what ever nature, should be referred immediately to the supervisor.
Delay will not cause confusion and very often the situation may be wrongly interpreted if it is not dealt with straight away.
In the case of accidents, a report of the incident must be kept and signed by those involved.
4.0.
CONCLUSION: This unit has been able to let you briefly what interpersonal skills means to food and beverage service operation.
This has implications for the way customers are treated.
Conversation between customers and staff override conversations between staff.
When in conversation with customers, staff should not: Talk to other members of staff without first excusing themselves from the customer, Interrupt interactions between customers and staff, but should wait until there is a suitable movement to catch the attention of the other member of staff so that they may excuse themselves from the customer first.
Serve customers while carrying on a conversation between themselves, Talk across a room, either to each other or to customers.
Customers should always be made to feel that they are being cared for and not that they are an intrusion into the operation.
5.0 SUMMARY: Interpersonal skills in food and beverage service centre on the interactions between the customer and the food and beverage service staff.
Explaining food and beverage items: use terms the customer understands, not technical terms such as turned vegetable or pause.
Use terms that make the item sound attractive such a, case role not stew, reamed or puree potatoes not mashed.
Do not use abbreviations, for example, ‘veg’.
Talking to customers: only talk when standing next to them and looking at them.
68 6.0.
TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT i. describe in details the certain interpersonal skills you know to make a food and beverage centre attractive to customers 7.0 REFERENCES Branson J. C. and Lemox M. (1986): Home Economics Abiprint Publishing co. Lagos, Molete Ibadan.
Dennis L. and John C. (2006): Food and Beverage Service.
Book Power Publishers, London.
Hamilton R. O.
(1995): Hotel Operations and Organizational Structure.
Kend All Hunt Publication Company Dubuque Iowa.
Pg.
170 – 177.
Ihekeronye R.I and Ngoddy P.O.
(1985): Integrated Food Science and Technology for the Tropic Macmillan Publishers Ltd. London 69 MODULE 4 UNIT 1 : FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE AREA AND EQUIPMENT I : STILL ROOM CONTENTS 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 CUSTOMERS IMPRESSIONS IN SERVIVE AREAS 3.2 IMPORTANT THINGS TO CONSIDER WHEN PURCHASING EQUIPMENT 3.3STILL ROOM 3.3.1 STAFF 3.3.2 EQUIPMENT 3.3.3 PROVISIONS 3.3.4 CONTROL 4.0SUMMARY 5.0CONCLUSION 6.0TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION: In any food and beverage sector, there are specific service areas and equipment.
This unit x – rays the functions of the still room as a food and beverage service area and equipment.
The service areas themselves are some of the busiest of a foodservice establishment, especially during the service periods.
Because of this, it is important that departmental heads ensure all staff know exactly what their duties are and how to carry them out efficiently and effectively 2.0 OBJECTIVES: It is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: i.
Explain the function of a still room ii.
Identify the staff, equipment, provisions and control of a still room 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 CUSTOMERS IMPRESSION IN SERVICE AREA In any establishment a customer's first impressions on entering the service area are of great importance: a customer may be gained or lost on these impressions alone.
The creation of atmosphere, by the right choice of decor, furnishings and equipment, is therefore a major factor that contributes to the success of the foodservice operation.
A careful selection of items in terms of shape, design and 70 colour enhances the overall decor or theme and contributes towards a feeling of total harmony.
The choice of furniture and its layout and the linen, tableware, small equipment and glassware will be determined by considering:  the type of clientele expected the site or location of the establishment  the layout of the food and beverage service area  the type of service offered  The funds available 3.2 IMPORTANT THINGS TO CONSIDER WHEN PURCHASING EQUIPMENT The general points to be considered when purchasing equipment for a food and beverage service area are:  Flexibility of us  Type of service being offered  Type of customer  Design  Durability  Ease of maintenance  Stack ability  Cost and funds available  Availability in the future – replacement  Storage  Rate of breakage i.e.
crockery  Psychological effect on customers  Delivery time Depending on the style of operation, there may be service areas behind the scenes, or what may be termed “back-of-house”.
These are required to be well organized, efficiently run and supervised and stocked with well-designed equipment.
It is necessary for all these factors to work together to contribute to the overall success of the food and beverage operations.
The service areas themselves are some of the busiest of a food service establishment, especially during the service periods.
Because of this, it is important that departmental heads ensure all staffs knows exactly what their duties are and how to carry them out efficiently and effectively.
In general, especially in large operations, five main back-of-house service areas can be identified:  Still room  Silver wash up  Hot plate 71  Spare linen store A well designed layout of these areas is essential to ensure an even flow of work by the various members of staff.
However, the layout itself may vary with different establishments, depending on the type of operational needs.
Each of the areas is considered in more detail below.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Explain what customers general impressions are on entering the service area.
Also, what are the important things to consider when purchasing equipment.
72
