 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCES COURSE CODE: HCM 345 COURSE TITLE: WINE AND FOOD PAIRING PRINCIPLES 2  COURSE DEVELOPMENT HCM 345 WINE AND FOOD PAIRING PRINCIPLES COURSE GUIDE Course Developer: Dr. J.C. Okafor Department of Hospitality Management, Federal Polytechnic, Ilaro Unit Writer: Dr. J.C. Okafor Department of Hospitality Management, Federal Polytechnic, Ilaro Course Editor: Programme Leader: Dr (Mrs) A. O. Fagbemi School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Mr. S. O. Israel-Cookey School of Management Sciences, 3 National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ............................................................................... 1 What you will learn in the Course............................................ 1 Working through this Course.................................................... 2 Course Evaluation..................................................................... 2 Study Units................................................................................ 3 Textbooks and References........................................................ 3 Presentation Schedule............................................................... 4 Conclusion.................................................................................. 4 Introduction Wine is the fermented juice of freshly gathered ripe grapes.
It can also be made from other sugar-containing fruits.
The combination of food and wine is one of life’s great pleasures.
A gourmet will seek out not only exotic foods and vintage wines, but also simple food that is well prepared and accompanied by an unpretentious, but quality wine.
Over the years, traditions have developed a how- to approach to the marrying of wines and food.
Food and its accompanying wine should harmonize well together.
The combination should prove most successful so as to please the individual.
There are general guidelines on matching wine and food, hence, the need may arise to recommend to customers which wines to choose to accompany a meal.
Such recommendations must consider the identification and style of the wine required as well as the extent to which the wine should be light or full.
However, it must be known that customers are at complete liberty to select their wines or other drinks.
4 The wine/drink list is presented to a customer.
The function of this list is similar to that of the menu as both are selling aids.
It is therefore necessary that the service staff should have a good knowledge of all the wines and drinks available, as well as an extensive knowledge of which wines are most suitable to offer with certain foods.
What you will learn in this Course During this course, the students will learn about:  Vinification  Major wine producing countries  Classification of wines  Categories of wines  Components of wines  General information required on wine  The role of wine in society  Tasting of wine  Factors affecting the taste of wine  Decanting  Wine and food matching  Sensory evaluation of wine  Storage of wines  Spirits  Liqueurs Working through this Course For a successful completion of this course, one is required to go through the study units, reference books, and other resources that are related to each unit.
The Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMA) should be done immediately and submitted to the Course Facilitator.
The medium and time for the submission of the TMA will be specified later.
This is a two (2) credit unit course, and so you are expected to spend a minimum of two (2) hours on it weekly.
It is expected that you complete the entire course outline in 18 – 25 weeks.
Course Evaluation As earlier stated, every unit of this course has an assignment section which you are expected to do at the end of the unit.
You are required to keep an assignment file.
At the end of the course, the evaluation shall be as follows: 5 Assessment Marks Assignments 30% Examination 70% Total 100% Out of all the assignments you will do, each shall be marked and converted to 3%.
At the end, the best ten (10) shall be selected to make up 30%.
The examination at the end of the course shall cover all aspects of the course.
Study Units The study topics to be discussed have been grouped in units and modules as shown below: Module 1 Unit 1 Vinification Unit 2 Major wine producing countries Unit 3 Classification of wines Unit 4 Categories of wines Unit 5 Components of wines Module 2 Unit 1 General information required on wine Unit 2 The role of wine in society Unit 3 Tasting of wine Unit 4 Factors affecting the taste of wine Unit 5 Decanting Module 3 Unit 1 Wine and food matching Unit 2 Sensory evaluation of wine Unit 3 Storage of wines Unit 4 Spirits Unit 5 Liqueurs The units shall be treated in sequential order.
6  Textbooks and References Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold David Foskett and Victor Ceserani (2007) The Theory of Catering 11th edition.
Hodder Education John R. Walker Introduction to Hospitality 4th edition.
Bacon, S.D.
(1962).
Alcohol in complex society.
In D.J.
Pittman and C.R.
Snyder (eds.
), Society, Culture and Drinking Patterns.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Barrows, S., Room, R. and Verhey, J.
(eds.)
(1987).
The Social History of Alcohol: Drinking and culture in modern society.
Berkeley, CA.
: Medical Research Institute of San Francisco, Alcohol Research Group.
Akyeampong, E.K.
(1996).
Drink, Power and Cultural Change: A social history of alcohol in Ghana, c.1800 to recent times.
Oxford: James Currey.
‘Social and cultural aspects of drinking’, A report to the European Commission, March 1998 Presentation Schedule Specific dates for particular activities, such as submission of assignments, tutorial schedules and examination dates shall be made available to you at a later date.
This will enable you plan your activities in the same line.
The method of submitting your assignments and receiving other course materials shall be agreed upon on a later date.
You should endeavour not to fall behind the schedule whenever it is given.
Conclusion By the time you go through all the modules and units, you will be well grounded in wine and food pairing principles.
7  8  COURSE DEVELOPMENT HCM 345 WINE AND FOOD PAIRING PRINCIPLES COURSE MAIN TEXT Course Developer: Dr. J.C. Okafor Department of Hospitality Management, Federal Polytechnic, Ilaro Unit Writer: Dr. J.C. Okafor Department of Hospitality Management, Federal Polytechnic, Ilaro Course Editor: Programme Leader: Dr (Mrs) A. O. Fagbemi School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Mr. S. O. Israel-Cookey School of Management Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
9  HCM 345 Module 1 Module 1 Unit 1 Vinification Unit 2 Major wine producing countries Unit 3 Classification of wines Unit 4 Categories of wines Unit 5 Components of wines UNIT 1 VINIFICATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 What is Vinification 3.2 Types of Vinification 3.3 Vine Specie 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The history of wine spans thousands of years and is closely intertwined with the history of agriculture, cuisine, civilization and humanity itself.
Archaeological evidence suggests that the earliest known wine production occurred in Georgia around 8,000 BC, with other notable sites in Iran and Armenia dated 7,000 BC and 6000 BC, respectively.
Evidence of the earliest wine production in Europe were uncovered at archaeological sites in northern Greece (Macedonia), dated to 6,500 years ago.
These same sites also contain remnants of the world's earliest evidence of crushed grapes.
In Egypt, wine became a part of recorded history, playing an important role in ancient ceremonial life.
Wine was common in ancient Greece and Rome, and many of the major wine-producing regions of Western Europe today were established with Phoenician and later Roman plantations.
Wine-making technology, such as the wine press, improved considerably during the time of the Roman Empire; many grape varieties and cultivation techniques were known and barrels were developed for storing and shipping wine In medieval Europe, following the decline of Rome and its industrial-scale wine production for export, the Christian Church became a staunch supporter of the wine 10 necessary for celebration of the Catholic Mass.
Whereas wine was forbidden in medieval Islamic cultures, its use in Christian libation was widely tolerated .
Wine production gradually increased and its consumption became popularized from the 15th century onwards and eventually establishing growing regions throughout the world.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be to: Explain vinification List the types of vinification Understand vine specie 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Vinification?
Vinification is the art of wine making.
This is a lengthy and delicate process that starts with selecting the right grapes to use in producing the liquor.
It essentially consists of the transformation of grapes’ natural sugars by yeast.
The major process in this art is fermentation.
The sugar of grape is converted to alcohol and carbon dioxide by yeast.
This process is vital to the making of alcoholic beverages.
Throughout the vinification process, the wine makers (Vinters) express their individual talents by nurturing their raw materials, and helping them evolve into a vast and original ensemble of aromatic hues.
3.2 Types of Vinification Generally, vinification is divided into two types:  Production of still wine, which does not utilize the carbonation process, and  Production of sparkling wine, which makes use of the carbonation process.
There are also:  Classic vinification – this type of vinification process is geared towards producing white wines that are full of colour and structure, containing enough phenolic compounds to support prolonged aging in oak barrels.
 Technological vinification – this type of vinification process is geared towards producing fresh wines with intense fruity and floral flavours and light colour, suitable for earlier consumption.
In this instance, fermentation with no skin contact is employed, with or without decanting and under strict temperature control.
3.3 Vine Specie The vine is a climbing plant with a woody stem, the fruit of which is known as the grape.
It is of the genus vitis, and of numerous species and varieties, the primary species being 11 the V. vinifera of the Old World.
The vine species that produce grape suitable for wine production, and which stocks most of the vineyards of the world is named vitis vinifera.
Most species now planted in Europe and elsewhere have evolved from this specie through cross-breeding, to suit local soils and climates.
The same grape may be given different names in different countries.
However, a number of grapes have become known to have distinctive characteristics.
3.3.1 The Grapes The grape consists of a number of elements:  The skin which provides tannin and colour  Stalk which provides tannin  Pips which provide bitter oils and  Pulp which contains sugar, water, fruit acids and pectins.
The yeast that is needed for the fermentation process is found on the outer skin of the grape fruit as a whitish bloom.
The colour of wine comes from the skin.
Hence, red wines are made from red grapes while white wines are made from white grapes.
White wines can also be made from red grapes provided the skin is removed before fermentation begins.
The quality of the grapes determines the quality of the wine more than any other factor.
Grape is usually affected by the variety, as well as the weather during the growing season, soil mineral and acidity, time of harvest, and pruning method.
Grape varieties are landmarks on the map of wine.
The wine drinker finds it useful to know the variety used because this is a major clue to the taste and character of the wine in the bottle.
A wine made from Chardonnay, for example, will have certain taste characteristics, wherever in the world it is made, but knowledge of the main grape varieties is a most useful tool in wine choice.
Despite the very large number of vine varieties, a few have been selected by winemakers as having special characteristics, and these have become increasingly international.
These varieties all originate in classic European vineyards, and they are linked in the minds of wine lovers and winemakers across the world with classic French and other wines.
Understanding the types of grapes used in wine and their characteristics is vital to getting a good understanding of wine.
There are over 5,000 varieties of wine grapes.
Some of them include: Auxerrois: Also known as Malbec or Chardonnay: This is a fresh, fruity Cot.
It creates a neutral fruity and grape grown in Burgundy, soft wine.
Champagne, California, Australia, Barbera: Barbera is a low-tannin and South Africa.
It is one of the grape known for its tarry flavour.
most popular and easiest to grow Cabernet Franc: A "parent" of the white grapes - it buds early, grows Cabernet Sauvignon grape.
It is easily and has high ripeness levels.
added in small amounts for flavour.
Chenin Blanc: This grape makes a light, fruity wine.
12 Cinsaut: Also known (incorrectly) as Gewurztraminer: The first part of Hermitage, this grape is mostly used the name literally means "spicey" in for blending with other, stronger German.
It has a floral taste with varieties.
nutty tones.
Colombard: These grapes end up Grande Vidure: Also known as the making a wine with "tropical fruit" Carmenére grape, this grape was overtones, a light wine to go with best known for its use in Medoc seafood.
wines.
Cortese: The primary grape for Gavi Grenache: Grenache is most often wine, this grape ripens early and used for rose wine.
It is the second makes a neutral white wine.
most planted grape in the world.
Gamay: This is the grape used in Pinotage: Developed in the early Beaujolais Nouveau wine, from 1900s and France.
used primarily by South Africa, Maréchal Foch: Early ripening, this Nebbiolo: This is a late ripening grape has very small berries in small grape that's known for being tannic, clusters.
The vines are hardy, pruny, tarry and chocolaty.
though, and make a good range of Pinot Blanc: This grape has a flavour red wines.
very much like Chardonnay wine.
Merlot: This is an early ripening Pinot Noir: These grapes are softer grape, with gentle flavours of cherry, and earlier ripening than Cabernet honey, and sometimes mint.
grapes, and are very sensitive to Muscat: This is a very grapey-tasting conditions.
grape that doesn't ripen easily.
4.0 CONCLUSION A Sommelier needs to have a good knowledge of the raw materials that go into wine making as well as the vinification method so as to have a good mastery of his carrier.
5.0 SUMMARY The making of good wine is dependent on the quality of the grape variety, type of soil, climate, preparation of vine yards, and method of wine making.
Wine making essentially consists of the conversion of grapes’ natural sugar to alcohol and carbon dioxide by yeast in the process of fermentation.
The major types of vinification are production of still wine and production of sparkling wine.
The most important wine-making grape variety is the vitis vinifera.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and describe some grape varieties 2.
Discuss the role of vine specie in wine making 13  7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold John R. Walker, Introduction to Hospitality 4th edition.
David Foskett and Victor Ceserani (2007) The Theory of Catering 11th edition.
Hodder Education 14  UNIT 2 MAJOR WINE PRODUCING COUNTRIES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 The New World 3.1.
New World Wine Making Countries 3.2 Characteristics of New World Wine 3.3 The Old World 3.4 Differences between old world and new world wines 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Wine regions can be categorized into Old Worlds and New Worlds.
Old world wine regions date back to the Roman Empire era and include France, Italy, Germany, and Spain.
These European regions had years to witness the impact of terroir (local soil) on wine production and refine their vinification methodology.
They emphasize terroir and traditions in vinification.
The New World wine regions include Australia, America, Latin America, South Africa, and New Zealand.
Without years of terroir knowledge, these regions rely on technology to obtain good yield and quality wines.
For example, many Austalian and Californian vineyards rely heavily on oak aging and natural compounds to enhance structure and flavor.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to explain: the new world The old world The characteristics of the new world wine The differences between the worlds of wine 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The New World New World wines are those wines produced outside the traditional wine-growing areas of Europe, in particular from Argentina, Australia, Canada, Chile, New Zealand, South Africa and the United States.
15 3.1.1 New World Wine Making Countries Argentina Argentina is the world’s fifth biggest wine producer.
It has a long tradition of winemaking under the Spanish, going back to 1557, but the industry has been influenced by more recent immigrants, notably Italians and also Germans.
The long history of viticulture in Argentina has brought forth the evolution of many local varieties, but perhaps the most typically Argentine grape is the Torrontés, which makes an aromatic white wine.
However, Argentines love red wine to go with their famous steaks.
Malbec has proven to be the most successful variety in export markets, with Barbera and "Bonarda" (now known to be Corbeau, a minor variety from Savoie) being blended into more affordable wines.
Australia Vine cuttings were brought from South Africa to Australia and this marked the beginning of wine production and wine exports.
By the 1880s Australian wines were winning prizes in Europe.
With time, there was a revival of interest in table wines, which culminated in Australia selling more wine to the United Kingdom than did France in 2000.
Australian wines were at some time criticized for being over-oaked and over-ripe, but today, Australian winemaking is some of the most sophisticated in the world.
Several regional specialties have emerged which are perhaps the finest fortified wines of the New World.
Canada Canada followed a similar path to the eastern United States - early attempts to grow Vitis vinifera failed, leading to a significant export industry based on Vitis labrusca and Vitis riparia, fortified to disguise the 'foxy' aromas.
The country had its own version of Prohibition until 1927, and after it ended red tape inhibited the industry until 1974.
In the following years improved viticulture and grape varieties allowed a substantial expansion of the industry in the 1990s, centred around the parts of Southern Ontario warmed by the Great Lakes, and in the Okanagan Valley of southern British Columbia.
While there has been some progress with red wines from the Bordeaux varieties and Pinot Noir, Canada's most successful wines are ice wines made from grapes such as Riesling, Vidal, and even Cabernet Franc.
Chile Many of Chile's vineyards are found on flat land within the foothills of the Andes.
As in Argentina, Chilean viticulture dates back to the Conquistadores.
It is the tenth biggest producer of wine in the world.
Under the Pinochet reforms of the 1980s, investments were made in wineries and vineyards, and exports began in earnest in the mid-1990s.
Chile is notable for being one of the few vine-growing regions to be free of phylloxera.
16  Mexico Mexico is the oldest wine-making region in the Americas.
In 1549, Spanish explorers and settlers came across a fertile valley in the present-day state of Coahuila where they encountered native vines and founded the Mission of "Holy Mary of the Vines".
In 1597, the Hacienda de San Lorenzo was established by the Spanish settler Don Lorenzo García, where he founded, along with other Spanish missionaries, Casa Madero - the oldest winery house in the Americas.
Several Mexican wines have achieved important international recognitions and received medals for their outstanding quality.
New Zealand New Zealand viticulture was started in a small way by Croatian immigrants at the end of the 19th century, but it was not until the 1970s that it really got going.
Various grapes were tried in the early years, but it was in the 1980s that New Zealand developed the pungent style of Sauvignon Blanc that became her trademark.
Since then the Burgundy grapes of Chardonnay and Pinot Noir have been developed in cooler, more southerly vineyards, with considerable success.
South Africa The end of apartheid sparked a wave of investment and innovation in the vineyards of the Cape.
There are large areas of undistinguished grape varieties that can produce world-class wines.
South Africa is second home to many known wines.
United States Although wine is made throughout the United States, 90% of it comes from California.
Earliest grape vines were imported from New Spain, or Mexico, which in turn were brought by Spanish explorers and settlers.
Prohibition had a devastating effect on commercial winemaking in United States which only started to recover in the late 1960s and 1970s.
In the years after Prohibition, the domestic market demand changed.
Interest in traditional European varieties increased leading to the innovations that triumphed so spectacularly in Paris in 1976.
3.2 Characteristics of New World wines Style Since New World vineyards are generally in hotter climates than those of Northern Europe, New World grapes tend to be riper.
Thus New World wines tend to be correspondingly more alcoholic and full-bodied.
17 Varietal Labeling Traditionally New World wine used names of well-known European regions, such as Burgundy, Champagne, Sherry, Port, and Hock.
This gave consumers a general idea of how the wine might taste.
This changed as winemakers developed the confidence to develop their own styles of wine such as Grange.
One reason was that unlike Europe, there was no history of particular localities being associated with particular styles of wine, and winemakers might buy in grapes from many sources.
Subsequently New World winemakers have 'rediscovered' the art of blending wines.
New World viticulturists now better understood the soils and climates of their vineyards, terroir has come to the New World.
Marketing Being less dependent on geography, New World wines have placed more emphasis on branding as a marketing tool.
With supermarkets selling an increasing proportion of wine in many markets, New World producers are better positioned to take advantage of this trend towards high volumes and low margins.
Ownership The greater size of New World wine companies has made them attractive targets for multinational drinks companies seeking to exploit the trend towards drinking wine rather than beer or spirits.
3.3 The Old World Old World wine refers primarily to wine made in Europe but can also include other regions of the Mediterranean basin with long histories of winemaking such as North Africa and the Near East.
The phrase is often used in contrast to "New World wine" which refers primarily to wines from New World wine regions such as the United States, Australia, South America and South Africa.
The term "Old World wine" does not refer to a homogeneous style with "Old World wine regions" each making vastly different styles of wine even within their own borders.
Rather, the term is used to describe general differences in viticulture and winemaking philosophies between the Old World regions where tradition and the role of terroir lead versus the New World where science and the role of the winemaker are more often emphasized.
In recent times, the globalization of wine and advent of flying winemakers have lessened the distinction between the two terms with winemakers in one region being able to produce wines that can display the traits of the other region—i.e.
an "Old World style" wine being produced in a New World wine region like California or Chile and vice versa.
The two most guiding influences of Old World style winemaking are that of tradition and terroir.
The former refers to the long history of a wine region, while the latter refers to geography and the unique characteristics of a place.
18 Some of the old world wine producing countries include: Austria Portugal Bulgaria Romania Croatia Slovakia Czech Republic Slovenia England Spain France Switzerland Germany Turkey Italy Greece 3.4 Differences between old world wine and new world wine Old world wine New world wine Wines come from the "classic wine making Wines come from everywhere else regions" in Europe Wine has been made in Europe and along the Started producing wine in the fifteenth, sixteenth or Mediterranean for several millennia.
seventeenth centuries, following European exploration or colonization Attracts higher prices Wines are often cheaper Style: Old World wines are traditionally more Wines are typically more ‘fruity’; modern, squeaky ‘terroir’ and structure driven clean, fruit forward and in general more varietal driven.
Philosophy: * Winemaking philosophies emanated from a Placed less sanctity on the preeminence of ‘terroir’, sense of place, and the primordial role and more on the preservation of varietal fruit ascribed to ‘terroir’ as well as ‘mother- character, believing that the appropriate harnessing nature’ in determining wine quality.
of scientific and technological best practices in the vineyard and in the winery could iron out any ‘terroir’ imperfections.
Quality: Tend to retain a more obvious minerality or wines retain their more forward fruit, no matter savoriness, no matter how ‘fruity’ they how strongly they portray their a sense of ‘place’.
become.
Wines are typically of higher alcoholic content Wines are typically have liwer alcoholic content Regulation: has to adhere to a detailed set of rules that very few restrictions exist, and winemakers are free govern what can be planted, density of to plant whatever grape varieties they wish and planting, training and pruning methods, make the wine however they deem appropriate minimum ripeness at harvest, maximum yields, winemaking techniques and use of oak.
*today the dividing line is more blurred, as New World wine producers discover ‘terroir’ and Old World producers discover ‘fruit’, adopting many of the technological advances developed in the New World.
19  4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has educated the students on the new and old world as it concerns wine making.
It has also tried to explain the characteristics of the new world wines, as well as, the differences between the two worlds.
5.0 SUMMARY The new world wine region is made up of Argentina, Australia, Canada, Chile, New Zealand, South Africa and the United States Some of the old world wine producing countries include: France, Armenia, Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, England, Germany, Italy, Spain The characteristics of new world wines is seen in style, varietal labelling, marketing and ownership Differences between old world wine and new world wine are in the areas of style, philosophy, quality and regulation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is meant by the term ‘new world wine’ and old world wine’?
Discuss the characteristics of new world wine Itemize the differences between new world wines and old world wines.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold John R. Walker, Introduction to Hospitality 4th edition.
David Foskett and Victor Ceserani (2007) The Theory of Catering 11th edition.
Hodder Education 20 UNIT 3 CLASSIFICATION OF WINES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Classification by Appellation 3.2 Regional wine classifications 3.3 Classification by vinification methods and style 3.4 Classification by vintage or varietal 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The classification of wine can be done according to various methods including, but not limited to, place of origin or appellation, vinification methods and style, sweetness and vintage, or varietal used.
Practices vary in different countries and regions of origin, and many practices have varied over time.
Some classifications enjoy official protection by being part of the wine law in their country of origin, while others have been created by, for example, grower's organizations without such protection.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, the students will understand the criteria used in classifying wines.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Classification by Appellation An appellation is a legally defined and protected geographical indication used to identify where the grapes for a wine were grown.
Restrictions other than geographical boundaries, such as what grapes may be grown, maximum grape yields, alcohol level, and other quality factors, may also apply before an appellation name may legally appear on a wine bottle label.
The rules that govern appellations are dependent on the country in which the wine was produced Historically, wines have been known by names reflecting their origin, and sometimes style.
For example Bordeaux, Rioja, Mosel and Chianti are all legally defined names reflecting the traditional wines produced in the named region.
These naming conventions or "appellations" (as they are known in France) dictate not only where the grapes in a wine were grown but also which grapes went into the wine and how they 21 were vinified.
The appellation system is strongest in the European Union, but a related system, the American Viticultural Area, restricts the use of certain regional labels in America, such as Napa Valley, Santa Barbara and Willamette Valley.
In most of the world, wine labeled Champagne must be made from grapes grown in the Champagne region of France and fermented using a certain method, based on the international trademark agreements included in the 1919 Treaty of Versailles.
However, in the United States, a legal definition called semi-generic has enabled U.S. winemakers to use certain generic terms (Champagne, Hock, Sherry, etc.)
if there appears next to the term the actual appellation of origin.
More recently, wine regions in countries with less stringent location protection laws such as the United States and Australia have joined with well-known European wine producing regions to sign the Napa Declaration to Protect Wine Place and Origin, commonly known as the Napa Declaration on Place.
This is a "declaration of joint principles stating the importance of location to wine and the need to protect place names".
The Declaration was signed in July 2005 by four United States winegrowing regions and three European Union winegrowing regions.
3.2 Regional wine classifications Many Regional wine classifications exist as part of tradition or appellation law.
The most common of these is based on vineyard sites and include the Bordeaux Wine Official Classification of 1855.
However, some regions classify their wines based on the style like the German wine classification system.
Vineyard classification has a long history dating from some early examples in Jurançon in the 14th century, in 1644 when the council of Würzburg ranked the city's vineyards by quality, and the early five-level designation of vineyards based on quality in Tokaj-Hegyalja in 1700.
Other well known classifications include:  Classification of Saint-Émilion wine of Bordeaux  Classification of Graves wine of Bordeaux  Cru Bourgeois of Bordeaux (Médoc)  Classified estates of Provence 3.2 Classification by vinification methods and style Wines may be classified by vinification methods.
This method of classifications gives rise to having: Red wine White wine Sparkling/ semi-sparkling wine Still wine Organic wine Table wine Cooking wine The colour of wine is not determined by the juice of the grape, which is almost always clear, but rather by the presence or absence of the grape skin during fermentation.
22 Style Attempts have been made to classify wines by style, which is difficult to define.
Subjectively, it involves a combination of the colour, taste, alcoholic strength and several other factors.
These are influenced by the grape variety or varieties used, the climate and soil conditions in the region of production, and the method of vinification.
By this method, there are: Dessert wine Fortified wine Fruit wines Rosé wines 3.4 Classification by vintage or varietal A vintage wine is one made from grapes that were all, or primarily, grown in a single specified year, and are accordingly dated as such.
Consequently, it is not uncommon for wine enthusiasts and traders to save bottles of an especially good vintage wine for future consumption.
However, there is some disagreement and research about the significance of vintage year to wine quality.
Most countries allow a vintage wine to include a portion of wine that is not from the labeled vintage.
A varietal wine is wine made from a dominant grape such as a Chardonnay or a Cabernet Sauvignon.
The wine may not be entirely of that one grape and varietal labeling laws differ.
In the United States a wine needs to be composed of at least 75% of a particular grape to be labeled as a varietal wine.
In the European Union, a minimum of 85% is required if the name of a single varietal is displayed, and if two or more varietals are mentioned, these varietals combined must make up 100% and they must be listed in descending order.
For example, a mixture of 70% Chardonnay and 30% Viognier must be called Chardonnay-Viognier rather than Viognier-Chardonnay.
4.0 CONCLUSION Wines are classified based on established and accepted criteria.
Some of these classifications enjoy legal protection and form part of the wine laws of their various countries while some others do not enjoy this protection, particularly those created by grower's organizations.
5.0 SUMMARY The classification of wine is based on four main criteria which include: Appellation Regional Vinification method Vintage All these criteria enjoy legal protection except some of them created by grower’s organizations.
23 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the various considerations in the classification of wines.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold 24 UNIT 4 CATEGORIES OF WINES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Categories of wine 3.1.1 Red wines 3.1.2 White wine 3.1.3 Sparkling wine 3.1.4 Still wine 3.1.5 Organic wine 3.1.6 Dessert and fortified wines 3.1.7 Alcohol-free, dealcoholised and low alcohol wines 3.1.8 Aromatized wines 3.1.9 Table wines 3.1.10 Cooking wine 3.2 Wine listing 3.2.1 By place of origin 3.2.2 By type 3.2.3 By grape 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are hundreds of wine types in the world, each with its own flavours and styles.
Most people know about the popular varieties of wine - chardonnay, cabernet and merlot.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, the students will be able to describe the different classes of wine.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Red wines Red wine is red.
Its colour can be derived from a vast assortment of grape varietals ranging from grapes that are reddish, deep purple, and even a beautiful blue on the colour scale.
These grapes give rise to a wine that is colour classified with such descriptors as garnet, almost black, dark red, light red, ruby red, opaque purple, deep violet, maroon and the list goes on.
It is the grape skins that are responsible for the red 25 wine’s distinct colour spectrum.
The skins are in contact with the grape’s juice during the fermentation process, allowing the dispersion of both colour and tannins.
The individual wine’s particular red hue depends on the grape type used in the process and the length of time the skin’s pigmentation is in contact with juice.
There are right around 50 key red wine varietals that consistently manifest themselves in today’s worldwide wine market.
Wine producers worldwide are constantly developing reds that are smoother, more rounded and juicier.
3.1.1 Red Wine Style As with all wines, the particular winemaker will have adequate “say” in the style of wine he will produce.
Red wines are often classified by “body-type.” This has to do with mouth-feel and tannin structure.
There are: Light-bodied Medium-bodied Full-bodied A light-bodied wine will have fewer tannins present and less presence on the palate.
These wines tend to be less demanding partners with flavour-filled foods.
An example of a light-bodied red wine would be one derived from the Gamay grape varietal, such as France’s famed young red wine: Beaujolais Nouveau.
In general, light-bodied wines tend to “feel” more like water in the mouth.
A medium-bodied red wine will contain more tannins than light-bodied wine.
Typical examples of medium-bodied red wines include: Merlot, Shiraz or a Chianti.
Full-bodied red wines boast the highest tannin (and often alcohol) content.
Prime examples of full-bodied reds are France’s esteemed Bordeaux wines, California’s key Cabs and Italy’s sizzling Super Tuscans.
Full-bodied wines feel heavier and more like milk.
This effect is due in large part to the higher tannin (and again, alcohol) content.
3.2 White wines White wine is not white at all, but yellow, golden or straw-like in colour.
Its colour can be derived from an assortment of grape varietals.
White wines are made from the grape juice and grape skin of green, gold or yellowish coloured grapes or from just the juice (not the skin) of select red grapes.
They are more refreshing, lighter in both style and taste than the majority of their red wine counterparts, White wine styles vary from bone dry to golden sweet.
26 3.3 Sparkling and still wines 3.3.1 Sparkling wines Sparkling wine is a wine with significant levels of carbon dioxide in it making it fizzy.
The carbon dioxide may result from natural fermentation, either in a bottle in a large tank designed to withstand the pressures involved or as a result of carbon dioxide injection.
Sparkling wine is usually white or rosé but there are many examples of red sparkling wines such as Italian Brachetto and Australian sparkling Shiraz.
The sweetness of sparkling wine can range from very dry "brut" styles to sweeter "doux" varieties.
The classic example of a sparkling wine is Champagne, but this wine is exclusively produced in the Champagne region of France and many sparkling wines are produced in other countries and regions, such as Espumante in Portugal, Cava in Spain, Franciacorta, Trento, Oltrepò Pavese Metodo Classico and Asti in Italy (the generic Italian term for sparkling wine being Spumante) and Cap Classique in South Africa.
Most countries, reserve the word Champagne for a specific type from the Champagne region of France.
The French terms "Mousseux" or "Crémant" are used to refer to sparkling wine not made in the Champagne region.
German and Austrian sparkling wines are called Sekt.
The United States is a significant producer of sparkling wine with producers in numerous states.
Recently the United Kingdom, which produced some of the earliest examples of sparkling wine, has started producing sparkling wines again.
3.3.2 Categories of sparkling wine Sparkling wines and Champagnes are categorized as: Extra Brut, Brut Extra dry Sec and Demi-sec This categorization depends on their sugar levels.
These classifications can be somewhat confusing, but keep in mind, that in wine terms "dry" is the opposite of "sweet."
Extra Brut - is "extra" dry Brut – dry (most popular style and very food-friendly) Sec – medium dry Demi-sec – pretty sweet (pair with fruit and dessert) Champagne and sparkling wines are also categorized as "vintage" or "non-vintage" (NV on the label) meaning they either come from a single year or are a blend of several different years.
The "vintage" Champagnes are typically pricier, as the non-vintage Champagne and sparkling wines make up the majority of the market.
27 3.3.3 Semi-sparkling wines Semi-sparkling wines are defined as those with between 1 and 2.5 atmospheres of pressures.
sparkling wines that contain less than 2.5 atmospheres of carbon dioxide at sea level and 20 °C.
These wines have less carbon dioxide than regular sparkling wine.
Their bubbles develop during second fermentation in tanks.
This fermentation is interrupted before the wines are fully sparkling.
They are produced in many countries.
3.4 Still wine Still wines are wines that have not gone through the sparkling wine methods and have no effervescence.
This is the largest category of wine.
Their alcoholic content may be between 8% and 15% by volume.
They can be red, white or rosé.
3.
5 Organic wine These are wines made from grapes grown without the aid of artificial insecticides, pesticides or fertilizers.
They are also known as ‘green’ or ‘environmentally friendly’ wines.
The wine itself will not be adulterated in any way, save for minimal amounts of the traditional preservatives, sulphur dioxide which is controlled at source.
3.6 Dessert and Fortified wine 3.6.1 Dessert wines A dessert wine is one that is potent, sweet, and full of flavour.
It is because of their sweet flavour the wine complements a dessert.
Often extra spirits are added to raise the alcohol content.
In general, dessert wines are thicker, richer, and sweeter than table wines.
The grapes are picked late in the harvest to preserve residual sugars.
They come in small bottles and are served in tiny glasses.
An average pour is 2 ounces.
Therefore, you notice that dessert wines sold in the smaller 375ml bottles (as well as in larger bottles).
Like dinner wines, white dessert wines are generally served chilled.
Red dessert wine are served at room temperature or slightly chilled.
Dessert wines are especially good with fresh bakery sweets and fruits.
It is best to save heavier tastes for winter, lighter tastes for summer.
These wines contain flavours like peach, almond, oak, and herbs, which allow them to show off their flavour, and add a tang to even the lightest dessert.
Adding them to a sweet cream or paste dessert always creates a wonderful combination.
Examples include fortified wines like port and sherry, and late harvest wines, which originated from grapes that have shriveled a bit, concentrating their sweetness.
As a rule of thumb, a dessert wine should always be sweeter than the dessert it accompanies.
28 Some of the world's great fortified wines include Madeira, Vermouth, Marsala, Sherry, Cream Sherry, and Port.
3.6.2 Types of dessert wine Late Harvest: In Sauternes this allows the sugars to condense in the grapes and then, a noble rot forms on the grapes.
It sounds disgusting, but it makes some of the best wines in the world.
Leave it to the French to turn mold into a great dessert wine, or a great cheese, like Rocquefort.
Ice wines The grapes used for these wines freeze at the end of harvest.
They yield only a small amount of sugary juice because of this when pressed.
The water is frozen.
They are grown in cold regions like Canada and Germany.
3.6.3 Fortified wines Fortified wines are wines that have been strengthened by the addition of alcohol, usually a grape spirit.
Their fermentation process is stopped by this addition of a spirit, such as brandy, or have had additional spirit added after fermentation.
They are often sweeter and generally more alcoholic wines.
Fortified wines are known on Europe as liqueur wines or vin de liqueur.
Their alcoholic strength may be from 15% to 22%.
Examples include: Port, Madeira and Sherry.
3.
7 Alcohol-free, de-alcoholised and low alcohol wines These wines are made in the normal way and the alcohol is removed either by hot- treatment distillation or cold filtration process/reverse osmosis.
The hot-distillation process removes not only the alcohol content but also most of the flavour.
The cold-filtration process removes the alcohol by mechanically separating or filtering out the molecules of alcohol through membranes made of cellulose or acetate.
At a later stage, water and a little must are added in an attempt to preserve much of the flavour of the original wine.
The alcohol-free wine has a maximum of 0.05% alcohol De-alcoholised wine contains a maximum of 0.50% alcohol while Low alcohol wine contains a maximum of 1.2% alcohol.
29 3.8 Aromatized/Aromatic wines These are wines fortified and flavoured with herbs, roots, flowers and barks.
They may be sweet or dry.
Aromatic wines are also known as aperitifs.
They are generally consumed before meals as digestive stimulants.
Examples include: Vermouths Chamberyzette Dubonnet St Raphael 3.
9 Table wines These are wines that have an alcohol content that is no higher than 14% in the U.S.
In Europe, light wine must be within 8.5% and 14% alcohol by volume.
Thus, unless a wine has more than 14% alcohol, or it has bubbles, it is a table wine or a light wine.
Table wines are usually classified as "white," "red," or "rosé," depending on their colour.
In Europe 'vins de table' (in French), 'vino da tavola' (in Italian), 'Tafelwein' (in German) or 'vino de mesa' (in Spanish), which translate to 'table wine' in English, are cheaper wines that often on the label do not include the information on the grape variety used or the region of origin.
3.10 Cooking wine This usually refers to inexpensive grape wine or rice wine (in Chinese and other East Asian cuisine).
It is intended for use as an ingredient in food rather than as a beverage.
Cooking wine typically available in North America is treated with salt as a preservative and food colouring.
In other countries good quality sherry wine is used for cooking, providing nice flavour to the dish and a tasty sauce.
When a usual wine bottle is opened and the wine is exposed to oxygen, a fermentative process will transform the alcohol into acetic acid resulting in wine vinegar.
This does not happen in fortified wines, as they are already fermented.
The salt in cooking wine inhibits the growth of the microorganisms that produce acetic acid.
This will preserve a bottle of cooking wine, which may be opened and used occasionally over a long period of time.
Cooking wines are convenient for cooks who use wine as an ingredient for cooking only rarely.
However, they are not widely used by professional chefs, as they believe the added preservative significantly lowers the quality of the wine and subsequently the food made with that wine.
Most professional chefs prefer to use inexpensive but drinkable wine for cooking, and this recommendation is given in many professional cooking textbooks as well as general cookbooks.
Many chefs believe there is no excuse for using a low quality cooking wine for cooking when there are quality drinkable wines available at very low prices.
30 Cooking wine is considered a wine of such poor quality, that it is unpalatable by itself and intended for use only in cooking.
There is a school of thought that advises against cooking with any wine one would find unacceptable to drink.
3.2 Wine listing Wines are normally listed in three main ways which are:  By place of origin  By type  By grape Place of origin This is a traditional approach.
Here, the wines are presented based on their country or region of origin.
This can further be broken down such that within the country or region, the wines are presented area by area.
Example of this listing is: Champagne and Sparkling France Spain South Africa Germany Italy England Australia Portugal It usual to list white wines first followed by the rosé wines, and then the red wines.
By Type This is a modern approach which lists wines by type.
For example: Sparkling wines White wines Rosé wines Red wines Dessert wines Within this grouping, the wines can further be presented by country, region or style.
If the presentation will be by type and style, the list could appear thus: White wines Red wines grapy whites fruity reds grassy-fruity whites claret style reds richer whites herby-spicy reds It is better to list the wines from the lighter to the more full wines.
By grape In this type of listing, the grapes are usually listed in alphabetical order.
Under each heading, the wines made from that grape are listed.
31 Examples of the grapes are: White grapes Red grapes Chardonnay canernet sauvignon Chenin blanc pinot noir Pinot blanc sangiovese Riesling zinfandel 4.0 CONCLUSION As a connoisseur, one needs to have a good knowledge of the categories of wine.
Wines have been categorised for ease in differentiating them, and understanding their special features.
One is therefore equipped better to know when and where each wine comes in.
5.0 SUMMARY Red wine is red.
Its colour can be derived from a vast assortment of grape varietals ranging from grapes that are reddish, deep purple, and even a beautiful blue on the colour scale.
White wine is not white at all, but yellow, golden or straw-like in colour.
Its colour can be derived from an assortment of grape varietals.
Sparkling wine is a wine with significant levels of carbon dioxide in it making it fizzy.
Still wines are wines that have not gone through the sparkling wine methods and have no effervescence.
Organice are wines made from grapes grown without the aid of artificial insecticides, pesticides or fertilizers.
A dessert wine is one that is potent, sweet, and full of flavour.
It is because of their sweet flavour the wine complements a dessert.
Fortified wines are wines that have been strengthened by the addition of alcohol, usually a grape spirit.
Alcohol-free, de-alcoholised and low alcohol wines are made in the normal way and the alcohol is removed either by hot-treatment distillation or cold filtration process/reverse osmosis.
The alcohol-free wine has a maximum of 0.05% alcohol.
De-alcoholised wine contains a maximum of 0.50% alcohol while.
Low alcohol wine contains a maximum of 1.2% alcohol.
Aromatized wines are flavoured and fortified wines.
32 Table wines are wines that have alcohol content within 8.5% and 14% alcohol by volume.
Cooking wine refers to inexpensive grape wine or rice wine.
It is intended for use as an ingredient in food rather than as a beverage.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List the various categories of wine.
Discuss any three categories of wine.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold John R. Walker, Introduction to Hospitality 4th edition.
33 UNIT 5 COMPONENTS OF WINE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 The components of wine 3.1.1 Tannins 3.1.2 Acidity 3.1.3 Alcohol 3.1.4 Sugar 3.1.5 Oak 3.1.6 Botrytis 3.1.7 Flavour 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The subject of wine is quite interesting.
Apart from its flavour, its structure is also important.
The structure of wine has to do with the components that make up a wine, which in turn affect the drinkability and longevity of the wine.
An appreciation of the balance of these components will go a long way in helping ones understanding and enjoyment of wine.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, the students will understand: The components of wine The effect of these components on the drinkability and longevity of wine.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The components of wine 3.1.1 Tannins The tannins in a wine are derived from the pips, skins and stalks.
They are vitally important if a wine is intended to age, as they are a natural preservative.
The tannins give structure and backbone to the wine.
They can be sensed by a furring of the mouth, or puckering of the gums, a sensation very similar to what happens on drinking stewed tea.
This is unsurprising, as this effect is also due to tannins, released from the tealeaves after stewing in the hot water for too long.
34 Tannins are of more importance in the ageing of red wines rather than white.
The tannins act as a preservative, and as they fade over many years, the simple, primary fruit flavours have time to develop into the more complex flavours that are found in fine, aged wines.
An ideal level of tannins in a wine ready for drinking is the amount just sufficient to provide structure, and not dominate the palate.
For this reason, tannins are still important in red wines not intended for long ageing, as they give grip or structure to these wines also.
Tannins may also have different qualities, and may be described as harsh or soft.
3.1.2 Acidity All fruit require acidity, be it an apple, lemon, mango or grape.
Acidity is what gives fruit its refreshing, flavoursome sensation.
Without acidity, fruit would seem overly sweet and cloying, a little like the sensation derived from drinking the sugary fruit syrup in which some canned fruit is presented.
Just like fruit, wine also requires acidity.
Too little, and it will seem dull, flabby or perhaps cloying, particularly if it is a sweet wine.
Too much, and the wine will be sharp, harsh and undrinkable.
Acidity can be detected by the sharpness of the wine in the mouth, particularly around the edges of the tongue near the front.
Some acids, such as acetic acid, are known as volatile acids, and in small amounts these can really lift the flavours in the wine.
Too much acidity will cause the wine to resemble furniture polish, acetone or even vinegar.
Higher acidity denotes a wine from a cooler region, such as Northern France, England or New Zealand.
Low acid wines come from countries with warmer weather, such as Australia, where acidity in the harvested grapes is often low enough to warrant chemical acidification.
3.1.3 Alcohol Alcohol is the product of fermentation of the natural grape sugars by yeasts, and without it, wine simply doesn't exist.
The amount of sugar in the grapes determines what the final alcohol level will be.
In cool climates, such as Germany, where the vines struggle to ripen their grapes, sugar levels will be minimal, and consequently such wines often only reach 7 or 8% strength.
In very warm climates, however, the final alcohol level will be determined not so much by the amount of sugar but rather by the yeasts themselves.
Once the alcohol level reaches about 14% the yeasts can no longer function and rapidly die off.
For this reason, wines with a strength of more than 15% are almost certainly fortified.
The conversion of sugar to alcohol is such a vital step in the process of making wine.
Hence, the control of fermentation is given much attention by the modern winemaker.
Fermentation generates heat, and a cool, controlled fermentation will result in very different flavours in the wine (in particular, it protects fresh, delicate fruit flavours) when compared with wines where fermentation is allowed to run riot.
35 Although fermentation will start naturally as a result of yeasts naturally present on the grapes in the vineyard, some winemakers prefer to remove the element of chance this involves, by kick-starting fermentation using cultured strains of yeast.
This use of cultured yeast strains could also cause problems.
They have been blamed for some unusual characteristics in wine, such as banana flavours in some wines.
3.1.4 Sugar If fermentation is arrested, either as a result of the yeasts failing in gradually increasing alcohol level in the ferment, or as a result of mans intervention, there will consequently be some remaining sugar in the wine.
Even when the work of yeast is unhindered, most wines still have at least 1g/L of residual sugar.
This is because some sugar compounds are resistant to the action of the yeasts.
Clearly, the level of sugar in the wine determines how sweet it tastes.
This is quite subjective, however, as even wines that taste very dry have some degree of residual sugar.
Most dry wines have less than 2g/L of sugar, although levels of up to 25g/L may be present in wines which still taste dry due to the presence of acidity and tannin alongside the sugar.
The bottom line remains that the greater the amount of residual sugar, the sweeter the wine.
3.1.5 Oak Many wines are matured in oak barrels, and some are even fermented in oak.
Oak from different sources will impart different characteristics on the wine.
Generally, oak maturation gives aromas of butter, toffee, caramel, vanilla, spice and butterscotch.
French oak may give more buttery aromas, whereas American oak gives stronger vanilla and spice aromas.
However, the aromas most times depend on: how much oak is used how much of it is new as opposed to re-used how long the wine stays in contact with the wood whether the wine is merely aged in oak or whether the fermentation takes place in it how the oak has been treated, and so on.
For instance, barrels that have been ‘toasted’ will have aromas of smoke and toast.
Barrels that have been steamed during manufacture, however, may give more oatmeal aromas.
3.1.6 Botrytis The result of the fungus Botrytis cinerea - ‘Noble Rot’ has a peculiarly beneficial effect on the grapes.
It tends to occur in vineyards that lie next to large bodies of water, where 36 morning mists dampen the grapes in the morning.
Such locations include Sauternes in Bordeaux, and around the Neusiederlersee in Austria.
Following this, the mists are burnt from the ground by the afternoon sun.
In conditions which are too damp, where the mists persist all day, the grapes are much more likely to be affected by Grey Rot, a destructive fungal infection which has no beneficial effect at all.
Grapes affected by Botrytis look terrible, discoloured and shrivelled, but they are the starting point for making some fabulous wines.
The Botrytis has the effect of reducing water content in the grapes, concentrating the grape sugars.
The wine that results has a rich, luscious texture, with sweet, concentrated fruit flavours.
3.1.7 Yeast In many wines the yeasts themselves are the cause of certain flavours.
When a wine has completed fermentation, it remains cloudy and contaminated with dead yeast cells.
Many different techniques are employed to clarify the wine from its lees (the collection of dead yeasts).
Wines that remain on the lees for a long time, however, will take on extra richness and texture, with bready, biscuity aromas (and flavours).
This technique is employed to add an extra dimension to many Champagnes, as well as Muscadet, white Burgundy and many other white wines.
Some vignerons practice batonnage (stirring of the lees) in order to accentuate this effect.
3.1.8 Flavour After the assessment of all the components present in wine, it is still necessary to examine the flavours that are present.
In young wines at least, the flavour is directly related to the grape variety used.
4.0 CONCLUSION The components that make up wine have vital roles to play in the eventual outcome of the wine making process.
5.0 SUMMARY The various components of wine are tannins, acidity, alcohol, sugar, oak, botrytis and flavour.
The aromas oak impacts to wine depend on: how much oak is used how much of it is new as opposed to re-used how long the wine stays in contact with the wood whether the wine is merely aged in oak or whether the fermentation takes place in it.
how the oak has been treated, and so on.
37 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and explain the components of wine.
Itemize the factors aromas from oak depend on.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Chloe Alster (2007) ‘Types of Wine - How External Factors Can Affect Your Wine’ EzineArticles.com.
Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold 38  Module 2 Unit 1 General information required on wine Unit 2 The role of wine in society Unit 3 Tasting of wine Unit 4 Factors affecting the taste of wine Unit 5 Decanting UNIT 1 GENERAL INFORMATION REQUIRED ON WINE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Wines 3.4 Alcoholic strength 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are information required to be given on wine to help the customers in making decision as to choice of drink.
Such information will be the wine itself and the alcoholic strength.
Most times the wine label contains most of this information.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students will: Understand the various information that are supposed to be given on the wine list or wine label.
Be able to interpret the information given on the wine label.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Wines The required information on wine include: Bin number Vintage 39  Name of wine Alcoholic strength Country and area of origin ½ bottle, bottle or magnum Quality indication Price Shipper Supplier Château/estate bottled Descriptive notes as appropriate.
Varietal (type of grape) 3.2 Alcoholic strength The alcoholic strength of wine and other drinks is expressed as percentage (%) alcohol by volume.
This is measured by the Organisation Internationale Métrologie Légale (OIML) Scale which is the universally accepted scale for the measurement of pure alcohol in a liquid.
Thus a liquid stated to have 30% alcohol by volume will have 30% of its content as pure alcohol.
The alcoholic content of most drinks now is shown on the labels.
The illustration below shows a typical US wine label.
40 Notice that most of the information needed on wine has been supplied on this wine label.
GERMANY BACK LABEL OTHER Above are more examples of wine labels.
Follow the numbers from each label to the related numbers in the text for a quick explanation of every label line.
Though these labels represent different countries with different sets of labeling regulations, it is seen that they all provide the same general information, with only relatively minor differences in format and content.
1.
Wine maker or winery: The company or firm that made the wine or, in some cases, the wine's trademark name.
2.
Appellation: The country or region where the grapes for this wine were grown.
This may be as broad as "California" or as narrow as a specific vineyard like "Trittenheimer Altärchen."
Note, however, that the California wine pictured here lists a narrower appellation ("El Dorado County") and takes advantage of the option to denote its specific vineyard source ("Wylie-Fenaughty") as well.
The German wine also mentions its region ("Mosel-Saar-Ruwer").
In most countries, wine-growing regions ("appellations") are defined by law, and wines made in these regions will carry legal language on the label such as "Appellation Controlée" in France or "Denominazione della Origine Contrallata (DOC)" in Italy.
Most regulations allow up to 15 percent of the wine to be made from grapes grown outside the area.
3.
Vintage: This is the year in which the grapes were harvested, not the year in which the wine was bottled, which for some wines may be years later.
Note that some countries add the local word for "vintage" to the label: "Cosecha" in Spain, "Vendemmia" in Italian.
(Most national wine laws require that at least 85 percent of the wine be harvested in the year of vintage; up to 15 percent may be blended in from other years.)
41 4.
Variety: The specific kind of grapes from which the wine was made.
Not all wines disclose varietal content.
Most French and Italian wines do not do so, for example, because the wine laws require the wines of each region be made from traditional varieties: Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Cabernet Franc, Petite Verdot and Malbec in Bordeaux, for example; Sangiovese and others in the case of Chianti, and the indigenous grapes Obidiah and Merwah in the offbeat Lebanese white wine from Chateau Musar pictured under "Other."
Most countries allow the use of some non-varietal grapes in the blend.
In most states of the U.S., for example, only 75 percent of the wine's content must be of the named varietal.
In Europe and Australia, the rule is usually 85 percent.
5.
Ripeness: In a tradition known primarily in Germany and, in somewhat different form, Austria, some wines use special terminology to reflect the ripeness of the grapes and the quality of the finished wine.
The German wine pictured, for instance, is a "Kabinett," the lowest ripeness level in "Qualitätswein mit Prädikat," the highest quality level.
Some German wine labels will also show "Trocken" ("Dry") or "Halbtrocken" ("Half Dry") to denote wines vinified to less natural sweetness.
6.
Estate bottling and winery information: If the wine is "estate bottled" (made from grapes grown and harvested in the winery's own vineyards), this will be disclosed with language on the label such as the French "Mise en bouteille(s) au Chateau;" the German "Gutsabfüllung"; or the English "estate bottled" or "grown, produced and bottled."
7.
Other required information: This may vary widely depending on national regulations.
German wines, for example, carry an "Amptliche Prüfungs Nummer (AP Number)," the serial number it received during official testing (barely visible on the right in the pictured label).
French wines may carry their ranking from traditional classifications (such as "Grand Cru" or "Premier Cru" on qualifying Burgundies).
The back labels of wines sold in the U.S. are typically decked out with required consumer warnings such as the notorious "Surgeon General's Warning" and notices that the wines contain sulfites.
Wine labels also carry small print disclosing the wine's approximate alcoholic content and the size of the bottle, as highlighted on several of the labels photos.
Imported wines in the U.S. normally bear the name and other information about the company that imported the wine.
8.
Optional information: Additional information that may range from winemaker's notes or detailed analytical and tasting information to advertising hype are often featured on labels, especially the back label.
4.0 CONCLUSION Information brings knowledge.
Lots of the prints on wine labels convey lots of information.
It is important that the sommelier or conossoir arm themselves with adequate knowledge to be able to impress and serve customers better.
5.0 SUMMARY 42 The major information required on wine is normally covered by the information on the wine label.
This most times concerns: Wine maker Appellation Vintage Variety Ripeness Estate bottled or not Alcoholic strength 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the general information required on wine.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold 43  UNIT 2 THE ROLE OF WINE IN SOCIETY CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Functions of wine 3.1.1 Situation definer 3.1.2 Religious importance 3.1.3 Social importance 3.1.4 Wine as a spiritual component 3.1.5 Wine as a global commodity 3.2 Wine and health 3.2.1 Reduce forgetfulness 3.2.2 Keeps body weight down 3.3.3 Boosts body defences 3.3.4 Guard against ovarian woes 3.2.5 Build better bones 3.2.6 Prevent blood-sugar problem 3.2.7 Improve digestion and absorption 3.3 Health components in wine 3.3.1 Alcohol 3.3.2 The real benefits 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Wine was regarded as an important product of civilization which brings significant benefits.
At the same time, though, they recognized in wine something with great potential for harm if used improperly.
From the ethnographic material available, it is clear that in all cultures where more than one type of alcoholic beverage is available, drinks are classified in terms of their social meaning, and the classification of drinks is used to define the social world.
Few, if any, alcoholic beverages are ‘socially neutral’: every drink is loaded with symbolic meaning, every drink conveys a message.
Alcohol is a symbolic vehicle for identifying, describing, constructing and manipulating cultural systems, values, interpersonal relationships, behavioural norms and expectations.
Choice of beverage is rarely a matter of personal taste.
44 A US survey examined perceptions of the situational appropriateness of various types of alcoholic drink, finding that wine, but not spirits or beer, is considered an appropriate accompaniment to a meal; wine and spirits, but not beer, are appropriate drinks for celebratory events, while beer is the most appropriate drink for informal, relaxation- oriented occasions.
Scientists are discovering that wine can be physically beneficial.
Wine can be dangerous, too, and out-of-control consumption can be a menace.
How societies balance the benefits and the dangers of alcohol is the subject of constant revealing debate.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of the unit, the students should understand: The roles of wine in the society of wine 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Functions of wine A look into the past will reveal that all the writings our ancestors left to us as a witness of their times and their cultures, among all beverages created by man, wine is the one which has been more frequently mentioned and it occupies a place of absolute importance Wine is rarely drunk in order to quench thirst.
Wine has always played a primary role in social and cultural events among the people in which it was present.
3.1.1 Situation definer At the simplest level, drinks are used to define the nature of the occasion.
In many Western cultures, for example, champagne is synonymous with celebration, such that if champagne is ordered or served at an otherwise ‘ordinary’ occasion, someone will invariably ask "What are we celebrating?".
3.1.2 Religious importance In many religions and cults, wine is a ritual element.
For example, in the Christian religion, wine is essential in celebrating Eucharist, considered as sacred, which therefore goes beyond the simple concept of beverage.
Dionysus, Bachus, and Liber are the names of the ancient Greek and Roman gods of wine.
These gods embodied many of the qualities which Greeks and Romans saw in wine itself: life and death, nature and civilization, male and female.
45  3.1.3 Social importance Like food, wine has a social role to play: Wine is a beverage of communion, friendship, aggregation and union.
The most important moments in the life of men are still today celebrated by wine.
It is consumed as a beverage to wish good luck for agreements.
It is used to celebrate special events.
3.1.4 Wine as a spiritual component It brings people together.
It can increase happiness.
Wine amplifies a sense of well-being.
It comforts sadness.
Wine can bewitch and bewilder, transfix and inspire.
By evoking these simple social and emotional responses, wine can be said to be a spiritual component 3.1.5 Wine as a global commodity Wine runs the gamut from mass production to artisanal craftsmanship, and so offers insight at every level to successes and failures in human organization, determination and vision.
The wine business, from agriculture to winemaking to sales and education, is rich with powerful personalities.
Wine offers culture and connoisseurship, while touching on art and philosophy.
3.2 Wine and health Wine that maketh glad the heart of man.
(Psalms, 104:15).
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake and thine often infirmities (1Timothy, 5:23) The list of wine’s benefits is long—and getting more surprising all the time.
Already well- known as heart healthy, wine in moderation might help one lose weight, reduce forgetfulness, boost your immunity, and help prevent bone loss.
Wine may do all of the following: 3.2.1.
Reduce forgetfulness Wine could preserve your memory.
When researchers gave memory quizzes to women in their 70s, those who drank one drink or more every day scored much better than those who drank less or not at all.
Wine helps prevent clots and reduce blood vessel inflammation, both of which have been linked to cognitive decline and heart disease.
46 Alcohol also seems to raise Higher Density Lipoprotein (HDL), the so-called good cholesterol, which helps unclog your arteries.
3.2.2.
Keeps weight down Studies have shown that people who drink wine daily have lower body mass than those who indulge occasionally; moderate wine drinkers have narrower waists and less abdominal fat than people who drink liquor.
Alcohol may encourage one’s body to burn extra calories for as long as 90 minutes after one downs a glass.
Beer seems to have a similar effect.
3.2.3.
Boost body’s defences In a British study, those who drank roughly a glass of wine a day reduced by 11% their risk of infection by Helicobacter pylori bacteria, a major cause of gastritis, ulcers, and stomach cancers.
As little as half a glass may also guard against food poisoning caused by germs like salmonella when people are exposed to contaminated food, according to a Spanish study.
3.2.4.
Guard against ovarian woes When Australian researchers recently compared women with ovarian cancer to cancer- free women, they found that roughly one glass of wine a day seemed to reduce the risk of the disease by as much as 50 percent.
Earlier research at the University of Hawaii produced similar findings.
Experts suspect this may be due to antioxidants or phytoestrogens, which have high anticancer properties and are prevalent in wine.
And in a recent University of Michigan study, a red wine compound helped kill ovarian cancer cells in a test tube.
Focus on wine's positive benefits regarding cancer has centered on the antioxidant properties of resveratrol, found in grapes, with some laboratory results showing a protective quality that inhibit cancerous changes in cells.
The research is ongoing with no conclusive results though some studies suggest that moderate wine consumption may lower the risk for lung, ovarian and prostate cancer.
3.2.5.
Build better bones On the average, women who drink moderately seem to have higher bone mass than abstainers.
Alcohol appears to boost estrogen levels; the hormone seems to slow the body’s destruction of old bone more than it slows the production of new bone.
Heavy alcohol consumption has been shown to have a damaging effect on the cellular processes that create bone tissue.
Long term alcoholic consumption at high levels increases the frequency of fractures.
Studies from St. Thomas' Hospital in London and the Epidimiologie de l'Ostioporose (EPIDOS) medical group in France suggest that moderate wine consumption may offer positive benefits to women, particularly elderly women, in retaining bone density and reducing the risk of developing osteoporosis 47  3.2.6.
Prevent blood-sugar problem Premenopausal women who drink one or two glasses of wine a day are 40 percent less likely than women who don’t drink to develop type 2 diabetes, according to a 10-year study by Harvard Medical School.
While the reasons aren’t clear, wine seems to reduce insulin resistance in diabetic patients.
Research has shown that moderate levels of alcohol consumed with meals, does not have a substantial impact on blood sugar levels.
A 2005 study presented to the American Diabetes Association suggests that moderate consumption may lower the risk of developing Type 2 diabetes.
3.2.7 Improve digestion and absorption Wine can improve digestion.
It can also increase the body's absorption of calcium, magnesium, phosphorus and zinc.
All these important minerals help prevent osteoporosis.
Red wine also contains iron, a necessary mineral for oxygen transport in the body.
3.3 Health components in wine The health benefits of drinking wine come from the chemical makeup of the wine, not necessarily the alcohol.
Alcohol is the by-product of fermentation, which on its own has tremendous health benefits (if taken in moderation of course).
3.3.1 Alcohol The alcohol itself may help to raise the good cholesterol and inhibit the formation of blood clots.
This is called vasodilation, meaning the opening of the blood vessels and increasing blood flow.
Alcohol cannot be dismissed as one of the health benefits of drinking wine.
3.3.2 The real benefits The real benefits in red wine are the ingredients derived from the grapes themselves.
The best part of the grape is the skin.
Since the skins are used in the process of fermentation, their benefits get absorbed into the red wine.
The skin contains over 400 health-promoting substances like tannins, phenols, flavonoids, bioflovanoids, vitamins, minerals, antioxidants and polyphenols like quercetin, resveratrol, OPC's and catechins.
They all work together to raise the level of HDL cholesterol "good", and lower the LDL cholesterol "bad".
48 Most of these act like antioxidants in the blood.
Antioxidants reduce free radicals in the body which cause damage, help create conditions for disease and cause aging.
Specifically they donate electrons to "unstable" molecules which are literally bouncing around in your blood putting small pits in your blood vessels and damaging healthy cells.
This action alone gives your body opportunity to heal the damage.
It is this 'damage' that we call the "signs of aging".
i. Resveratrol Resveratrol is the king of the red wine health benefits.
Also found in the skins of grapes, resveratrol is the antibody the grapes produce when they are fighting disease, fungi or injury.
They repair cells, reduce inflation, and act as antioxidants in reversing the aging process.
Where free radicals damage healthy cells, which is what causes aged skin, resveratrol not only combats the free radicals but repairs the damaged cells.
The best way to absorb Resveratrol in humans appears to be buccal delivery that is without swallowing, but by direct absorption through the inside of the mouth.
The way wine drinkers swish the wine in their mouth before swallowing is what make the combination so effective.
ii Flavonoids and bioflavonoids These two are really the same.
Their purpose in plants is to create the blue and yellow pigments in flowers and leaves - but they do so much more.
Research has shown them to have both anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and anti-allergy abilities.
iii Tannins Tannins are what give wine its bitter, dry taste and are found in the skin and seeds of the grapes.
They are proanthocyanidins (often referred to as OPC's).
Tannins work like antioxidants and prevent hardening of the arteries, and inhibit the growth of plaque on the teeth.
Winemakers often go to great lengths to reduce the number of tannins in wine.
Press Wine, on the other hand, is extremely high in tannins because the winemakers do not deseed the grapes, but instead press and break the seeds during winemaking.
iv Quercetin This is another pigment in red grapes.
Also found in apples, green onions and green tea, quercetin works as an anti-inflammatory, an antihistamine and an antioxidant.
Trials are currently under way to see how quercetin fights off cancer cells.
All together, these ingredients makeup the health benefits of drinking wine.
The only thing healthier than adding red wine to your diet is quitting smoking.
While white wine does have its benefits, it cannot hold a candle to the power grape skins add to the health benefits of drinking wine.
4.0 CONCLUSION 49 The health effects of wine (and alcohol in general) are the subject of considerable ongoing study.
There is evidence that a regular, moderate intake of alcohol can have beneficial health effects.
These findings do not represent a reason to take up drinking if you currently abstain, but they do represent a reason to cut back if you imbibe heavily.
It's safe to say that, whilst very interesting, none of the above evidence should induce abstainers to take up drinking, just for the health benefits.
Nearly all research into the positive medical benefits of wine consumptions make a distinction between moderate consumption, heavy and binge drinking.
What constitutes a moderate, healthy level of consumption will vary by individual according to age, gender, genetics, weight and body stature as well as the situation-i.e.
is food being consumed as well, are any other drugs currently in the individual's system, etc.
We are now aware of the wonderful health benefits of drinking wine, specifically red wine.
Taken in moderation, as all the studies report, the red wine benefits can dramatically improve health.
5.0 SUMMARY Wine has been shown as a situation definer and a global commodity, which also performs religious, social and spiritual functions.
Wine also contains health components that deliver some health benefits when taken in moderation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the role of wine in the society Explain the health benefits of wine.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING ‘Social and cultural aspects of drinking’, A report to the European Commission, March 1998 Akyeampong, E.K.
(1996).
Drink, Power and Cultural Change: A social history of alcohol in Ghana, c.1800 to recent times.
Oxford: James Currey.
Bacon, S.D.
(1962).
Alcohol in complex society.
In D.J.
Pittman and C.R.
Snyder (eds.
), Society, Culture and Drinking Patterns.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Barrows, S., Room, R. and Verhey, J.
(eds.)
(1987).
The Social History of Alcohol: Drinking and culture in modern society.
Berkeley, CA.
: Medical Research Institute of San Francisco, Alcohol Research Group.
50  UNIT 3 TASTING OF WINE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 What is wine tasting?
3.2 Types of wine tasting 3.3 Tasting stages 3.4 Steps in tasting wine 3.5 Components of aroma 3.6 Characteristics assessed during tasting 3.7 Advantages of wine tasting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A sommelier is expected to have a good knowledge of the characteristics of wines offered.
It is through the aromas of wine that wine is actually tasted.
The human tongue is limited to the primary tastes perceived by taste receptors on the tongue-acidity, bitterness, saltiness, sweetness and umami (savoriness).
The wide arrays of fruit, earthy, floral, herbal, mineral and woodsy flavor perceived in wine are derived from aroma notes interpreted by the olfactory bulb.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, the students should know: The meaning and types of wine tasting The tasting stages and steps Characteristics assessed and advantages of wine tasting.
3.1 What is wine tasting?
Wine tasting is the sensory examination and evaluation of wine.
The practice of wine tasting is as ancient as its production.
Today, a more formalized approach to wine tasting is in use and formal terminologies for describing the range of perceived flavors, aromas and general characteristics of a wine have been established.
Modern professional wine tasters use the constantly evolving terminologies.
3.2 Types of wine tasting There are various types of wine tasting which include: 51 Blind tasting This is a tasting method where the wine is served without the tasters seeing anything about the wine e.g.
the bottle or the label.
Sometimes, the wine could be served from a black wine glass to mask the colour of the wine.
This is to ensure impartial judgment of the wine as it has been established that a taster's judgment can be prejudiced by knowing details of a wine, such as geographic origin, price, reputation, colour, or other considerations.
Vertical tasting In a vertical tasting, different vintages of the same wine type from the same winery are tasted.
This emphasizes differences between various vintages.
Horizontal tasting In a horizontal tasting, the wines are all from the same vintage but are from different wineries.
Keeping wine variety or type and wine region the same helps emphasize differences in winery styles.
Vertical and horizontal wine tastings are wine tasting methods that highlight differences between similar wines.
When it comes to wine tasting, there are factors that have strong effects.
 Perception  Expectancy People expect more expensive wine to have more desirable characteristics than less expensive wine.
When given wine that they are falsely told is expensive, they virtually always report it as tasting better than the very same wine when they are told that it is inexpensive.
Similarly, people have expectations about wines because of their geographic origin, producer, vintage, colour, and many other factors.
For example, when Brochet served a white wine he received all the usual descriptions: "fresh, dry, honeyed, lively."
Later he served the same wine dyed red and received the usual red terms: "intense, spicy, supple, and deep."
Tasting flights Tasting flight is a term used by wine tasters to describe a selection of wines, usually between three and eight glasses, but sometimes as many as fifty, presented for the purpose of sampling and comparison.
3.3 Tasting stages There are four recognized wine tasting stages: 52  appearance  "in glass" the aroma of the wine  "in mouth" sensations  "finish" (aftertaste) The results of the four recognized stages to wine tasting are combined in order to establish the following properties of a wine:  complexity and character  potential (suitability for aging or drinking)  possible faults A wine's overall quality assessment, based on this examination, follows further careful description and comparison with recognized standards, both with respect to other wines in its price range and according to known factors pertaining to the region or vintage such as: if it is typical of the region if it diverges in style if it uses certain wine-making techniques, such as barrel fermentation or malolactic fermentation, or any other remarkable or unusual characteristics.
Whereas wines are regularly tasted in isolation, a wine's quality assessment is more objective when performed alongside several other wines, in what are known as tasting "flights".
Wines may be deliberately selected for their vintage ("horizontal" tasting) or proceed from a single winery ("vertical" tasting), to better compare vineyard and vintages, respectively.
Alternatively, in order to promote an unbiased analysis, bottles and even glasses may be disguised in a "blind" tasting, to rule out any prejudicial awareness of either vintage or winery.
3.4 Steps in wine tasting In wine tasting, wine is often smelled before being drunk in order to identify some components of the wine that may be present.
Different terms are used to describe what is being smelled.
The most basic term is aroma which generally refers to a "pleasant" smell as opposed to odour which refers to an unpleasant smell or possible wine fault.
The term aroma maybe further distinguished from bouquet which generally refers to the smells that arise from the chemical reactions of fermentation and aging of the wine.
Wine tasting entails the following steps: 1.
Look at the wine Tilting the glass a bit can make it easier to see the way the colour changes from the center to the edges.
Holding the glass in front of a white background, such as a napkin, tablecloth, or sheet of paper, is another good way to make out the wine's true colour.
Look for the colour of the wine and the clarity.
53 What colour is it?
Look beyond red, white or blush.
If it's a red wine is the colour maroon, purple, ruby, garnet, red, brick or even brownish?
If it's a white wine is it clear, pale yellow, straw-like, light green, golden, amber or brown in appearance?
Intensity, depth or saturation of colour are not necessarily linear with quality.
White wines become darker as they age while time causes red wines to lose their colour turning more brownish, often with a small amount of harmless, dark red sediment in the bottom of the bottle or glass.
This is also a good time to catch a preliminary sniff of the wine so you can compare its fragrance after swirling.
This will also allow you to check for any off odors that might indicate spoiled (corked) wine.
2.
Swirl the wine in your glass.
This is to increase the surface area of the wine by spreading it over the inside of the glass allowing them to escape from solution and reach your nose.
It also allows some oxygen into the wine, which will help its aromas open up.
3.
Note the wine's viscosity This shows how slowly the wine runs back down the side of the glass while one is swirling.
More viscous wines are said to have "legs," and are likely to be more alcoholic.
Outside of looking pretty, this has no relation to a wine's quality but may indicate a more full bodied wine.
4.
Sniff the wine Initially you should hold the glass a few inches from your nose.
Then let your nose go into the glass.
What do you smell?
5.
Take a sip of wine, but do not swallow The difference between drinking and tasting is expectorating!
Roll the wine around in your mouth exposing it to all of your taste buds.
You will only be able to detect sweet, sour, salty, bitter and umami (think: meaty or savory).
Pay attention to the texture and other tactile sensations such as an apparent sense of weight or body.
6.
Aspirate through the wine With your lips pursed as if you were to whistle, draw some air into your mouth and exhale through your nose.
This liberates the aromas for the wine and allows them to reach your nose where they can be detected.
The nose is the only place where you can detect a wine's aromas.
However, the enzymes and other compounds in your mouth and saliva alter some of a wine's aromatic compounds.
By aspirating through the wine, you are looking for any new aromas liberated by the wine's interaction with the environment of your mouth.
54 7.
Take another sip of the wine This time, especially if you are drinking a red wine, introduce air with it.
In other words, slurp the wine without making a loud slurping noise, of course.
Note the subtle differences in flavor and texture.
8.
Note the aftertaste when you spit How long does the finish last?
Do you like the taste?
9.
Write down what you experienced You can use whatever terminology you feel comfortable with.
The most important thing to write down is your impression of the wine and how much you liked it.
Many wineries provide booklets and pens so that you can take your own tasting notes.
This will force you to pay attention to the subtleties of the wine.
Also, you will have a record of what the wine tastes like so that you can pair it with meals or with your mood.
Wines have four basic components: Taste Tannins Alcohol Acidity Some wines also have sweetness, but the latter is only appropriate in dessert wines.
A good wine will have a good balance of all four characteristics.
Aging will soften tannins.
Acidity will soften throughout the life of a wine as it undergoes chemical changes which include the breakdown of acids.
Fruit will rise and then fall throughout the life of a wine.
Alcohol will stay the same.
All of these factors contribute to knowing when to drink/decant a wine.
Malolactic fermentation (the natural or artificial introduction of a specific bacteria) will cause white wines to taste creamy or buttery Aging in oak will cause wines to take on a vanilla or nutty flavor.
Other common taste descriptors are minerality, earthiness and asparagus.
10.
Match the glassware to the wine.
Match the glassware to the wine.
Stemware/drinkware comes in a variety of shapes and sizes.
The more experienced wine drinkers and connoisseurs often enjoy wines out of stemware or bulbs that are tailor-made for a specific varietal.
When starting out, there is a basic rule of thumb; larger glasses for reds, and smaller glasses for whites.
55 3.5 Components of aroma Within wine there are volatile and non-volatile compounds that contribute to the makeup of a wine's aroma.
During the fermentation and for the first few months of a wine's existence, chemical reactions among these compounds occur frequently and a wine's aroma will change more rapidly during this period than at any other point.
As a wine ages and matures, changes and developments in aroma will continue to take place but at a slower and more gradual pace.
Volatile aroma compounds are present in the skin and juice of a grape berry and will vary in composition according to the individual grape variety.
The act of tasting wine is essentially the act of smelling these vaporized aroma compounds.
Olfactory receptors cells, each sensitive to a different aroma, pick up these compounds and transfer the information to the brain by way of the olfactory bulb.
Study of the compounds responsible for aroma and flavour, as well as their correlation with a wine's quality, is ongoing.
As understanding of these compounds grows, there is concern that wines in the future could be "manipulated" through the use of chemical additives to add complexity and additional aromas to wine (such as creating a manufactured perfume).
In 2004, a winery in South Africa was found to have added illegal flavoring to their Sauvignon blanc to enhance the aroma.
Some of the identified aroma compounds include the following:  Methoxypyrazine- This is a grassy, herbaceous aroma compound associated with Cabernet Sauvignon and Sauvignon blanc.
 Monoterpenes-responsible for the floral aromatics of varieties like Gewürztraminer, Muscat and Riesling.
Includes geraniol, linalool and nerol.
 Norisoprenoids-Carotenoid derived aromatic compound that includes megastigmatrienone which produces some of the spice notes associated with Chardonnay and zingerone responsible for the different spice notes associated with Syrah.
 Thiols-sulfur contain compounds that can produce an aroma of garlic and onion that is considered a wine fault (mercaptans).
They have also been found to contribute to some of the varietal aromas associated with Cabernet Sauvignon, Gewürztraminer, Merlot, Muscat, Petit Manseng, Pinot blanc, Pinot gris, Riesling, Scheurebe, Semillon and Sylvaner.
Esters Some of the aromas perceived in wine are from esters created by the reaction of acids and alcohol in the wine.
Esters can develop during fermentation, with the influence of yeast, or later during aging by chemical reactions.
56 3.6 Characteristics assessed during tasting a. Varietal character This describes how much a wine presents its inherent grape aromas.
b.
Integration This is a state in which none of the components of the wine (acid, tannin, alcohol, etc.)
is out of balance with the other components.
When a wine is well balanced, the wine is said to have achieved a harmonious fusion.
c. Expressiveness Expressiveness is the quality the "wine possesses when its aromas and flavors are well- defined and clearly projected.
The complexity of the wine is affected by many factors, one of which may be the multiplicity of its flavors.
The connectedness of the wine, a rather abstract and difficult to ascertain quality, describes the bond between the wine and its land of origin (terroir).
3.7 Advantages of wine tasting The advantages of tasting wine include:  to develop learning from experience.
 to help in the assessment of the quality of a wine in terms of value when making purchasing decisions.
 To monitor the progress of a wine being stored to determine the optimum selling time as part of protecting investment.
 Help in describing the wine when explaining its qualities or deficiencies to a customer.
 Provide a personal record of wines tested to reinforce learning and experience.
4.0 CONCLUSION Wine tasting is a skill that when employed, brings out all there is to know with regard to the taste of the wine.
The taste of wine is all wrapped around the volatile and non- volatile compounds which contribute to the makeup of wines’ aroma.
5.0 SUMMARY There are various types of wine tasting- blind, vertical and horizontal.
Recognized wine tasting stages are- appearance, "in glass", "in mouth" and "finish".
There are several steps to go through in the tasting of wine.
Wines have four basic components: taste, tannins, alcohol and acidity.
Characteristics assessed during tasting are- Varietal character, Integration and Expressiveness Wine tasting has several advantages.
57 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define the term ‘wine tasting’.
Outline the types of wine tasting.
Discuss the various steps in wine tasting.
Itemize the advantages of wine tasting.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ronald S. Jackson, Wine Tasting: A Professional Handbook.
Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold 58 UNIT 4 FACTORS AFFECTING THE TASTE OF WINE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Factors which influence the taste of wine 3.1.1 The Vine 3.1.2 Vineyards and Vinification 3.1.3 Technology 3.1.4 Oak 3.1.5 Time 3.2 External Influences on the Taste of Wine 3.2.1 Temperature 3.2.2 Noise interference 3.2.3 Colours 3.2.4 Foods 3.2.5 Shape and structure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Taste, also called smatch or gestation, is one of the traditional five senses.
It refers to the ability to detect the flavor of substances such as food, certain minerals, poisons, etc.
In the tasting of wine, the tasters employ their taste organs to qualify the wine.
Various factors have been recognised as having effect on the final taste of wine.
These factors will be looked at in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, the students will be able to understand: The various factors that influence the taste of wine.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Factors affecting the taste of wine 3.1.1 The Vine The single most influential factor affecting the taste of wine is the grape variety or varieties from which it is made.
It is impossible to put a definitive figure on the number of varieties of wine grape in the world – Italy alone boasts more than 1,000.
Each variety has its own distinct character and part of the fun of getting to know them is choosing a word which precisely describes the smell and taste of a particular grape.
59 3.1.2 Vineyards and Vinification Climate, altitude and soil composition all have a part to play in determining flavour.
A few extra degrees of warmth can introduce more exotic, tropical flavours.
Altitude promotes higher acidity, which also affects taste.
There can be significant flavour differences between the same variety grown in different parts of the same country, especially if a number of different latitudes is involved.
Vines cooled by sea breezes ripen more slowly and evenly than those on hot, insulated, inland vineyards.
All these factors have a profound effect on flavour.
Generally, wines produced in hot climates have a higher alcohol content and lower acidity content than wines produced in cooler climates.
The concept of terroir is important to grasp, as it is central to an ongoing debate as to how much of the distinctive character of a wine stems from the specific environment in which it grows.
Its literal meaning is ‘soil’ and in broad terms, the word refers to a regional, or even a particular vineyard character which ‘sings’ in the wine, and represents the combined effects of soil and other factors such as climate and exposure.
More specifically, some tasters swear they can taste, for example, slate in a glass of Mosel, or flint in Chablis.
There is no conclusive scientific evidence as yet to support the notion that a patch of earth could make its presence so acutely felt in the glass, but there is general agreement that certain vineyard sites do have tangible characteristics which it is possible to spot despite vintage variations.
3.1.3 Technology This has made it possible to produce wine in a particular style, irrespective of its origins.
Some branded wines, for which consistency is very important, rely on the increasing ability of technology, including special yeasts and fermentation techniques, to create uniformity of flavour despite the vagaries of vintage or even variety.
In many evolving wine regions, expertise from abroad improves and raises the profile of local wines, but in others serves purely to create international appeal.
3.1.4 Oak The vanilla aromas, and toasty flavours which are present in wine which has been fermented and/or aged in a barrel are instantly recognisable.
The mighty oak has always been associated with wine production.
The inside of a barrel is finished by firing, on a range of lightly toasted to charred.
This will have its own effects on the wine which will be stored in them.
The age of the barrel, the intensity which decreases with time, and its size, all affect wine in their own way.
Very large barrels influence texture more than taste so that wines fermented or aged in them may display more subtle effects of oak, such as a creaminess of taste, or roundness of texture.
The use of wood chips to flavour everyday wines provides a quick and inexpensive fix, at around 5% of the cost of a new barrel.
The winemaker’s decision is not, however, based 60 only on price.
Some grape varieties are better suited to oak than others, and vintage characteristics also have a part to play, as does wine style.
The differences between a gently oxidised tawny port, aged entirely in cask, and a deeper-coloured, fruity vintage Port, aged in bottle, are striking.
3.1.5 Time As wine gets older, it changes dramatically in taste.
Harsh tannins polymerise and soften, brash acidity and raw alcohol interact to form compounds called esters, and primary fruit flavours evolve into complex bouquets.
When mature fruit and alcohol are in balance, the wine can be said to have reached a platform of drinkability, which may last for a number of years.
At the end of this period, the wine is at the end of its useful life, and should be drunk up before it begins to taste dried out, or spirity.
3.1.6 Soil Wines have the attributes of the soil that their grapes come from.
Clayey soils stick tothe hand and are astringently ‘sticky’ in the mouth, limestone soils make wines with ‘curves’ (‘galbe’) and gravelly soiled wines are free-flowing just like letting a fistful of gravel fall from your hand.
3.1.6 Other factors Other factors that affect the taste of wine include: Yeast and fermentation Vintage Method of shipping and transportation Storage temperature Decanting 3.2 External Influences on the Taste of Wine 3.2.1 Temperature The temperature at which wine is served affects its taste.
At warmer temperatures, wines were much less astringent.
Colder temperatures accentuate the hardness of tannins.
Stipulating the right temperature to serve a wine by type does not go far enough.
It is essential to decide on the right temperature for each wine.
3.2.2 Noise interference The taste of wine is affected by noise.
Noisy environment makes wine seem less aromatically intense.
3.2.3 Colours Colour of one’s immediate surroundings is very important to take into account when tasting wine.
Neutral colours cause less ‘interference’ when tasting wines.
61 3.2.4 Foods Some foods also affect the taste of wine.
In a bid to match texture, volume and flavour in food and wine pairing, some foods make some wines appear much lower in acidity and also rounder and riper.
3.2.5 Shape and structure Wines do have their own shape and structure and we need to take this into consideration when matching foods with wines.
4.0 CONCLUSION It has been shown that there are both internal and external influences on the final taste of wine.
This entails that these factors should be taken into consideration in the production and tasting of wines in order to control or eliminate their influences.
5.0 SUMMARY Internal influences on the taste of wine are: the grape variety used, the vineyard and vinification, technology, oak, time, etc.
External influences on the taste of wine are: temperature, noise, colour, food and shape and structure of the wine.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the internal and external influences on the taste of wine.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold 62 UNIT 5 DECANTING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Meaning of decanting 3.2 Why do we decant 3.3 How to decant wine 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Who actually owns a decanter nowadays?
People who live in stately homes, or perhaps the proprietors of antique and curiosity shops?
Anyone who wants the best from their wine should own one.
Decanting wines is not just for show, and even in this modern age of industrial, fined and filtered wines, some will still benefit from spending some time in a decanter.
Decanting is known to improve the smell and taste of wine.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to understand: The importance of decanting wines How wine is decanted 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of decanting Decanting means the transfer of contents of a wine bottle into another receptacle (the decanter) before serving.
3.2 Why do we decant In times gone by, before so many wines were routinely fined and filtered to a crystal clear state, it was quite common for wines poured from both barrel and bottle to contain a considerable degree of solid matter.
In order to avoid bringing an unsightly looking wine to the table, it was quite the norm to decant the wine into a suitably resplendent receptacle.
The need for such a receptacle led to the development of the many and varied elegant decanters which are available today.
The presentation of wine in a beautiful crystal decanter adds to the ambience of a beautifully set table and prepared dinner.
63 Most wines on the shelves today, however, have no real need for decanting.
The winemaking process ensures the wine is thoroughly clarified before it is bottled.
A process of fining which involves passing egg whites, bentonite clay or other unsavoury substances through the fine to collect solid matter, and mechanical filtration were applied.
Although these wines are often best served from the bottle, many others still benefit from decanting.
Wines which have aged in bottle, typically red wines rather than white, will generally throw a sediment by perhaps ten years of age or more.
Not only is this sediment displeasing to the eye, it can also be quite unpleasant in the mouth.
More than any other wines, these are the ones that deserve decanting.
Young wines also benefit from decanting.
The aim is not to take the wine off its sediment, as there is rarely any such sediment in young wines, but rather to aerate the wine.
The action of decanting itself, and the large surface area in contact with the air in the decanter, alters the wine.
Decanting softens its youthful bite and encourages the development of the more complex aromas that normally develop with years in bottle.
For this reason even inexpensive wines plucked from the shelves of the local supermarket can benefit from decanting, if a first taste reveals a tannic, grippy, youthful structure.
3.3 How to decant wine Assuming that we are decanting a wine in order to remove it from its sediment, there is a simple procedure to follow.
If decanting a wine simply to aerate it and perhaps liven it up a little, this procedure doesn't really matter.
Simply pour the wine into any suitable receptacle with minimal fuss.
First, take the wine from where it has been stored, hopefully lying on its side in a suitably cool, dark environment.
If you suspect a considerable amount of sediment, as may occur with older wines, it's advisable to stand the bottle upright for a day or so prior to decanting, thus allowing the sediment to fall to the bottom of the bottle.
When the time comes to decant the wine, assemble the few things which you will need.
These are corkscrew and bottle together with a suitable receptacle, together with a suitable source of light.
A small candle or a small torch or anything similar will do.
Firstly, remove the entire capsule from around the neck of the bottle, using a knife or other implement.
It's important to remove the whole capsule, and not just the top, as you need to have a clear view into the neck of the bottle whilst decanting.
This is so that you can observe the wine coming through the neck for sediment.
To enhance your view of the wine in the neck, position the light source shining through the neck from behind.
Once done, you are ready to pour.
64 Hold the receptacle in one hand and the bottle in the other, and with a smooth and steady action, pour the wine into the decanter.
Don't rush when decanting, rather use a gentle, steady movement, to avoid disturbing the sediment in the wine.
Keep the neck of the bottle over the light source, so that you can observe for an arrowhead of sediment moving into the neck of the bottle.
This is your cue to stop pouring.
If you've done it all correctly, the end result should be a full carafe or decanter of clear wine, with just half a glass or so of sediment-laden wine remaining.
This remaining portion makes a great addition to the gravy, should you be decanting the wine as an accompaniment to a roast dinner.
Don't fret too much if you haven't achieved a crystal clear pour, as a small amount of very fine sediment is not a great concern - as long as the large, unpalatable pieces have been removed.
4.0 CONCLUSION Wine decanting is very beneficial to the sommelier 5.0 SUMMARY Old wines that have been cellared properly will contain sediment due to the aging process.
By properly decanting the wine, the sediment will remain in the bottle.
Young full-bodied red wines can benefit from decanting.
When the wine comes in contact with oxygen, the aromas present in the wine are released.
The decanter in this case should be a wide bottomed decanter.
Wide body decanters provide more surface area for oxygen to allow aromas from the wine to be released.
The presentation of wine in a beautiful crystal decanter adds to the ambience of a beautifully set table and prepared dinner.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define the term ’decanting’.
State the reasons for decanting wines.
Explain the process of wine ddecanting 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING ‘Decanter’ Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Joseph Nase ‘Decanting Makes a Difference’ The Sommelier Decanting Wine: Why and How to Decant Wine, Wine Enjoyment Guide 2003-2011 WineCountryGetaways.com Winedoctor 2000 - 2012 ‘Decanting Wine’ 65 Module 3 Unit 1 Wine and food matching Unit 2 Sensory evaluation of wine Unit 3 Storage of wines Unit 4 Spirits Unit 5 Liqueurs UNIT 1 WINE AND FOOD MATCHING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Characteristics of wine and food considerations.
3.2 Tradition for matching wine and food 3.3 Other rules in wine and food pairing 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References/further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The combination of food and wine is one of life’s great pleasures.
It is as old as making of wine.
The flavor of wine consumed on its own will taste different than when it is consumed with food.
Wine and food pairings is an individual choice.
Every person's sense of taste is different.
In general, each person should decide for him or herself what combinations of wine and food taste good.
Pairing wine with food is more complicated than "red with beef and white with fish."
Ultimately, a wine should complement the food and cleanse the palate.
Food and its accompanying wine should harmonize well together, with each enhancing the others performance.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, the students should be able to understand: The guidelines of pairing wine with food.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Characteristics of wine and food considerations This looks at the characteristics of wine and the types of foods they are well suited for.
The table below shows the wine characteristics and their food considerations.
66 Characteristics Food considerations Acidity This can be used to match or contrast acidity in foods.
For example crisp wine can go well with lemon or tomato.
Age/maturity The more a wine matures, the more delicate it becomes with complex and intricate flavours.
This goes better with grills and roasts.
Stronger tasting foods could overpower the wine Oak The more oaked wines go better with more robust and flavoursome foods.
It is expected that the wine should taste sweeter than the food so that it does not taste flat or thin with the food.
Sweet foods Sweetness need to be contrasted to blend well with the sweeter wine.
E.g.
acid in foods can harmonize well with sweetness in wine.
Tannin Tannic wines match well with red meats and semi-hard cheese; but not with egg dishes and salty foods.
Weight Big rich wines go well with robust/flavoursome meat dishes; but not light –flavoured foods which they easily overpower.
3.2 Tradition for matching wine and food Over the years, traditions have developed a how-to- approach to the pairing of wines and foods.
Generally, the following traditions apply:  White wine is best served with white meat, shellfish and fish.
 Red wine is best served with red meat.
 The heavier the food, the more robust the wine should be.
 Champagne can be served throughout the meal.
 Port and red wine go well with cheese.
 Dessert wines best complement desserts and fresh fruits that are not highly acidic.
 When a dish is cooked with wine, it is best served with that wine.
 Regional food is best complemented by wines from the region.
 Wines should never accompany salads with vinegar dressings, chocolate dishes or curries, as the taste will clash or be overpowering.
 Sweet wines should be serve with foods that are not too sweet.
3.3 Other rules in wine and food pairing The three most important rules when it comes to wine-and-food pairing are: 1.
Drink and Eat What You Like Choose a wine that you would want to drink by itself, rather than hoping a food match will improve a wine made in a style you don’t like.
That way, even if the pairing isn’t perfect, you will still enjoy what you’re drinking; at worst, you might need a sip of water 67 or bite of bread between the dish and the glass.
The same holds true for the food: After all, if you detest liver, there is no wine pairing with it on earth that will work for you.
2.
Look for Balance Consider the weight—or body, or richness—of both the food and the wine.
The wine and the dish should be equal partners, with neither overwhelming the other.
If you balance the two by weight, you raise the odds dramatically that the pairing will succeed.
This is the secret behind many classic wine-and-food matches.
3.
Match the Wine to the Most Prominent Element in the Dish This is critical to fine-tuning wine pairings.
Identify the dominant character; more often it is the sauce, seasonings or cooking method, rather than the main ingredient.
Consider two different chicken dishes: Chicken Marsala, with its browned surface and a sauce of dark wine and mushrooms, versus a chicken breast poached in a creamy lemon sauce.
The caramelized, earthy flavors of the former tilt it toward a soft, supple red, while the simplicity and citrus flavors of the latter call for a fresh white.
4.
Structure and Texture Matter Ideally, a wine’s components are in balance, but you can affect that balance, for better or worse, with the food pairing.
Elements in a dish can accentuate or diminish the acidity and sweetness of a wine, and the bitterness of its tannins.
High levels of acidic ingredients, such as lemon or vinegar, for example, benefit high- acid wines by making them feel softer and rounder in comparison.
On the other hand, tart food can turn balanced wines flabby.
Sweetness on the plate can make a dry wine taste sour, but pairs well with a bit of sweetness in the wine; as long as a wine balances its sugar with enough natural acidity (such as German Rieslings and demi-sec Champagnes), it can work very well with many dishes.
Tannins interact with fats, salt and spicy flavors.
Rich, fatty dishes such as steak diminish the perception of tannins, making a robust wine such as a Cabernet seem smoother, as do lightly salty foods like Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese.
However, very salty foods increase the perception of tannins and can make a red wine seem harsh and astringent; salt likewise accentuates the heat of a high-alcohol wine.
Very spicy flavors also tend to react badly with tannins and high alcohol, making the wines feel hotter; such dishes fare better with fruity or lightly sweet wines.
5.
Look for Flavor Links This is where pairing can be endless fun.
The aromatics of wine often remind us of foods such as fruits, herbs, spices and butter.
You can create a good match by including ingredients in a dish that echo—and therefore emphasize—the aromas and flavors in a 68 wine.
For a Cabernet, for example, currants in a dish may bring out the wine’s characteristic dark fruit flavors, while a pinch of sage could highlight hints of herbs.
On the other hand, similar flavors can have a “cancellation effect”—balancing each other out so that other aspects of a wine come out more strongly.
Serving earthy mushrooms with an earthy red might end up giving more prominence to the wine’s fruit character.
6.
Give Consideration to age Aged wines present a different set of textures and flavors.
As a wine matures, the power of youth eventually subsides; the tannins soften, and the wine may become more delicate and graceful.
Fresh fruit flavors may give way to earthy and savory notes, as the wine takes on more complex, secondary characteristics.
When choosing dishes for older wines, tone down the richness and big flavors and look for simpler fare that allows the nuances to shine through.
For example, rather than a grilled, spice-rubbed steak with an older Cabernet, try lamb braised for hours in stock.
4.0 CONCLUSION the art of wine and food pairing is one which can bring our experience of both the food and the wine to new levels.
There is something almost magical about the interaction of some food and wine, creating a synthesis that is above and beyond either alone.
However, while the right wine and food pairing can increase one’s pleasure, matching the wrong food and wine can cause the diminution of either or both.
Wine and food matching is the process of pairing food dishes with wine to enhance the dining experience.
Feel free to drink whichever wine you want with whatever food you want, but remember a perfect pairing is a highly enjoyable experience.
Always remember also that the goal in food and wine pairing is the enjoyment of the food and wine.
You and your guest will be the judge of this experience.
5.0 SUMMARY There are just a few important points to bear in mind when thinking about which wines work well with which foods.
 Keep your guests' tastes in mind - will they enjoy the wine you are considering?
 When pairing wine and food, there are just a few combinations to avoid.
 Otherwise most wines will work well with most foods.
 Watch out for problem foods.
Do you need to serve more than one wine to get around this?
 Don't be swayed by the opinions of others.
Riesling with beef is fine, if that is what you enjoy.
69 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the main considerations in wine and food pairing 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold John R. Walker, Introduction to Hospitality 4th edition.
70 UNIT 2 SENSORY EVALUATION OF WINE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Sensory analysis 3.2 Practical sensory evaluation procedures 3.3 Sensory tools to characterize wine 3.4 Practical sensory evaluation considerations 3.5 Faults in wine 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References/further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The attributes of a wine rely on the sensory acuity of the winemaker or the winemaker’s team.
Depending on the winery operations or the style of wine made, the winemaker can be viewed as the expert crafting an artisan wine or producing a commercial alcoholic beverage designed to appeal to many consumers.
The globalization of the wine market now enables more consumers to taste wines produced in foreign regions.
Winemakers producing popular wines have been challenged by evolving consumer needs, values, and motivations for drinking wines, consumption habits, and greater product competition.
Sensory evaluation provides tools to assist winery operations by characterizing wine sensory properties and by better understanding consumer preferences in order to design better wine styles.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, the students should be able to understand: The importance of sensory evaluation of wine.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sensory analysis Sensory analysis or sensory evaluation is a scientific discipline that applies principles of experimental design and statistical analysis to the use of human senses (sight, smell, taste, touch and hearing) for the purposes of evaluating consumer products.
The discipline requires panels of human assessors, on whom the products are tested, and recording the responses made by them.
By applying statistical techniques to the results it is possible to make inferences and insights about the products under test.
Most large consumer goods companies have departments dedicated to sensory analysis.
Sensory analysis can mainly be broken down into three sub-sections:  Effective testing (dealing with objective facts about products) 71  Affective testing (dealing with subjective facts such as preferences)  Perception (the biochemical and psychological aspects of sensation) Effective testing This type of testing is concerned with obtaining objective facts about products.
This could range from basic discrimination testing (e.g.
Do two or more products differ from each other?)
to descriptive profiling (e.g.
what are the characteristics of two or more products?).
The type of panel required for this type of testing would normally be a trained panel.
Affective testing Also known as consumer testing is a type of testing concerned with obtaining subjective data, or how well products are likely to be accepted.
Usually large (50 or more) panels of untrained personnel are recruited for this type of testing, although smaller focus groups can be utilised to gain insights into products.
The range of testing can vary from simple comparative testing (e.g.
which do you prefer, A or B?)
to structured questioning regarding the magnitude of acceptance of individual characteristics (e.g.
please rate the "fruity aroma": dislike|neither|like).
Perception Perception involves the biochemical and psychological theories relating to human (and animal) sensations.
By understanding the mechanisms involved it may be possible to explain why certain characteristics are preferred over others.
3.2 Practical sensory evaluation procedures There are many sensory methods available such as: difference testing, consumer preference and acceptance testing, descriptive analysis, assessment of wine quality using the Australian 3/7/10 system, and estimation of the presence and intensity of off- flavors in wine which arise post-bottling (e.g.
cork taint, random oxidation).
Performing some of these tests might not be feasible in a small- to medium-sized winery.
However, they are offered as a service by other companies if needed.
Difference testing Difference testing is a way to determine if a sensory difference actually exists between the wine samples.
The degree or nature of the difference might not be able to be quantified, yet difference testing is important to determine if different winemaking processing techniques or operations have had an impact on the sensory properties of a wine.
For example ‘Difference tests’ may be performed to determine whether different fermentation conditions or new vineyard treatments alter the character of a wine.
This is something particularly important to producers who aim for consistency.
72 Selection of the appropriate difference test depends on many factors, including the objectives of the test, the number of available tasters and the volume of wine needed for the test.
There are four suitable types of difference tests: triangle, duo-trio, paired comparison and same/different tests.
Once a difference has been established a paired preference test can also be performed.
Triangle tests These are useful as a multi-purpose difference test to be used throughout the winemaking process when comparing two wines for a difference.
The taster is presented with three wines; two are the same and one is different.
The taster is required to select the sample which is different.
Triangle tests are often preferred as they require fewer tasters to perform the assessment as there is a greater likelihood that a result will be genuine and not due to a chance effect.
Duo-trio tests These tests are often used instead of a triangle test to compare unknown differences between wines.
Tasters are presented with a reference wine, and then two test wines; one test wine which is the same as the reference and the other is the wine to be tested.
Tasters are asked to identify the sample that is the same as the reference wine.
This test might be preferred as the taster has a reference wine to compare to, which generally tasters find easier to evaluate.
It can also be better for assessing red wines by palate as there is less taster fatigue.
However, more tasters are required to perform the test.
Paired comparison tests These are tests used when there is a known difference in chemical composition of the wines, which requires a sensory assessment (i.e.
a wine is higher in residual sugar, but is it sweeter?)
Tasters are presented with two wines and asked to identify which sample is higher in the attribute.
This test can be useful when assessing alternative wine blends.
The test requires the same amount of wine and tasters as the duo-trio test.
Same/different test This is similar to the paired comparison test.
However it is used when the difference between two wines is unknown.
Tasters are asked to identify whether they think the two samples presented are the same or different.
These tests are easy to set up, but more tasters are required to perform them.
The tasters must perform the test at least twice, receiving a different randomised serving order each time.
Preference test Once a significant difference has been established between two wines a preference test can be performed.
This is useful in situations where winemakers are trying to assess 73 which blend or which yeast fermentation they prefer.
It is important to note that a preference test should be performed separately and after a difference test.
It may be tempting to combine the two but this should be avoided as results can be misleading.
In determining preference, it is also important for the tasters to consider (and possibly discuss) the desired wine style required before tasting the wine.
The preference decision should not be a personal preference, but a preference for the wine which best suits the desired wine style.
Preference testing can also be done to establish consumer preference Descriptive analysis Descriptive analysis determines the most prominent traits of the wine.
It involves trained panels (6-30 people) who evaluate products by rating the intensity of various characteristics on a scale.
Statistical analyses are applied to look for differences among various products for characteristics of interest.
3.3 Sensory tools to characterize wine Sensory evaluation is a scientific discipline used to evoke, measure, analyze, and interpret reactions to stimuli perceived through the senses.
Sensory tests are conducted according to protocols minimizing physiological and psychological biases that could affect the sensory response of the sensory panelists The sensory characteristics of wine are:  appearance  odour  taste Sight Sight is the first tool you will use in the wine tasting process.
The visual clues that one receives from looking at a glass of wine can be illuminating.
One can learn about the probable age, overall condition, as well as the probable “weight” of the wine from merely studying the wine closely.
The best possible way to examine wine is over a neutral, preferably white background, lit by natural lighting above.
Odour Odour is the second and most important tool in the tasting process.
The human sense of smell is capable of detecting more than 10,000 different odors, with a “trained” nose capable of recognizing more than 1,000 specific aromas.
The human sense of smell is also considered to be the strongest trigger for memories, especially “taste” memories.
After examining the wine, the next step is to smell the aroma of the wine, again looking for clues about the wine.
74 Taste Taste is the third and last tool in the tasting process.
The human sense of taste is based entirely on the taste buds present on the tongue, which are capable of perceiving four basic flavor components: Sweet, Sour, Bitter and Salt.
While the sensation associated with taste oftentimes seems grander than the four aspects listed, the taste buds are only designed and arrayed to recognize these four simple traits.
The human body provides two pathways to the olfactory epithelium, the organ that senses smell.
One is directly through the nostrils.
The other is through passageways in the roof of the mouth that lead indirectly into the nasal passage.
Use the taste buds to focus on the following aspects of a wine character:  The structure of a wine is defined by the overall weight/body of the wine combined with the presence of a substance called tannin.
 The balance of a wine is defined by the ratio of sweet to sour and whether a wine’s base flavor is harmonious with all of its components.
 The weight/body of a wine is evident by the fullness, or lack of fullness in the mouth.
Wines that seem “heavy” on the palate are illustrating a trait of full- bodied wines.
 The level of tannin in a wine is indicated by the presence of “bitterness” on the sides of the tongue.
Tannin will give the impression of dryness in the mouth.
Suck briefly on a used tea bag and you will know exactly what the sensation of tannin is like.
 For balance, look for the sensations of sweet and sour on the tongue.
Some grapes have a greater potential for acidity, but that acidity is usually kept in check by a winemaker’s ability to bring out either the natural fruit sweetness in the variety, or perhaps by leaving a small amount of residual sugar in the wine.
Wines that are too sharp or wines that leave a cloying feeling on the palate illustrate wines that may be out of balance.
3.4 Practical sensory evaluation considerations 1.
Tasters should taste the wine 'blind' The identification of the wines to be tasted should not be known to the taster(s).
Wines should be presented in a different, randomized order for each taster, with no clues as to their identity.
This ensures that the biases of all tasters are minimized, if not eliminated.
2.
Have at least two independent tasters Quality control assessments, such as wine additive taint screening or cork taint checking, require at least two tasters who have strengths in that type of assessment, (e.g.
cork taint recognition) to evaluate the wine.
If the two tasters do not agree, more rigorous testing might need to be applied.
75 Knowledge of winemakers' and other staff members' sensory strengths and weaknesses is important for this type of testing.
Variation among tasters in their ability to perceive different aroma and flavor compounds can be quite large.
For example, some wine tasters might have a high threshold for 'Brett' flavor compounds, but be very sensitive to cork taint or oxidation.
It is important to note that sensory testing doesn't have to be limited to winemakers.
Any company staff member including administration and cellar door staff can potentially be used for sensory analysis provided they are familiar with the type of test, and their individual strengths and weaknesses have been evaluated.
It is, therefore, strongly recommended that the cellar floor staff members be trained in sensory evaluation.
This has two benefits: it will increase the number of tasters available for sensory evaluation and will also make the cellar floor staff members more aware of taints and faults, which is an important skill for people working with your product every day.
3.
Repeat the tasting When performing a difference test a single tasting by each taster might not provide the most accurate information about a wine due to the chance of tasters guessing the correct answer.
Having tasters repeat the tasting exercise can decrease this chance of guessing.
Difference tests also require a certain number of answers or responses to determine statistical significance and for this, the greater the number of responses the better.
An easy way to increase the number of responses without increasing the number of tasters is to have each taster repeat the tasting exercise.
This is simple to do as tastings can be organized so that the same sample comparison is presented twice, with the wines presented in a different order each time.
4.
Minimize presentation effects Fatigue, adaptation, suppression/ masking of flavors and visual biases are all effects that can be decreased with correct presentation of the samples.
Ideally, samples should be pre-poured at a constant tasting volume (30mL) and temperature (approx.
20ºC), into covered glasses, preferably coded with three digit random numbers.
The samples should be presented in a random order, which differs for each taster.
Tasters should taste within a set period (e.g.
1 hour), and if this is not possible, the samples should be repoured (but not by the taster).
This is standard practice in scientific sensory assessments and also should be practiced in commercial tastings.
5.
Minimize talking during tasting To prevent tasters influencing the judgement of each other, tasters should not communicate until they have made, and written down, their judgement.
To ensure tasters do not communicate during tasting, tasters should taste in isolation, either at different times, i.e.
one person goes into the sensory lab as one goes out, or they could taste in different physical areas.
If this is not possible, tasters should at least face away from each other and avoid eye contact and talking during the tasting.
Use of tasting 76 sheets is also suggested as they make the taster write down a response, and enable tasters to taste and record their results in a standardised format each time.
Tasting sheets also enable easy collation of results, and can be filed so there is a record of all tastings.
6.
Reduce physiological effects Fatigue, degree of tiredness, hunger and other issues of emotional state will affect taster performance.
Generally it is recommended to carry out assessments in the morning, with no tasting held for at least half an hour after smoking, eating or drinking.
To reduce effects of fatigue and adaptation, ideally a maximum of six to seven wines should be presented at any one session, with tasters having a short rest if more samples are to be assessed.
7.
Establish if a difference exists before deciding on preference Before considering preference testing, establish if there is a significant sensory difference with a difference test.
Preferences are an important part of sensory testing and a winemaker will often need to state their preference to aid decision making.
Before doing this though, it is essential to ensure that a real difference actually exists between the wines.
If there is no sensory difference, or if personnel cannot reliably and repeatedly detect a difference between samples, their preferences are meaningless, and probably due to random choice.
Challenges of sensory evaluation  variation among tasters - every taster has strengths and weaknesses  assessments based on a personal standard or benchmark  bias due to preconceptions when not tasting the wine 'blind'  the 'cellar palate' phenomenon1  small, insignificant differences may be dwelled upon if the individual is particularly sensitive in that area  decisions being influenced by position in company hierarchy and seniority.
3.5 Faults in wine A wine fault or defect is an unpleasant characteristic of a wine often resulting from poor winemaking practices or storage conditions, and leading to wine spoilage.
Many of the compounds that cause wine faults are already naturally present in wine but at insufficient concentrations to adversely affect it.
In fact, depending on perception, these concentrations may impart positive characters to the wine.
However when the concentration of these compounds greatly exceeds the sensory threshold, they replace or obscure the flavors and aromas that the wine should be expressing.
Ultimately the quality of the wine is reduced, making it less appealing and sometimes undrinkable.
There are many causes for the perception in wine faults ranging from poor hygiene at the winery, excessive and/or insufficient exposure of the wine to oxygen, excessive or insufficient exposure of the wine to sulphur, overextended maceration of the wine 77 either pre or post fermentation, faulty fining, filtering and stabilization of the wine, the use of dirty oak barrels, over extended barrel aging and the use of poor quality corks.
Outside of the winery, other factors within the control of the retailer or end user of the wine can contribute to the perception of flaws in the wine.
These include poor storage of the wine that exposes it to excessive heat and temperature fluctuations as well as the use of dirty stemware during wine tasting that can introduce materials or aromas to what was previously a clean and fault-free wine.
4.0 CONCLUSION Sensory evaluation is used throughout the entire winemaking process to aid decision making and to evaluate the quality of a wine.
To ensure that production decisions are made based on real sensory differences between wines, it is vital to ensure that sensory assessment is performed in a suitable but scientific manner.
Sensory assessment should accommodate for the high degree of variability in tasters responses as one person's perception of a wine will be different from another's 5.0 SUMMARY Sensory evaluation of wine involves tasting and testing the different characteristics of the wine.
Various tests and parameters are employed to achieve the evaluation.
Statistical analysis is also employed.
There are considerations and challenges involved in wine sensory evaluation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is sensory evaluation?
Discuss the sub-sections of sensory evaluation Explain the sensory evaluation considerations Itemize the challenges of sensory evaluation 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Wine Business Monthly: A publication for Wineries and Growers, 2008 Isabelle Lesschaeve (2007) Sensory Evaluation of Wine and Commercial Realities: Review of Current Practices and Perspectives Am.
J. Enol.
Vitic.
58:2 pp 252-258 Jim Lamar ‘Sensory User's Manual’ ‘Wine tasting’ Wikipedia free encyclopedia.
78 UNIT 3 STORAGE OF WINES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Factors that affect wine in storage 3.2 Bottle orientation during storage 3.3 Length of storage 3.4 Places to store wine 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References/further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Storage is an important consideration for wine that is being kept for long-term aging.
While most wine is consumed within 24 hours of purchase, fine wines are often set aside for long-term storage.
Wine is one of the few commodities that can improve with age and increase in value, it is important that if it is stored, it is stored in inadequate conditions so as to avoid deterioration in quality.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, the students will be able to understand: The factors that affect wine in storage 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Factors that affect wine in storage The factors that affect wine in storage are: 3.1.1 Light Strong, direct sunlight or incandescent light can adversely react with phenolic compounds in wine and create potential wine faults.
Delicate, light-bodied white wines run the greatest risk from light exposure and are often packaged in darkly tinted wine bottles that offer some protection from the light.
Wines packaged in clear, light green and blue coloured bottles are the most vulnerable to light and may need extra precautions for storage.
In the cellar, wines are stored in corrugated boxes or wooden crates to protect the wines from direct light.
[ 79 3.1.2 Humidity Some degree of humidity is required in order to keep wines with cork enclosures from drying out.
Even when wine bottles are stored on their sides, one side of the cork is still exposed to air.
If the cork begins to dry out, it can allow oxygen to enter the bottle, filling the ullage space and possibly causing the wine to spoil or oxidize.
Excessive humidity can also pose the risk of damaging wine labels, which may hinder identification or hurt potential resale value.
Some wine experts opine that 75% humidity is ideal for storage.
However, there is very little significant research to definitively establish an optimal range.
Concern about humidity is one of the primary reasons why wine experts recommend that wine should not be kept in a refrigerator since the refrigeration process often includes dehumidifying, which can quickly dry out corks.
Some wine experts debate the importance of humidity for proper wine storage.
Claims have been made that the relative humidity within a bottle be maintained at 100% regardless of the closure used or the orientation of the bottle.
However, some experts hold that low humidity can still be detrimental to premium wine quality due to the risk of the cork drying out.
As a way of maintaining optimal humidity, it is recommended that half an inch of gravel be spread on the floor of a wine cellar and periodically sprinkle it with some water.
3.1.3 Temperature Wine is very susceptible to changes in temperature, hence, temperature control is an important consideration in wine storage.
If the wine is exposed to too high a temperature (in excess of 77 °F (25 °C)) for long periods of time, it may become spoilt or "cooked" and develop off flavors that taste raisiny or stewed.
The exact length of time that a wine is at risk of exposure to high temperatures will vary depending on the wine.
For example, some wines such as Madeira is exposed to high temperatures during its winemaking.
It is therefore able to sustain exposure to high temperatures more easily than other more delicate wines.
If the wine is exposed to temperatures that are too cold, the wine can freeze and expand, causing the cork to be pushed out.
This will allow more exposure of the wine to oxygen.
Dramatic temperature swings can also cause adverse chemical reactions in the wine that may lead to a variety of wine faults.
Most experts recommend that wine be kept at constant temperatures between 50 and 59 °F (10 and 15 °C) with 52 °F (11 °C) being the most ideal temperature for storage and aging.
In general, a wine has a greater potential to develop complexity and a more aromatic bouquet if it is allowed to age slowly in a relatively cool environment.
The lower the 80 temperature, the more slowly a wine develops.
On the average, the rate of chemical reactions in wine doubles with each 18 °F (8 °C) increase in temperature.
An expert even believes that wine can be exposed to temperatures as high as 120 °F (49 °C) for a few hours and not be damaged.
3.1.4 Vibration Although anecdotal information regarding the contributions of vibration in wine storage states that it contributes to the accelerated aging of wine with adverse effects, this remains a research area with relatively little data.
In a particular study, vibrations of different frequencies have been shown to have their own distinct effect on the chemistry of the wine though the authors have not stated whether the effects are detrimental to the quality of the wine or if the effects are caused by other aging factors.
3.2 Bottle orientation during storage Most wine racks are designed to allow a wine to be stored on its side.
The thinking behind this orientation is that the cork is more likely to stay moist and not dry out if it is kept in constant contact with the wine.
Some wineries package their wines upside down in the box for much the same reason.
Research in the late 1990s suggested that the ideal orientation for wine bottles is at a slight angle, rather than completely horizontal.
This allows the cork to maintain partial contact with the wine in order to stay damp but also keeps the air bubble formed by a wine's ullage at the top rather than in the middle of the bottle if the wine is lying on its side.
Keeping the ullage near the top, it has been argued, allows for a slower and more gradual oxidation and maturation process.
This is because the pressure of the air bubble that is the ullage space rises and falls depending on temperature fluctuation.
When exposed to higher temperatures, the bubble's pressure increases (becomes positive relative to the air outside of the bottle, and if the wine is tilted at an angle, this compressed gas will diffuse through the cork and not harm the wine.
When the temperature falls the process reverses.
If the wine is completely on its side, then, this action will eject some wine through the cork.
Through this "breathing" which can result from variations in temperature, oxygen may be repeatedly introduced into the bottle and as a result can react with the wine.
An appropriate and constant temperature is therefore preferred.
Additionally, oxidation will occur more rapidly at higher temperatures and gases dissolve into liquids faster, the lower the temperature.
While most wines can benefit from lying on their side, Champagne and other sparkling wines tend to age better if they are kept upright.
This is because the internal pressure caused by the trapped carbonic gas provides enough humidity and protection from oxygen.
A study found that Champagne stored on its side aged more quickly because 81 oxygen was allowed to seep in after the Champagne corks lost their elasticity due to contact with the moist wine.
3.3 Length of storage Wine can be stored for short term or long term.
Short Term Storage This is for wine that you will consume within six months.
Or they may be bottles that are just home from the store and intended to be consumed shortly or bottles that have been pulled from longer storage to be available for spur of the moment consumption.
The closest you can duplicate the conditions necessary for long term storage, the better.
However, small wine racks kept in your kitchen, dining room, pantry or where ever are a satisfactory solution in the short term.
Keep the bottles stored so that:  the bottle is on its side so the cork stays moist  the wines are at the lowest stable temperature possible  the location is free of vibration  the location is not a storage area for other items that have a strong odor Refrain from placing your rack on top of the refrigerator.
Your refrigerator is hot, close to the light and vibrates from the refrigerator compressor.
Long Term Storage This is wine that one will keep for more than 6 months before consumption If one plans to collect fine wines that will benefit from additional bottle maturity (over six months), proper storage is critical.
Before choosing a space, be sure it will be big enough to house future purchases.
In some cases, empty space beneath a stairway is sufficient, or one may find it necessary to allow room for hundreds of wines stored both as individually racked bottles and full cases.
One will need something that is temperature controlled, manages humidity, protects from vibration and also UV rays.
Dark, cool, stable environments work best for wine.
Storing Open Wine Bottles Keeping the wine as the winemaker intended overnight is no easy feat, given how rapidly a wine can degrade when exposed to oxygen.
The biggest challenge with storing opened wine is the acetic bacteria often present and active in open bottles.
Wine does not oxidize in the chemical way, but generally rather more rapidly as the bacteria feed, turning your wine to vinegar.
82 A typical wine left overnight without any special handling will not be drinkable due to oxidation.
On the other hand, a wine that did not fully open up during the first night of drinking may well be better with a night to continue evolving.
There are four complementary solutions all of which minimize the effect of oxidation on the wine:  Vacuum Corking - Vacuum corking works for the short term, longer if the wine started a little closed in the first place.
The problem with this is that while some wines seem to benefit this way, others turn flat and dull.
 Gassing - Laying down a gas blanket works better, but a wine will still react a little with the "neutral" gas or continue interacting with the air mixed in earlier.
 Storage in a smaller bottle - A small bottle, of course, reduces the amount of oxygen in the bottle, but pouring into the smaller bottle is tedious and exposes the wine to more air.
 Refrigeration - Refrigeration is controversial.
Some feel that refrigeration "kills" a wine, even a white.
However, if storing opened red wine, it needs to be allowed to warm up before drinking.
Do not disturb the bottle.
Place it into the fridge soon after opening.
3.4 Places to store wine Since the end of the 20th century, there has been growth in industries relating to wine storage.
Some wine connoisseurs may elect to store their wine at home in a dedicated room or closet.
Other options involve purchases and rentals at off-site wine storage facilities that are specifically designed for the task.
Wine can be stored in the following places: 3.4.1 Wine cellar A wine cellar is a storage room for wine in bottles or barrels, or more rarely in carboys, amphorae or plastic containers.
In an active wine cellar, important factors such as temperature and humidity are maintained by a climate control system.
In contrast, passive wine cellars are not climate-controlled, and are usually built underground to reduce temperature swings.
An aboveground wine cellar is often called a wine room, while a small wine cellar (less than 500 bottles) is sometimes termed a wine closet.
Active versus passive Wine cellars can be either active or passively cooled.
Active wine cellars are highly insulated and need to be properly constructed.
They require specialized wine cellar conditioning and cooling systems to maintain the desired temperature and humidity.
In a very dry climate, it may be necessary to actively humidify the air, but in most areas this is not necessary.
Passive wine cellars must be located in naturally cool and damp areas with minor seasonal and diurnal temperature variations—for example, a basement in a temperate 83 climate.
Passive cellars may be less predictable, but cost nothing to operate and are not affected by power outages.
Purpose Wine cellars protect alcoholic beverages from potentially harmful external influences, providing darkness and a constant temperature.
Wine is a natural, perishable food product.
Left exposed to heat, light, vibration or fluctuations in temperature and humidity, all types of wine can spoil.
When properly stored, wines not only maintain their quality but many actually improve in aroma, flavor, and complexity as they mature.
3.4.2 Wine caves These are subterranean structures for the storage and aging of wine.
They are an integral component of the wine industry worldwide.
The design and construction of wine caves represents a unique application of underground construction techniques.
The storage of wine underground offers the benefits of energy efficiency and optimum use of limited land area.
Wine caves naturally provide both high humidity and cool temperatures; key to the storage and aging of wine.
3.4.3 Wine accessory A Wine accessory is generally any equipment that may be used in the storing or serving of wine.
Wine accessories include many items such as wine glasses, corkscrews, and wine racks.
Wine racks These are storage devices that hold wine bottles in an orientation facilitating long term wine aging.
Most wine racks are designed for a bottle to be stored on its side, with a slight slant downward towards the bottle's neck.
This ensures that wine is always in contact with the cork, preventing the cork from drying out and the subsequent ingress of oxygen, which would ultimately spoil the wine.
Wine racks can be made of many materials such as wood, steel, and stone, holding just several bottles to thousands.
These racks also serve as decorative pieces in many homes.
4.0 CONCLUSION No matter how good a wine, or how great its maturing potential, if stored incorrectly it will never realize its full potential.
5.0 SUMMARY Ideal wine storage conditions are cool (around 55 F/13 C), not subject to dramatic fluctuations in temperature, not too dry (otherwise the corks may dry out) and not too 84 damp.
A relative humidity of around 70% is generally thought to keep corks damp but labels clear of mould.
Wines should be stored free from light and vibrations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the factors that affect wine in storage.
Explain why bottle orientation is important in storage.
Describe the places wine can be stored.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING J. Robinson (ed) (2006) "The Oxford Companion to Wine" Third Edition, Oxford University Press.
Lichine, Alexis (1967).
Alexis Lichine's Encyclopedia of Wines and Spirits.
London: Cassell & Company Ltd. D'Agostini, Daniel (2009).
Into the Earth: A Wine Cave Renaissance.
Panache Partners.
85 UNIT 4 SPIRITS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition and Types of spirit 3.2 Production of spirits 3.3 Regulation of spirits 3.4 Spirits and health 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References/further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Alcohol has been used medicinally throughout recorded history.
Its medicinal properties are mentioned 191 times in the Old and New Testaments.
As early as the turn of the century, there was evidence that moderate consumption of alcohol was associated with a decrease in the risk of heart attack.
The evidence of health benefits of moderate consumption has continued to grow over time.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, students will be able to understand: The types of spirits How spirits are produced The regulation of spirits, and The health effects of spirits.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition and Types of spirit Spirits are unsweetened, distilled alcoholic beverages intended for human consumption.
An alcoholic beverage is a drink containing ethanol, commonly known as alcohol.
Spirit drinks possess particular organoleptic qualities and have a minimum alcoholic strength of 15 % alcohol by volume (ABV).
They are produced by the distillation of a fermented base product.
Distilling concentrates the alcohol and eliminates some of the congeners.
Spirits can be added to wines to create fortified wines, such as port and sherry.
Types of spirits All spirits are grouped into two broad categories:  clear spirits  dark spirits.
All distillates come off the still as clear liquids.
The taste, smell, and appearance of the final product depend on how the distiller processes the liquid.
86 The clear spirits Clear spirits are the ones one can see through.
They appear clear.
Depending on the foods from which they were distilled, some have a specific flavor.
Examples include:  Gin comes in two basic styles.
There's the original Dutch jenevre (juniper, or genievre in French), a distillate of malt spirits that include juniper berries.
London dry gin is a clear spirit that's redistilled with juniper berries and further flavored with aromatic botanicals (plant products).
 Rum is distilled from molasses or sugar cane.
All rums start out as totally clear spirits; some are aged in barrels.
Aging turns the rum golden, amber, or very dark.
 Sake is a clear spirit distilled from rice wine.
 Tequila is distilled from the fruit of the blue agave plant.
Like rum, all tequilas start out clear, but some turn golden or amber with aging.
 Vodka is a true neutral spirit, crystal clear, with no discernible flavor or aroma.
Modern vodka producers, however, may flavor their vodkas, changing the taste and sometimes the colour to match the colour of the fruit juice or synthetic flavoring.
The dark spirits With the exception of brandy, which is distilled from wine, dark spirits are beverages distilled from grains.
Like clear spirits, the dark spirits start out clear, but aging in barrels and the addition of colouring agents such as caramel (burnt sugar) to maintain colour consistency from year to year turns them characteristically golden amber.
Examples are:  Brandy is a spirit distilled from wine or a mash (fermented mass) of any fruit, most commonly grapes.
 Whiskey is a spirit distilled from grain, such as barley, corn, rye, or wheat.
A straight whiskey is made from the distillate produced by one operation of a still and added neutral spirits.
A blended whiskey contains several straight whiskeys and added neutral spirits.
 Bourbon and Tennessee Whiskey are distilled spirits made only in the United States; by law, they must be made of 51 percent corn.
 Canadian Whisky is a distilled spirit made in Canada, generally from a mix of grains, primarily corn, plus rye, wheat, and barley.
 Irish Whiskey is a distilled spirit made in Ireland from a mix of grains dominated by barley.
87  Scotch Whisky is a distilled spirit made in Scotland from a mix of grains, primarily barley, plus "small grains" — so-called because they're used in limited amounts.
The small grains usually include oats.
3.2 Production of spirits All spirits are produced by distillation.
In the processing of alcoholic beverages, the distillation is not used as a true purification method but more to transfer all volatiles from the source materials to the distillate.
The history of distillation goes back over 2,000 years when it was used in China to make perfumes, and by the Arabs to make spirit-based drinks.
The principle of distillation is that ethyl alcohol vapourises at a lower temperature (78%) than water (100%).
Thus, when a liquid containing alcohol is heated in an enclosed environment, the alcohol will form steam first and can be taken off, leaving water and other ingredients behind.
This process raises the alcoholic content of the resulting liquid.
There are two main methods of producing spirits: Pot still method Patent still method.
The pot still method is used for full, heavy flavoured spirits such as brandy, while the patent still method is used in producing the lighter spirits such as vodka.
Bases for spirits The spirit drinks are produced from various bases.
In each case, the base is a fermented liquid (alcoholic wash).
The table below shows some of the bases and the spirits produced from them.
Spirit Base Whisky, gin and vodka Barley, maize or rye (i.e.
beer) Brandy Wine Calvados Cider Rum Molasses Tequila Pulque 3.3 Regulation of spirits The regulation of spirits is under the authority of National Agency for Food and Drug Administration (NAFDAC).
It comes under the following headings: Prohibition: 1.
(1) No person shall manufacture, import, export, advertise, sell or distribute spirit drink specified in schedule I to these Regulations in Nigeria unless it has been registered in accordance with the provision of these regulations.
88  (2) No person shall sell any spirit drink unless the main panel of the label carries a Declaration of the actual percentage by volume of absolute alcohol contained therein.
2.
Use and limit The use and limits of food additives or food colours in the manufacture of spirit shall be as prescribed by the Agency.
3.
Restrictions on sale of alcoholic Spirit No alcoholic spirit with an alcoholic content below37.0 percent shall be sold except the label shall bears a declaration of the alcoholic content together with a statement that the product is “under strength” 4.
Packaging/Labeling.
In addition to compliance with the Pre-packaged Food (Labelling) Regulations 2004, the following shall apply:— (a) the name of every spirit drink shall indicate the accurate nature; (b) Where a name has been established for the spirit drink in these Regulations, such a name shall only be used; (c) where no common name exists for the spirit drink an appropriate descriptive name shall be used; (d) a coined or fanciful name may be used, provided, the name is not misleading and is accompanied by an appropriate descriptive term.
5.
Advertisement of Spirit.
In addition to compliance with the Food Products (Advertisement) Regulations 2004, the following shall apply:- (a) the content of advertisements of spirit drink shall not be misleading and shall be free of health claims; (b) radio, television or print media, advertisements of spirit drink shall not be permitted in children’s programmes nor shall children, sportsmen or expectant mothers be used as models; (c) gift items promoting spirit drinks shall not be directed at children and sportsmen.
6.
Specifications for Alcoholic spirit Alcoholic spirit manufactured, distributed, imported, exported, sold, or advertised in Nigeria shall conform with the specifications provided in Schedule II – V of these Regulations.
89 7.
Penalty (1) Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of these Regulations shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction in case of :- (a) an individual, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to a fine of N50,000 or to both imprisonment and fine; (b) body corporate, to a fine not exceeding N100,000.
(2) Where an offence under these regulations is committed by a body corporate, firm or other association of individuals:- (a) every director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate; or (b) every partner or officer of the firm; or (c) every trustee of the body concerned; or (d) every person concerned in the management of the affairs of the association; or (e) every person who was purporting to act in a capacity referred to in paragraphs (a) to (e) of this regulation is severally guilty of that offence and liable to be proceeded against and punished for that offence in the same manner as if he had himself committed the offence, unless he proves that the act or omission constituting the offence took place without their knowledge, consent or connivance.
8.
Forfeiture In addition to the penalty specified in Regulation 7 of these regulations, a person convicted of an offence under these regulations shall forfeit to the Agency the spirit drinks and whatsoever is used in connection with the commission of the offence.
3.4 Spirits and health The health benefits of moderate alcohol consumption have long been known.
One of the earliest scientific studies on the subject was published in the Journal of the American Medical Association in 1904.
Moderate drinking can be healthy—but not for everyone.
One must weigh the benefits and risks.
Alcohol's link with health is two-faced.
Exactly which face it shows depends largely on who's drinking and how much.
For most moderate drinkers, alcohol has overall health benefits.
While moderate drinking can increase the risk of colon and breast cancer, these risks are trumped by the boost in cardiovascular health—especially in middle age, when heart disease begins to account for an increasingly large share of disease and deaths.
Non-drinkers, however, shouldn't feel the need to start drinking to improve their health.
Heavy drinkers, with their increased risk of cancer, heart disease, high blood pressure, cirrhosis, and dependence should cut back or stop drinking altogether.
A pregnant woman should also avoid alcohol, since it can cause brain damage to the unborn child.
90 Another opinion believes that moderate drinkers tend to have better health and live longer than those who are either abstainers or heavy drinkers.
In addition to having fewer heart attacks and strokes, moderate consumers of alcoholic beverages (beer, wine and distilled spirits or liquor) are generally less likely to suffer strokes, diabetes, arthritis, enlarged prostate, dementia (including Alzheimer's disease), and several major cancers.
What's considered moderate drinking?
For women, it's up to one drink per day; for men, it's up to two drinks per day.
What's considered a drink?
A general guideline is 12 ounces of beer, 5 ounces of wine, or 1½ ounces of hard liquor, such as vodka or whiskey.
Alcohol vs. Lifestyle Why drink to reduce the risk of heart disease?
Wouldn't eating a good diet, exercising, and losing weight do the same thing?
No, it wouldn't.
The moderate consumption of alcohol appears to be more effective than most other lifestyle changes that are used to lower the risk of heart and other diseases.
For example, the average person would need to follow a very strict low-fat diet, exercise vigorously on a regular basis, eliminate salt from the diet, lose a substantial amount of weight, and probably begin medication in order to lower cholesterol by 30 points or blood pressure by 20 points.
But medical research suggests that alcohol can have a greater impact on heart disease than even these hard-won reductions in cholesterol levels or blood pressure.
Only cessation of smoking is more effective.
Additionally, other medical research suggests that adding alcohol to a healthful diet is more effective than just following the diet alone.
Longevity Various studies have been done on the issue of alcohol and health as it relates to longevity.
The items below are some of the findings.
The emphasis has always been on moderate consumption.
Moderate drinkers tend to live longer than those who either abstain or drink heavily.
 The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism has found that the lowest death rate from all causes occurs at the level of one to two drinks each day.
 Drinking alcohol in moderation (1-2 drinks per day for women and 2-4 for men) was found to reduce risk of mortality significantly according to meta-analysis of 34 studies of alcohol and total mortality among 1,015,835 men and women around the world.
 An exhaustive review of all major heart disease studies found that "Alcohol consumption is related to total mortality in a U-shaped manner, where moderate consumers have a reduced total mortality compared with total non- consumers and heavy consumers."
91  A Harvard study found the risk of death from all causes to be 21% to 28% lower among men who drank alcohol moderately, compared with abstainers.
 A large-scale study in China found that middle-aged men who drank moderately had a nearly 20% lower overall mortality compared with abstainers.
 Harvard's Nurses' Health Study of over 85,000 women found reduced mortality among moderate drinkers.
 A British analysis of 12,000 male physicians found that moderate drinkers had the lowest risk of death from all causes during the 13 year study.
 A large study of about 88,000 people conducted over a period of ten years found that moderate drinkers were about 27% less likely to die during the period than were either abstainers or heavy drinkers.
The superior longevity was largely due to a reduction of such diseases as coronary heart disease, cancer, and respiratory diseases.
 A twelve year long prospective study of over 200,000 men found that subjects who had consumed alcohol in moderation were less likely to die during that period than those who abstained from alcohol.
 A study of more than 40,000 people by the Cancer Research Center in Honolulu found that "persons with moderate alcohol intake appear to have a significantly lower risk of dying than nondrinkers."
 An analysis of the 89,299 men in the Physicians' Health Study over a period of five and one-half years found that those who drink alcohol in moderation tend to live longer than those who either abstain or drink heavily.
 An Italian study of 1,536 men aged 45-65 found that about two years of life were gained by moderate drinkers (1-4 drinks per day) in comparison with occasional and heavy drinkers.21  A study of 2,487 adults aged 70-79 years, who were followed for an average period of over five and one-half years, found that all-cause mortality was significantly lower in light to moderate drinkers than in abstainers or occasional drinkers (those who drank less than one drink per week).
 A large prospective study found that older men consuming up to about three drinks per day and older women consuming over one drink per day had a dramatically lower risk of dying than did non-drinkers.
 A large study found that moderate drinkers, even after controlling for or adjusting for numerous factors, maintain their high longevity or life survival advantage over alcohol abstainers.
 A Danish study of about 12,000 men and women over a period of 20 years found that abstaining from moderate alcohol consumption is a health and longevity risk factor.
Choosing not to drink alcohol increases the risk of illness, disease and death.
 A 14-year study of nearly 3,000 residents of an Australian community found that abstainers were twice as likely to enter a nursing home as people who were moderate drinkers.
Drinkers also spent less time in hospitals and were less likely to die during the period of the study.
 A prospective study of middle-aged Chinese men found that the consumption of two drinks per day was associated with a 19% reduction in mortality risk.
This protective effect was not restricted to a specific type of alcoholic drink.
92  Alcohol prevents more deaths than its abuse causes in the United Kingdom, according to research from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
 Scientists at the University of London concluded that light and moderate drinking saves more lives in England and Wales than are lost through the abuse of alcohol.
If everyone abstained from alcohol, death rates would be significantly higher.
 The Cancer Council of New South Wales concludes that "If the net effect of total alcohol consumption on Australian society is considered, there is a net saving of lives due to the protective effect of low levels of consumption on cardiovascular disease."
Tips for staying healthy with alcohol 1.
If you don't drink, there's no need to start For some people—especially pregnant women, people recovering from alcohol addiction, people with a family history of alcoholism, people with liver disease, and people taking one or more medications that interact with alcohol—the risks of drinking outweigh the benefits.
There are other ways to boost one’s heart health and lower risk of diabetes such as: getting more active staying at a healthy weight eating healthy fats and whole grains.
2.
If you do drink, drink in moderation—and choose whatever drink you like Wine, beer, or spirits, all seem to have the same health benefits as long as moderation is the word.
Not more than one drink a day for women, and no more than two drinks per day for men.
3.
Take a multivitamin with folic acid.
Folic acid is the synthetic form of folate, a B vitamin that may help lower the risk of heart disease and cancers of the colon and breast.
Those who drink may benefit the most from getting extra folate, since alcohol moderately depletes our body's stores.
The amount in a standard multivitamin—400 micrograms—is enough, when combined with a healthy diet.
4.
Ask your doctor about your drinking habits.
If you or your friends think you may have a problem with drinking, talk to a doctor or other health professional about it.
He or she can help.
93 5.
Pick a designated driver.
Alcohol and driving do not mix.
If you have been out drinking cocktails and it's time to head home, hand your car keys to someone who has been sipping seltzer all night.
4.0 CONCLUSION Spirits are alcoholic beverages whose sale and use are regulated.
They are of various types and are known to have positive health effects when used in moderation.
Excessive use of spirits can have damaging effects to health.
5.0 SUMMARY Spirits are distilled alcoholic beverages having a minimum alcoholic strength of 15% ABV.
Spirits are classified as clear or dark spirits.
The sale and consumption of spirits is regulated and controlled.
Moderate consumption of alcohol attracts health benefits.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the two major classes of spirits.
Elaborate on the health effects of consumption of spirits.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Blue, Anthony Dias (2004).
The Complete Book of Spirits: A Guide to Their History, Production, and Enjoyment.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold 94 UNIT 5 LIQUEURS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition and types of liqueur 3.2 Production of liqueur 3.3 Shelf life of liqueurs 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked assignment 7.0 References/further reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Liqueurs are alcoholic beverages.
They are historical descendants of herbal medicines; they were made in Italy as early as the 13th century and were often prepared by monks (e.g., Chartreuse and Bénédictine).
Nowadays, liqueurs are made worldwide and are served in many ways.
Liqueurs are typically quite sweet; they are usually not aged for long but may have resting periods during their production to allow flavors to marry 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, the students will be able to understand: The types of liqueurs Liqueur production methods Shelf-life of liqueurs 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition and types of liqueur A liqueur is a sweet alcoholic beverage, often flavored with fruits, herbs, spices, flowers, seeds, roots, plants, barks, and sometimes cream.
The word liqueur comes from the Latin word liquifacere which means "to dissolve."
This refers to the dissolving of the flavorings used to make the liqueur.
Liqueurs are not usually aged for long periods, but may have resting periods during their production to allow flavors to marry.
Liqueurs are also referred to as cordials.
Liqueurs have sugar contents starting at 2.5 percent, with the sweetest going far beyond that.
Their alcohol content can range from a low 15 percent (30 proof) to 55 percent (110 proof).
Liqueurs are just as important as the base liquors in the bar, some more 95 than others.
These spirits begin with a base liquor, which could be anything from a neutral grain alcohol to a brandy, rum or whiskey.
To this sugar is added along with a mix of herbs, fruits or spices depending on the desired result.
One will often see liqueurs with a main ingredient, such as curacao (orange) or herbsaint (anise), while other liqueurs are more of a blend of flavor, like Campari, Drambuie and Tuaca.
Grand Marnier is a delicious example of an orange liqueur which makes a flavorful ingredient in many recipes.
Cream liqueurs have cream added, while crème liqueurs are much sweeter, likened to a potent syrup.
Our ancestors referred to liqueurs as cordials, and they were often used medicinally.
Types of liqueur There are many categories of liqueurs as listed below: Cream liqueur Are flavored mixtures that have been homogenized with cream.
They have a rich mixture that's velvety smooth and creamy, and they require no refrigeration.
Examples are: Advocaat Amarula (sugar, cream, and the fruit of the African marula tree) Baileys Irish Cream Baja Rosa Carolans Creme de la Creme Maple Cream Liqueur Cruzan_Rum Crea Coffee liqueur Café Aztec Café Britt Coffee Liqueur Café Oriental Café Marakesh Caffè Borghetti Coloma chocolate liqueur schnapps liqueur brandy liqueur anise liqueur nut-flavoured liqueur herbal liqueur.
Berry liqueur Chambord (raspberry) Creme de cassis (blackcurrant) 96 Crème liqueurs Are distinguished by being sweet and syrupy.
Examples include: Crème de banane Crème de cacao Crème de cassis Crème de Cerise Crema di Fragole Crème de menthe Flower liqueurs Bulgarian rose liqueur—from the Valley of the Roses Crème de Rose (rose) Crème de violette (violet) Crème Yvette (violet, vanilla) Fior d'Alpi (alpine flowers, herbs) Lavender Liqueur (lavender) Fruit liqueurs Amabilli (banana) Amarula African liqueur (marula fruit) Aurum (rum, tea, and tangerines) Bajtra—Maltese liqueur (prickly pear) Cherry Heering (cherry) Cosa Gialla (citrus fruits) Cointreau (orange) Other herbal liqueurs Agwa de Bolivia (37 Herbs) Altvater Amaro Angelika Bitter (11 herbs, especially Angelica archangelica) Appenzeller (42 herbs) Becherovka (anise seeds, cinnamon, and other herbs) Beirão (seeds and herbs from around the world) Bénédictine (27 plants and spices) Honey liqueurs Bärenjäger Brandymel Drambuie Ron Miel Tennessee Honey—Jack Daniel's 97 Nut-flavored liqueurs Amaretto (almonds, or the almond-like kernels from apricots, peaches, cherries, or similar stone fruits) Bellota (acorns) Dumante (pistachio) Dwersteg's Organic Amaretto Liqueur (organic liqueur with distillate from almond kernels) Frangelico (hazelnuts and herbs) Kahana Royale (macadamia nut) Nocello (walnut and hazelnut) Whisky liqueurs Atholl Brose (Scotch whisky, Benromach single malt spirit, honey, secret spice recipe, from Gordon & Macphail) Bruadar (Scotch whisky, honey, sloe) Cock o' the North (single malt, blaeberry) Drambuie (Scotch, heather honey, herbs, and spices) Eblana (Irish whiskey, coffee, honey, almond, peanut) Famous Grouse liqueur (Scotch, bourbon, citrus, spices) Other liqueurs Advocaat (egg yolks and vanilla) After Shock (several varieties, the most popular of which is cinnamon) Agnes (orange peels, apples, vanilla and caraway seeds) Aurum (rum, tea, and tangerines) Baczewski Bärenfang (honey) One export version is named Bärenjäger Bloody Oath (vodka, herbs and spices) The above listed are examples of variety of brands available in the various categories.
The recipes of some of these liqueurs, like Averna, Benedictine, Chartreuse and Frangelico, date back centuries and are as popular as ever.
The distinction between liqueurs and spirits is not simple because many spirits are available today in a flavored form (e.g., flavored vodka).
The most reliable guide to classification is that liqueurs contain added sugar, but spirits do not.
Liqueurs can also be classified as: Proprietary liqueurs These are made exclusively by specific liqueur houses with secret formulas, some of which have been closely guarded for centuries.eg bénédictine, galliano and southern comfort.
98 Generic liqueurs Generic liqueurs are made by various producers using fairly standard recipes.
Quality brands are typically flavored with the finest ingredients, essential oils and extracts; less expensive examples often use artificial flavorings e.g.
amaretto and crème de cacao 3.2 Production of liqueur Liqueurs are made by two basic methods:  Heat or infusion method  Cold or maceration method Heat or infusion method is used when herbs, peels roots etc are being used, as heat can extract their oils, flavours and aromas.
Cold or maceration method is best suited when soft fruits are used to provide the flavours and aromas.
The flavoring of liqueur may be in four ways: distillation- alcohol and flavoring agents are blended before being distilled infusion- flavorings are steeped in hot water, which is then mixed with the alcohol base; maceration- flavoring agents are steeped directly in the alcohol base; percolation- alcohol is dripped through the flavoring agents to extract their essences.
Flavouring ingredients used for liqueur production incude: Aniseed coriander Apricots kernels of almond Blackcurrants nutmeg Caraway seeds rind of citrus fruit Chrries rose petals Cinnamon wormwood The general principle of liqueur-making is to take an alcohol base (sometimes called "neutral spirits") and steep a flavoring in it for a time.
Next, filter out any remaining solids, add sweetening, and age.
Finally, bottle and serve.
3.3 Shelf life of liqueurs Liqueurs and Cordials: The shelf lives of liqueurs are more temperamental than the base spirits because they contain sugar and other ingredients which can spoil, some more than others.
Most opened (and well sealed) liqueurs should last for months and even years depending on their alcohol content and preservatives.
Again, opened bottles are likely to lose some of their characteristics due to exposure to air.
Once you begin to see any sugar crystallizing on the bottom, discolouration, curdling or other changes you will want to throw that bottle away or at least give it a taste test before mixing with it.
99 Cream liqueurs, those that contain dairy, cream or egg, are a different story and should be discarded after 18 months or so.
Liqueurs like Bailey's Irish Cream, Advocaat and Amarula should be consumed within a year of opening, although some of their cheaper creamy cousins will deteriorate faster.
Even in unopened bottles, these liqueurs will spoil and be undrinkable after a year and a half or more.
Some of these touchier liqueurs will include an expiration date on the bottle as well.
It is unnecessary to refrigerate cream liqueurs, but it can't hurt it 4.0 CONCLUSION Liqueurs were originally used (and some still are) as a digestive.
They are now usually served after dinner but also play an important role in many cocktails.
Liqueurs can also be used in cooking, particularly for desserts.
Aging plays a vital role in the production of liqueurs.
What goes into the bottle will be harsh and undefined because the various extracts will not have had time to mingle, and some of the delicate aromatics that make the finished liqueur such a pleasure will not be completely developed Liqueurs are alcoholic beverages, hence health effects and benefits of other alcoholic beverages applies to them.
5.0 SUMMARY Liqueurs have sugar content ranging from 2.5%, and an alcoholic content between 15 and 55%.
Liqueurs are made from alcoholic base which could be brandy, whiskey, rum or any other alcoholic wash.
There are different categories of liqueur and they are produced by two main methods- Heat or infusion method and Cold or maceration method.
Different nuts, seeds fruits and other plant parts are used as flavouring agents in the production of liqueurs.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the types of liqueur.
List and explain the categories of liqueur with examples.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Dennis Lillicrap and John Cousins (2006) Food and Beverage Service 7th edition.
Hodder Arnold Lichine, Alexis (1987).
Alexis Lichine's New Encyclopedia of Wines & Spirits (5th ed.).
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
100
