 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: CIT 484 COURSE TITLE: WEBSITE DESIGN & PROGRAMMING 1  COURSE GUIDE CSC 484 WEBSITE DESIGN &PROGRAMMING Course Developer/Writer Dr J.N.
Ndunagu National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor Dr B. C. Mbam Course Coordinator Dr J.N.
Ndunagu NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2  COURSE GUIDE CIT 484 - WEBSITE DESIGN & PROGRAMMING National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Annex 245 Samuel Adesujo Ademulegun Street Central Business District Opposite Arewa Suites Abuja e-mail: @nou.edu.ng URL: .nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2010 First Printed -------- - ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction……………………………………………….. v What you will learn in this Course……………………....... v Course Aim………………………………………………...vi Course Objectives………………………………………….
vi Working through this Course………………………………vii Course Materials…………………………………………...viii Study Units…………………………………………………viii Recommended Texts……………………………………….ix Assignment File……………………………………………xii 3  Presentation Schedule……………………………………...xii Assessment…………………………………………………xii Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs)……………………….xii Final Examination and Grading……………………………xii Course Marking Scheme……………………………………xiii Course Overview………………………………………….. xiv How to get the most from this course…………………….
xiv Tutors and Tutorials……………………………………….. xv Introduction Welcome to CIT 484: Website design and Programming which is a three credit unit course offered in the fourth year to students of the undergraduate degree programme in Communication Technology.
There are fifteen study Units in this course.
There are no perquisites for studying this course.
It has been developed with appropriate local and foreign examples suitable for audience.
This course guide is for distance learners enrolled in the B.Sc.
Communication Technology programme of the National Open University of Nigeria.
This guide 4 is one of the several resource tools available to you to help you successfully complete this course and ultimately your programme.
In this guide you will find very useful information about this course: aims, objectives, what the course is about, what course materials you will be using; available services to support your learning; information on assignments and examination.
It also offers you guidelines on how to plan your time for study; the amount of time you are likely to spend on each study unit; your tutor – marked assignments.
I strongly recommend that you go through this course guide and complete the feedback form at the end before you begin your study of the course.
The feedback form must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator along with your first assignment.
I wish you all the best in your learning experience and successful completion of this course.
What you will learn in this Course The overall aim of this course, CIT 484, is to teach you the fundamentals of HTML and the Web.
It starts with the basics and then moves on to the more advanced concepts.
The Internet and the World Wide Web are also treated.
You will also learn about creating lists, getting feedback with forms, creating tables and frames.
Finally, you will be introduced to JavaScript, dealing with Java Script variables and data types, Statement and Operators and Control structures, object based programming message box in JavaScript.
Course Aim This course aims at designing web pages using HTML and Java Script.
You are not expected to have experience in the languages before using this course material.
It is hoped that the knowledge would help you become proficient in HTML, fully versed in the language’s syntax, semantics and elements of style.
Course Objectives 5 In order to achieve this aim, the course has a set of objectives.
Each unit has specific objectives which are included at the beginning of the unit.
You are expected to read these objectives before you study the unit.
You may wish to refer to them during your study to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completion of each unit.
By doing so, you would have followed the instructions in the unit.
Below are the comprehensive objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aim of the course.
Therefore, after going through this course you should be able to: (cid:1) Define the Internet (cid:1) Differentiate between the Internet and the World Wild Web (cid:1) Describe the History of the Internet (cid:1) List World Wide Web browser software available in this course material (cid:1) Explain the meaning of WWW (cid:1) Describe how WWW works (cid:1) Explain parts of URLs (cid:1) Define HTML (cid:1) Describe the History of HTML (cid:1) Explain how HTML works (cid:1) Describe how to open a Notepad (cid:1) Describe markup tag in HTML (cid:1) Write a simple HTML Document using text editor (cid:1) Describe the head and body section of HTML (cid:1) Create a headline for your document using head section (cid:1) Describe the paragraph marker.
(cid:1) Describe the physical markup tags (cid:1) Describe the logical markup tags (cid:1) State the difference between formatting tags and preformatted text (cid:1) Define hypertext link (cid:1) List types and uses of hypertext link (cid:1) State the steps of creating hyperlinks (cid:1) Define unordered lists, ordered list, definition list and list within list (cid:1) State the steps in creating unordered lists, ordered list, definition list and list within list (cid:1) Distinguish between Ordered list and list within list (cid:1) Explain HTML form (cid:1) List types of input field in HTML form (cid:1) Create a simple HTML form (cid:1) Explain JavaScript language (cid:1) Describe the history of JavaScript 6 (cid:1) Distinguish the difference between Java and JavaScript (cid:1) List the features of JavaScript (cid:1) Explain JavaScript Variables (cid:1) List JavaScript Data types (cid:1) Describe Global Scope Variables (cid:1) Explain two types of statement in JavaScript (cid:1) List types of Operators in JavaScript (cid:1) List types of Control Structures Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read each study unit, read the textbooks and read other materials which may be provided by the National Open University of Nigeria.
Each unit contains tutor marked assignments and at certain points in the course you would be required to submit assignment for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course there is a final examination.
The course should take you about a total of 15 weeks to complete.
Below is the list of all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course on time and successfully.
This course entails that you spend a lot of time to read and practice.
For easy understanding of this course, I will advise that you avail yourself the opportunity of attending the tutorials sessions where you would have the opportunity to compare your knowledge with that of other people, and also have your questions answered.
The Course Material The main components of this course are: 1.
The Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Further Reading/References 4.
Assignments 7 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Units There are 15 study units and 4 modules in this course.
They are: (cid:2) MODULE ONE - THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB (cid:1) UNIT ONE - The Internet (cid:1) UNIT TWO - Understanding the WWW (cid:1) UNIT THREE - HTML and the WEB (cid:2) MODULE TWO – The Basics of HTML (cid:1) UNIT ONE - Getting Started with HTML (cid:1) UNIT TWO - Understanding the Basics of HTML (cid:1) UNIT THREE - Formatting Text (cid:1) UNIT FOUR – Using Hypertext Links (cid:2) MODULE THREE- Lists, Tables and Frames in HTML (cid:1) UNIT ONE – Creating Lists in HTML (cid:1) UNIT TWO – Getting Feedback with Forms (cid:1) UNIT THREE – Using Tables (cid:1) UNIT FOUR– Using Frames (cid:2) MODULE FOUR - JavaScript (cid:1) UNIT ONE - Introduction to Java Script (cid:1) UNIT TWO - Java Script variables and data types (cid:1) UNIT THREE - Statement and operators (cid:1) UNIT FOUR - Control structures object based programming message box in JavaScript Recommended Texts These texts will be of enormous benefit to you in learning this course: • `Arpajian, S., and R. Mullen.
1996.
How to use HTML 3.2.
Emeryville, Ziff-Davis Press.
219 pp.
• Abbate, Janet.
Inventing the Internet.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999.
• Andrew H. Watt, Jinjer L. Simon, Jonathan Watt: Teach Yourself JavaScript in 21 Days, Pearson Education, ISBN 0672322978 8 • Andy Harris, Andrew Harris: JavaScript Programming, Premier Press, ISBN 0761534105 • Barnet, Belinda (2004).
Lost In The Archive: Vision, Artefact And Loss In The Evolution Of Hypertext.
University of New South Wales, PhD thesis.
• Bemer, Bob, "A History of Source Concepts for the Internet/Web" • Bolter, Jay David (2001).
Writing Space: Computers, Hypertext, and the Remediation of Print.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
ISBN 0- 8058-2919-9.
• Buckland, Michael (2006).
Emanuel Goldberg and His Knowledge Machine.
Libraries Unlimited.
ISBN 0-31331-332-6.
• Byers, T. J.
(April 1987).
"Built by association".
PC World 5: 244–251.
• Campbell-Kelly, Martin; Aspray, William.
Computer: A History of the Information Machine.
New York: BasicBooks, 1996.
• Castro, E. 1998.
HTML 4 for the world wide web.Berkeley, Peachpit Press.
336 pp.
• Cicconi, Sergio (1999).
"Hypertextuality".
Mediapolis.
Ed.
Sam Inkinen.
Berlino & New York: De Gruyter.
: 21–43.
http://www.cisenet.com/cisenet/writing/essays/hypertextuality.htm.
• Clark, David D., "The Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet Protocols", Computer Communications Review 18:4, August 1988, pp.
106–114 • Conklin, J.
(1987).
"Hypertext: An Introduction and Survey".
Computer 20 (9): 17–41.
doi:10.1109/MC.1987.1663693.
• Crane, Gregory (1988).
"Extending the boundaries of instruction and research".
T.H.E.
Journal (Technological Horizons in Education) (Macintosh Special Issue): 51–54.
.
• Danny Goodman, Brendan Eich: JavaScript Bible, Wiley, John & Sons, ISBN 0764533428 • Danny Goodman, Scott Markel: JavaScript and DHTML Cookbook, O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 0596004672 • David Flanagan, Paula Ferguson: JavaScript: The Definitive Guide, O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 0596000480 9 • Engelbart, Douglas C. (1962).
Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework, AFOSR-3233 Summary Report, SRI Project No.
3579. http://www.dougengelbart.org/pubs/augment-3906.html.
• Ensslin, Astrid (2007).
Canonizing Hypertext: Explorations and Constructions.
London: Continuum.
ISBN 0-8264-95583.
• Gary B. Shelly, Thomas J. Cashman, William J. Dorin, Jeffrey Quasney: JavaScript: Complete Concepts and Techniques, Course Technology, ISBN 0789562332 • Graham, I. S. 1997.
HTML sourcebook, third edition.
New York, John Wiley & Sons.
620 pp.
• Graham, Ian S. The HTML Sourcebook: The Complete Guide to HTML.
New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1995.
• Heim, Michael (1987).
Electric Language: A Philosophical Study of Word Processing.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
ISBN 0-300-07746-7.
Scott ArpajianKrol, Ed.
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Internet, 1987.
• Landow, George (2006).
Hypertext 3.0 Critical Theory and New Media in an Era of Globalization: Critical Theory and New Media in a Global Era (Parallax, Re-Visions of Culture and Society).
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
ISBN 0-8018-8257-5.
• Nelson, Theodor H. (1973).
"A Conceptual framework for man-machine everything".
AFIPS Conference Proceedings VOL.
42. pp.
M22–M23.
• Nelson, Theodor H. (1992).
Literary Machines 93.1.
Sausalito CA: Mindful Press.
ISBN 0-89347-062-7.
• Nelson, Theodor H. (September 1965).
"Complex information processing: a file structure for the complex, the changing and the indeterminate".
ACM/CSC-ER Proceedings of the 1965 20th national conference.
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=806036.
• Nelson, Theodor H. (September 1970).
"No More Teachers’ Dirty Looks".
Computer Decisions.
http://www.newmediareader.com/excerpts.html.
• Nick Heinle, Richard Koman: Designing with JavaScript, O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 1565923006 • Nigel McFarlane: Rapid Application Development with Mozilla, Prentice Hall Professional Technical References, ISBN 0131423436 • Scientific American Special Issue on Communications, Computers, and Networks, September, 1991 10 • Scott Duffy: How to do Everything with JavaScript, Osborne, ISBN 0072228873 • Sham Bhangal, Tomasz Jankowski: Foundation Web Design: Essential HTML, JavaScript, CSS, PhotoShop, Fireworks, and Flash, APress L. P., ISBN 1590591526 • Thomas A. Powell, Fritz Schneider: JavaScript: The Complete Reference, McGraw-Hill Companies, ISBN 0072191279 • Van Dam, Andries (July 1988).
"Hypertext: '87 keynote address".
Communications of the ACM 31: 887–895.
doi:10.1145/48511.48519.
http://www.cs.brown.edu/memex/HT_87_Keynote_Address.html.
• Williams, R. 1994.
The non-designer’s design book.
Design and typographic principles for the visual novice.
Berkeley, Peachpit Press.
144 pp.
• Williams, R., and J. Tollett.
1998.
The non-designer’s web book.
An easy guide to creating, designing , and posting your own web site.
Berkeley, Peachpit Press.
288 pp.
• Yankelovich, Nicole; Landow, George P., and Cody, David (1987).
"Creating hypermedia materials for English literature students".
SIGCUE Outlook 20 (3).
Assignment File The assignment file will be given to you in due course.
In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final mark for the course.
Altogether, there are 15 tutor marked assignments for this course.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in this course guide provides you with important dates for completion of each tutor marked assignment.
You should therefore endeavor to meet the deadlines.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of this course.
First, there are tutor marked assignments; and second, the written examination.
Therefore, you are expected to take note of the facts, information and problem solving gathered during the course.
The tutor marked assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment, in accordance to the deadline given.
The work submitted will count for 40% of your total 11 course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination.
This examination will account for 60% of your total score.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are 15 TMAs in this course.
You need to submit all the TMAs.
The best 4 will therefore be counted.
When you have completed each assignment, send them to your tutor as soon as possible and make certain that it gets to your tutor on or before the stipulated deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your assignment on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of extension.
Extension will not be granted after the deadline, unless on extraordinary cases.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination on CIT 484 will last for a period of 3 hours and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the tutor marked assignments that you have previously encountered.
Furthermore, all areas of the course will be examined.
It would be better to use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination, to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your TMAs and comment on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course marking Scheme The following table includes the course marking scheme Table 1 Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignments 1-15 15 assignments, 40% for the best 4 Total = 10% X 4 = 40% Final Examination 60% of overall course marks Total 100% of Course Marks Course Overview This table indicates the units, the number of weeks required to complete them and the assignments.
Table 2: Course Organizer Unit Title of the work Weeks Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Week 1 12 Module 1 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB Unit 1 The Internet Week 1 Assessment 1 Unit 2 Understanding the WWW Week 2 Assessment 2 Unit 3 HTML and the WEB Week3 Assessment 3 Module 2 THE BASICS OF HTML Unit 1 Getting Started with HTML Week 4 Assessment 4 Unit 2 Understanding the Basics of Week 5 Assessment 5 HTML Unit 3 Formatting Text Week 6 Assessment 6 Unit 4 – Using Hypertext Links Week 7 Assessment 7 Module 3 Lists, Tables and Frames in HTML Unit 1 Creating Lists in HTML Week 8 Assessment 8 Unit 2 Getting Feedback with Forms Week 9 Assessment 9 Unit 3 Using Tables Week 10 Assessment 10 Unit 4 Using Frames Week 11 Assessment 11 Module 4 JAVASCRIPT Unit 1 Introduction to Java Script Week 12 Assessment 12 Unit 2 Java Script variables and data Week 13 Assessment 13 types Unit 3 Statement and operators Week 14 Assessment 14 Unit 4 Control structures object based Week 15 Assessment 15 programming message box in JavaScript How to get the best from this course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read your set books or other material.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
13  Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives enable you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the units you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to assist you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
(cid:1) Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
(cid:1) Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course Overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Whatever method you chose to use, you should decide on it and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
(cid:1) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they lag behind in their course work.
(cid:1) Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
(cid:1) Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will almost always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set of books on your desk at the same time.
(cid:1) Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
(cid:1) Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
(cid:1) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
(cid:1) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments on the tutor-marked assignment form.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
14 (cid:1) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide).
Tutors and Tutorials There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
(cid:1) Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail or submit your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
(cid:1) Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, or e-mail if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: (cid:1) You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings (cid:1) You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
GOODLUCK!
MODULE ONE – THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB UNIT ONE - The Internet 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 – The Internet 3.2 – History of the Internet 15 3.3 - Modern Uses 3.4 - Information 3.5 - Communication 3.6 - Data Transfer 3.7 – Access 3.8 - Sociology of the Internet 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources U NIT TWO – Understanding the WWW 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1– How the WWW works 3.2– How do URLs work 3.3-How to Use a Web Browser 3.4 How to Use a Hypertext link 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources UNIT THREE – HTML AND THE WEB 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
What is HTML?
3.2.
History of HTML 3.3.
How HTML works with the Web 3.3.1 How HTML works on the Web 3.3.2.
What are the tags up to?
3.3.3 Is there anything HTML cannot do?
16 3.4.
Things you can do with HTML 4.0 .
Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources MODULE TWO –The Basics of HTML UNIT ONE - Getting Started with HTML 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 – How to Use Notepad 3.2 – How to Use Markup Tags 3.3 - How to Write a Simple HTML Document 3.4 - How to Use Special HTML Editing Software 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources UNIT TWO - Understanding the Basics of HTML 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 – How to Use the Head Section 3.2 – How to Use the Body Section 3.3 - How to Use Headings 3.4 - How to Use the Paragraph Tag 3.5 - How to Use Special Characters 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources UNIT THREE - Formatting Text 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 – How to Format Characters with Physical Tags 17 3.2 – How to Format Characters with Logical Markup Tags 3.3 - How to Format Paragraphs 3.4 - How to Use Text Breaks 3.5 - How to Use Preformatted Text 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources UNIT FOUR – Using Hypertext Links 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How to Create a Hyperlink 3.2 How to Use the ID Attribute 3.3 How to Use Relative Path Names 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources MODULE THREE –Lists, Tables and Frames in HTML UNIT ONE – Creating Lists in HTML 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1How to Create Unordered Lists 3.2How to Create Ordered Lists 3.3.
How to Create Definition Lists 3.4 How to Create Lists within Lists 4.
0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources UNIT TWO – Getting Feedback with Forms 18 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 HTML form 3.2 How to Create a Simple Form 3.3 How to Use Input Fields in Forms 4.
0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources UNIT THREE – Using Tables 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
How to create a simple Table 3.
2 How to format Tables 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources MODULE FOUR – JAVASCRIPT UNIT ONE - Introduction to Java Script 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is JavaScript?
3.2 The basic concepts of JavaScript and client-side scripting 3.3.
History of JavaScript 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 19 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources UNIT TWO: Java Script variables and data types 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 JavaScript Variables 3.2 Java Script Data type 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources UNIT THREE: Statement and Operators 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 JavaScript Statement 3.2 JavaScript Operators 3.3 Control structures 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources MODULE ONE – WEBSITE DESIGN UNIT ONE - THE INTERNET 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1– The Internet 3.2– History of the Internet 3.3 - Modern Uses 20 3.4 - Information 3.5 Communication 3.6 - Data Transfer 3.7 – Access 3.8 - Sociology of the Internet 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION Web design is the process of planning and creating a website.
Text, images, digital media and interactive elements are shaped by the web designer to produce the page seen on the web browser.
It is the creation of digital environments that facilitate and encourage human activity; reflect or adapt to individual voices and content; and change gracefully over time while always retaining their identity.
The terms Internet and World Wide Web are often used in everyday speech without much distinction.
However, the Internet and the World Wide Web are not one and the same.
The Internet is a global data communications system.
It is a hardware and software infrastructure services that provide connectivity between computers.
In contrast, the Web is one of communication via the Internet.
It is a collection of interconnected documents and other resources, linked by hyperlinks and URLs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Define the Internet (cid:1) Differentiate between the Internet and the World Wild Web (cid:1) Describe the History of the Internet (cid:1) List World Wide Web browser software available in this course material 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 – The Internet The Internet is a global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP) to serve billions of users worldwide.
It is a network of networks that consists of millions of private, public, academic, business, and government networks, of local to global scope, that are linked by a broad array of electronic, wireless and optical networking technologies.
The Internet carries a vast range of information resources and services, such as the inter-linked hypertext documents of the World Wide Web (WWW) and the infrastructure to support electronic mail.
21 Most traditional communications media including telephone, music, film, and television are reshaped or redefined by the Internet, giving birth to new services such as Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and IPTV.
Newspaper, book and other print publishing are adapting to Web site technology, or are reshaped into blogging and web feeds.
The Internet has enabled or accelerated new forms of human interactions through instant messaging, Internet forums, and social networking.
Online shopping has boomed both for major retail outlets and small artisans and traders.
Business-to-business and financial services on the Internet affect supply chains across entire industries.
The origins of the Internet reach back to research of the 1960s, commissioned by the United States government in collaboration with private commercial interests to build robust, fault- tolerant, and distributed computer networks.
The funding of a new U.S. backbone by the National Science Foundation in the 1980s, as well as private funding for other commercial backbones, led to worldwide participation in the development of new networking technologies, and the merger of many networks.
The commercialization of what was by the 1990s an international network resulted in its popularization and incorporation into virtually every aspect of modern human life.
As of 2009, an estimated quarter of Earth's population used the services of the Internet.
The Internet has no centralized governance in either technological implementation or policies for access and usage; each constituent network sets its own standards.
Only the overreaching definitions of the two principal name spaces in the Internet, the Internet Protocol address space and the Domain Name System, are directed by a maintainer organization, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN).
The technical underpinning and standardization of the core protocols (IPv4 and IPv6) is an activity of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a non-profit organization of loosely affiliated international participants that anyone may associate with by contributing technical expertise.
3.2– History of the Internet The USSR's launch of Sputnik spurred the United States to create the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA or DARPA) in February 1958 to regain a technological lead.
ARPA created the Information Processing Technology Office (IPTO) to further the research of the Semi Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE) program, which had networked country-wide radar systems together for the first time.
The IPTO's purpose was to find ways to address the US military's concern about survivability of their communications networks, and as a first step interconnect their computers at the Pentagon, Cheyenne Mountain, and Strategic Air Command headquarters (SAC).
J. C. R. Licklider, a promoter of universal networking, was selected to head the IPTO.
Licklider moved from the Psycho-Acoustic Laboratory at Harvard University to MIT in 1950, after becoming interested in information technology.
At MIT, he served on a committee that established Lincoln Laboratory and worked on the SAGE project.
In 1957 he became a Vice President at BBN, where he bought the first production PDP-1 computer and conducted the first public demonstration of time-sharing.
At the IPTO, Licklider's successor Ivan Sutherland in 1965 got Lawrence Roberts to start a project to make a network, and Roberts based the technology on the work of Paul Baran, who had written an exhaustive study for the United States Air Force that recommended packet switching (opposed to circuit switching) to achieve better network robustness and disaster survivability.
Roberts had worked at the MIT Lincoln Laboratory originally established to work on the design of the SAGE system.
UCLA professor Leonard Kleinrock had provided 22 the theoretical foundations for packet networks in 1962, and later, in the 1970s, for hierarchical routing, concepts which have been the underpinning of the development towards today's Internet.
Sutherland's successor Robert Taylor convinced Roberts to build on his early packet switching successes and come and be the IPTO Chief Scientist.
Once there, Roberts prepared a report called Resource Sharing Computer Networks which was approved by Taylor in June 1968 and laid the foundation for the launch of the working ARPANET the following year.
After much work, the first two nodes of what would become the ARPANET were interconnected between Kleinrock's Network Measurement Center at the UCLA's School of Engineering and Applied Science and Douglas Engelbart's NLS system at SRI International (SRI) in Menlo Park, California, on 29 October 1969.
The third site on the ARPANET was the Culler-Fried Interactive Mathematics center at the University of California at Santa Barbara, and the fourth was the University of Utah Graphics Department.
In an early sign of future growth, there were already fifteen sites connected to the young ARPANET by the end of 1971.
The ARPANET was origin of today's Internet.
In an independent development, Donald Davies at the UK National Physical Laboratory developed the concept of packet switching in the early 1960s, first giving a talk on the subject in 1965, after which the teams in the new field from two sides of the Atlantic ocean first became acquainted.
It was actually Davies' coinage of the wording packet and packet switching that was adopted as the standard terminology.
Davies also built a packet-switched network in the UK, called the Mark I in 1970.
Bolt Beranek and Newman (BBN), the private contractors for ARPANET, set out to create a separate commercial version after establishing "value added carriers" was legalized in the U.S.
The network they established was called Telenet and began operation in 1975, installing free public dial-up access in cities throughout the U.S. Telenet was the first packet- switching network open to the general public.
Following the demonstration that packet switching worked on the ARPANET, the British Post Office, Telenet, DATAPAC and TRANSPAC collaborated to create the first international packet-switched network service.
In the UK, this was referred to as the International Packet Switched Service (IPSS), in 1978.
The collection of X.25-based networks grew from Europe and the US to cover Canada, Hong Kong and Australia by 1981.
The X.25 packet switching standard was developed in the CCITT (now called ITU-T) around 1976.
X.25 was independent of the TCP/IP protocols that arose from the experimental work of DARPA on the ARPANET, Packet Radio Net and Packet Satellite Net during the same time period.
The early ARPANET ran on the Network Control Program (NCP), implementing the host-to- host connectivity and switching layers of the protocol stack, designed and first implemented in December 1970 by a team called the Network Working Group (NWG) led by Steve Crocker.
To respond to the network's rapid growth as more and more locations connected, Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn developed the first description of the now widely used TCP protocols during 1973 and published a paper on the subject in May 1974.
Use of the term "Internet" to describe a single global TCP/IP network originated in December 1974 with the publication of RFC 675, the first full specification of TCP that was written by Vinton Cerf, 23 Yogen Dalal and Carl Sunshine, then at Stanford University.
During the next nine years, work proceeded to refine the protocols and to implement them on a wide range of operating systems.
The first TCP/IP-based wide-area network was operational by 1 January 1983 when all hosts on the ARPANET were switched over from the older NCP protocols.
In 1985, the United States' National Science Foundation (NSF) commissioned the construction of the NSFNET, a university 56 kilobit/second network backbone using computers called "fuzzballs" by their inventor, David L. Mills.
The following year, NSF sponsored the conversion to a higher-speed 1.5 megabit/second network.
A key decision to use the DARPA TCP/IP protocols was made by Dennis Jennings, then in charge of the Supercomputer program at NSF.
The opening of the NSFNET to other networks began in 1988.
The US Federal Networking Council approved the interconnection of the NSFNET to the commercial MCI Mail system in that year and the link was made in the summer of 1989.
Other commercial electronic mail services were soon connected, including OnTyme, Telemail and Compuserve.
In that same year, three commercial Internet service providers (ISPs) began operations: UUNET, PSINet, and CERFNET.
Important, separate networks that offered gateways into, then later merged with, the Internet include Usenet and BITNET.
Various other commercial and educational networks, such as Telenet (by that time renamed to Sprintnet), Tymnet, Compuserve and JANET were interconnected with the growing Internet in the 1980s as the TCP/IP protocol became increasingly popular.
The adaptability of TCP/IP to existing communication networks allowed for rapid growth.
The open availability of the specifications and reference code permitted commercial vendors to build interoperable network components, such as routers, making standardized network gear available from many companies.
This aided in the rapid growth of the Internet and the proliferation of local-area networking.
It seeded the widespread implementation and rigorous standardization of TCP/IP on UNIX and virtually every other common operating system.
Figure 1: This NeXT Computer was used by Sir Tim Berners-Lee at CERN and became the world's first Web server.
Although the basic applications and guidelines that make the Internet possible had existed for almost two decades, the network did not gain a public face until the 1990s.
On 6 August 1991, CERN, a pan-European organization for particle research, publicized the new World 24 Wide Web project.
The Web was invented by British scientist Tim Berners-Lee in 1989.
An early popular web browser was ViolaWWW, patterned after HyperCard and built using the X Window System.
It was eventually replaced in popularity by the Mosaic web browser.
In 1993, the National Center for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois released version 1.0 of Mosaic, and by late 1994 there was growing public interest in the previously academic, technical Internet.
By 1996 usage of the word Internet had become commonplace, and consequently, so had its use as a synecdoche in reference to the World Wide Web.
Meanwhile, over the course of the decade, the Internet successfully accommodated the majority of previously existing public computer networks (although some networks, such as FidoNet, have remained separate).
During the late 1990s, it was estimated that traffic on the public Internet grew by 100 percent per year, while the mean annual growth in the number of Internet users was thought to be between 20% and 50%.
This growth is often attributed to the lack of central administration, which allows organic growth of the network, as well as the non-proprietary open nature of the Internet protocols, which encourages vendor interoperability and prevents any one company from exerting too much control over the network.
The estimated population of Internet users is 1.97 billion as of 30 June 2010.
From 2009 onward, the Internet is expected to grow significantly in Brazil, Russia, India, China, and Indonesia (BRICI countries).
These countries have large populations and moderate to high economic growth, but still low Internet penetration rates.
In 2009, the BRICI countries represented about 45 percent of the world's population and had approximately 610 million Internet users, but by 2015, Internet users in BRICI countries will double to 1.2 billion, and will triple in Indonesia.
3.3 Modern uses The Internet is allowing greater flexibility in working hours and location, especially with the spread of unmetered high-speed connections and web applications.
The Internet can now be accessed almost anywhere by numerous means, especially through mobile Internet devices.
Mobile phones, datacards, handheld game consoles and cellular routers allow users to connect to the Internet from anywhere there is a wireless network supporting that device's technology.
Within the limitations imposed by small screens and other limited facilities of such pocket-sized devices, services of the Internet, including email and the web, may be available.
Service providers may restrict the services offered and wireless data transmission charges may be significantly higher than other access methods.
Educational material at all levels from pre-school to post-doctoral is available from websites.
Examples range from CBeebies, through school and high-school revision guides, virtual universities, to access to top-end scholarly literature through the likes of Google Scholar.
In distance education, help with homework and other assignments, self-guided learning, whiling away spare time, or just looking up more detail on an interesting fact, it has never been easier for people to access educational information at any level from anywhere.
The Internet in general and the World Wide Web in particular are important enablers of both formal and informal education.
25 The low cost and nearly instantaneous sharing of ideas, knowledge, and skills has made collaborative work dramatically easier, with the help of collaborative software.
Not only can a group cheaply communicate and share ideas, but the wide reach of the Internet allows such groups to easily form in the first place.
An example of this is the free software movement, which has produced, among other programs, Linux, Mozilla Firefox, and OpenOffice.org.
Internet "chat", whether in the form of IRC chat rooms or channels, or via instant messaging systems, allow colleagues to stay in touch in a very convenient way when working at their computers during the day.
Messages can be exchanged even more quickly and conveniently than via email.
Extensions to these systems may allow files to be exchanged, "whiteboard" drawings to be shared or voice and video contact between team members.
Version control systems allow collaborating teams to work on shared sets of documents without either accidentally overwriting each other's work or having members wait until they get "sent" documents to be able to make their contributions.
Business and project teams can share calendars as well as documents and other information.
Such collaboration occurs in a wide variety of areas including scientific research, software development, conference planning, political activism and creative writing.
Social and political collaboration is also becoming more widespread as both Internet access and computer literacy grow.
From the flash mob 'events' of the early 2000s to the use of social networking in the 2009 Iranian election protests, the Internet allows people to work together more effectively and in many more ways than was possible without it.
The Internet allows computer users to remotely access other computers and information stores easily, wherever they may be across the world.
They may do this with or without the use of security, authentication and encryption technologies, depending on the requirements.
This is encouraging new ways of working from home, collaboration and information sharing in many industries.
An accountant sitting at home can audit the books of a company based in another country, on a server situated in a third country that is remotely maintained by IT specialists in a fourth.
These accounts could have been created by home-working bookkeepers, in other remote locations, based on information emailed to them from offices all over the world.
Some of these things were possible before the widespread use of the Internet, but the cost of private leased lines would have made many of them infeasible in practice.
An office worker away from their desk, perhaps on the other side of the world on a business trip or a holiday, can open a remote desktop session into his normal office PC using a secure Virtual Private Network (VPN) connection via the Internet.
This gives the worker complete access to all of his or her normal files and data, including email and other applications, while away from the office.
This concept has been referred to among system administrators as the Virtual Private Nightmare, because it extends the secure perimeter of a corporate network into its employees' homes.
3.4 Information Many people use the terms Internet and World Wide Web, or just the Web, interchangeably, but the two terms are not synonymous.
The World Wide Web is a global set of documents, images and other resources, logically interrelated by hyperlinks and referenced with Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs).
URIs allow providers to symbolically identify services and clients to locate and address web servers, file servers, and other databases that store documents and provide resources and access them using the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the primary carrier protocol of the Web.
HTTP is only one of the hundreds of 26 communication protocols used on the Internet.
Web services may also use HTTP to allow software systems to communicate in order to share and exchange business logic and data.
World Wide Web browser software, such as Microsoft's Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Opera, Apple's Safari, and Google Chrome, let users navigate from one web page to another via hyperlinks embedded in the documents.
These documents may also contain any combination of computer data, including graphics, sounds, text, video, multimedia and interactive content including games, office applications and scientific demonstrations.
Through keyword-driven Internet research using search engines like Yahoo!
and Google, users worldwide have easy, instant access to a vast and diverse amount of online information.
Compared to printed encyclopedias and traditional libraries, the World Wide Web has enabled the decentralization of information.
The Web has also enabled individuals and organizations to publish ideas and information to a potentially large audience online at greatly reduced expense and time delay.
Publishing a web page, a blog, or building a website involves little initial cost and many cost-free services are available.
Publishing and maintaining large, professional web sites with attractive, diverse and up-to-date information is still a difficult and expensive proposition, however.
Many individuals and some companies and groups use web logs or blogs, which are largely used as easily updatable online diaries.
Some commercial organizations encourage staff to communicate advice in their areas of specialization in the hope that visitors will be impressed by the expert knowledge and free information, and be attracted to the corporation as a result.
One example of this practice is Microsoft, whose product developers publish their personal blogs in order to pique the public's interest in their work.
Collections of personal web pages published by large service providers remain popular, and have become increasingly sophisticated.
Whereas operations such as Angelfire and GeoCities have existed since the early days of the Web, newer offerings from, for example, Facebook and MySpace currently have large followings.
These operations often brand themselves as social network services rather than simply as web page hosts.
Advertising on popular web pages can be lucrative, and e-commerce or the sale of products and services directly via the Web continues to grow.
When the Web began in the 1990s, a typical web page was stored in completed form on a web server, formatted with HTML, ready to be sent to a user's browser in response to a request.
Over time, the process of creating and serving web pages has become more automated and more dynamic.
Websites are often created using content management or wiki software with, initially, very little content.
Contributors to these systems, who may be paid staff, members of a club or other organization or members of the public, fill underlying databases with content using editing pages designed for that purpose, while casual visitors view and read this content in its final HTML form.
There may or may not be editorial, approval and security systems built into the process of taking newly entered content and making it available to the target visitors.
3.5 Communication Electronic mail, or email, is an important communications service available on the Internet.
The concept of sending electronic text messages between parties in a way analogous to mailing letters or memos predates the creation of the Internet.
Pictures, documents and other files are sent as email attachments.
Emails can be cc-ed to multiple email addresses.
27 Internet telephony is another common communications service made possible by the creation of the Internet.
VoIP stands for Voice-over-Internet Protocol, referring to the protocol that underlies all Internet communication.
The idea began in the early 1990s with walkie-talkie- like voice applications for personal computers.
In recent years many VoIP systems have become as easy to use and as convenient as a normal telephone.
The benefit is that, as the Internet carries the voice traffic, VoIP can be free or cost much less than a traditional telephone call, especially over long distances and especially for those with always-on Internet connections such as cable or ADSL.
VoIP is maturing into a competitive alternative to traditional telephone service.
Interoperability between different providers has improved and the ability to call or receive a call from a traditional telephone is available.
Simple, inexpensive VoIP network adapters are available that eliminate the need for a personal computer.
Voice quality can still vary from call to call but is often equal to and can even exceed that of traditional calls.
Remaining problems for VoIP include emergency telephone number dialing and reliability.
Currently, a few VoIP providers provide an emergency service, but it is not universally available.
Traditional phones are line-powered and operate during a power failure; VoIP does not do so without a backup power source for the phone equipment and the Internet access devices.
VoIP has also become increasingly popular for gaming applications, as a form of communication between players.
Popular VoIP clients for gaming include Ventrilo and Teamspeak.
Wii, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360 also offer VoIP chat features.
3.6 Data transfer File sharing is an example of transferring large amounts of data across the Internet.
A computer file can be emailed to customers, colleagues and friends as an attachment.
It can be uploaded to a website or FTP server for easy download by others.
It can be put into a "shared location" or onto a file server for instant use by colleagues.
The load of bulk downloads to many users can be eased by the use of "mirror" servers or peer-to-peer networks.
In any of these cases, access to the file may be controlled by user authentication, the transit of the file over the Internet may be obscured by encryption, and money may change hands for access to the file.
The price can be paid by the remote charging of funds from, for example, a credit card whose details are also passed—usually fully encrypted—across the Internet.
The origin and authenticity of the file received may be checked by digital signatures or by MD5 or other message digests.
These simple features of the Internet, over a worldwide basis, are changing the production, sale, and distribution of anything that can be reduced to a computer file for transmission.
This includes all manner of print publications, software products, news, music, film, video, photography, graphics and the other arts.
This in turn has caused seismic shifts in each of the existing industries that previously controlled the production and distribution of these products.
Streaming media is the real-time delivery of digital media for the immediate consumption or enjoyment by end users.
Many radio and television broadcasters provide Internet feeds of their live audio and video productions.
They may also allow time-shift viewing or listening such as Preview, Classic Clips and Listen Again features.
These providers have been joined by a range of pure Internet "broadcasters" who never had on-air licenses.
This means that an Internet-connected device, such as a computer or something more specific, can be used to access on-line media in much the same way as was previously possible only with a television or radio receiver.
The range of available types of content is much wider, from specialized technical webcasts to on-demand popular multimedia services.
Podcasting is a variation on 28 this theme, where—usually audio—material is downloaded and played back on a computer or shifted to a portable media player to be listened to on the move.
These techniques using simple equipment allow anybody, with little censorship or licensing control, to broadcast audio-visual material worldwide.
Digital media streaming increases the demand for network bandwidth.
For example, standard image quality needs 1 Mbps link speed for SD 480p, HD 720p quality requires 2.5 Mbps, and the top-of-the-line HDX quality needs 4.5 Mbps for 1080p.
Webcams are a low-cost extension of this phenomenon.
While some webcams can give full- frame-rate video, the picture is usually either small or updates slowly.
Internet users can watch animals around an African waterhole, ships in the Panama Canal, traffic at a local roundabout or monitor their own premises, live and in real time.
Video chat rooms and video conferencing are also popular with many uses being found for personal webcams, with and without two-way sound.
YouTube was founded on 15 February 2005 and is now the leading website for free streaming video with a vast number of users.
It uses a flash-based web player to stream and show video files.
Registered users may upload an unlimited amount of video and build their own personal profile.
YouTube claims that its users watch hundreds of millions, and upload hundreds of thousands of videos daily.
3.7 Access The prevalent language for communication on the Internet has been English.
This may be a result of the origin of the Internet, as well as the language's role as a lingua franca.
Early computer systems were limited to the characters in the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), a subset of the Latin alphabet.
After English (27%), the most requested languages on the World Wide Web are Chinese (23%), Spanish (8%), Japanese (5%), Portuguese and German (4% each), Arabic, French and Russian (3% each), and Korean (2%).
By region, 42% of the world's Internet users are based in Asia, 24% in Europe, 14% in North America, 10% in Latin America and the Caribbean taken together, 6% in Africa, 3% in the Middle East and 1% in Australia/Oceania.
The Internet's technologies have developed enough in recent years, especially in the use of Unicode, that good facilities are available for development and communication in the world's widely used languages.
However, some glitches such as mojibake (incorrect display of some languages' characters) still remain.
Common methods of Internet access in homes include dial-up, landline broadband (over coaxial cable, fiber optic or copper wires), Wi-Fi, satellite and 3G/4G technology cell phones.
Public places to use the Internet include libraries and Internet cafes, where computers with Internet connections are available.
There are also Internet access points in many public places such as airport halls and coffee shops, in some cases just for brief use while standing.
Various terms are used, such as "public Internet kiosk", "public access terminal", and "Web payphone".
Many hotels now also have public terminals, though these are usually fee-based.
These terminals are widely accessed for various usage like ticket booking, bank deposit, online payment etc.
Wi-Fi provides wireless access to computer networks, and therefore can do so to the Internet itself.
Hotspots providing such access include Wi-Fi cafes, where would- be users need to bring their own wireless-enabled devices such as a laptop or PDA.
These services may be free to all, free to customers only, or fee-based.
A hotspot need not be limited to a confined location.
A whole campus or park, or even an entire city can be enabled.
29 Grassroots efforts have led to wireless community networks.
Commercial Wi-Fi services covering large city areas are in place in London, Vienna, Toronto, San Francisco, Philadelphia, Chicago and Pittsburgh.
The Internet can then be accessed from such places as a park bench.
Apart from Wi-Fi, there have been experiments with proprietary mobile wireless networks like Ricochet, various high-speed data services over cellular phone networks, and fixed wireless services.
High-end mobile phones such as smartphones generally come with Internet access through the phone network.
Web browsers such as Opera are available on these advanced handsets, which can also run a wide variety of other Internet software.
More mobile phones have Internet access than PCs, though this is not as widely used.
An Internet access provider and protocol matrix differentiates the methods used to get online.
In contrast, an Internet blackout or outage can be caused by accidental local signaling interruptions.
Disruptions of submarine communications cables may cause blackouts or slowdowns to large areas depending on them, such as in the 2008 submarine cable disruption.
Internet blackouts of almost entire countries can be achieved by governments as Internet censorship, such as with the Internet in Egypt, where approximately 93% of networks were shut down in 2011 in an attempt to stop mobilisation for anti-government protests.
In an American study in 2005, the percentage of men using the Internet was very slightly ahead of the percentage of women, although this difference reversed in those under 30.
Men logged on more often, spend more time online, and are more likely to be broadband users, whereas women tended to make more use of opportunities to communicate (such as email).
Men were more likely to use the Internet to pay bills, participate in auctions, and for recreation such as downloading music and videos.
Men and women were equally likely to use the Internet for shopping and banking.
More recent studies indicate that in 2008, women significantly outnumbered men on most social networking sites, such as Facebook and Myspace, although the ratios varied with age.
In addition, women watched more streaming content, whereas men downloaded more.
In terms of blogs, men were more likely to blog in the first place; among those who blog, men were more likely to have a professional blog, whereas women were more likely to have a personal blog.
3.8 Sociology of the Internet The Internet has enabled entirely new forms of social interaction, activities, and organizing, thanks to its basic features such as widespread usability and access.
Social networking websites such as Facebook, Twitter and MySpace have created new ways to socialize and interact.
Users of these sites are able to add a wide variety of information to pages, to pursue common interests, and to connect with others.
It is also possible to find existing acquaintances, to allow communication among existing groups of people.
Sites like LinkedIn foster commercial and business connections.
YouTube and Flickr specialize in users' videos and photographs.
In the first decade of the 21st century the first generation is raised with widespread availability of Internet connectivity, bringing consequences and concerns in areas such as personal privacy and identity, and distribution of copyrighted materials.
These "digital natives" face a variety of challenges that were not present for prior generations.
30 The Internet has achieved new relevance as a political tool, leading to Internet censorship by some states.
The presidential campaign of Howard Dean in 2004 in the United States was notable for its success in soliciting donation via the Internet.
Many political groups use the Internet to achieve a new method of organizing in order to carry out their mission, having given rise to Internet activism.
Some governments, such as those of Iran, North Korea, Myanmar, the People's Republic of China, and Saudi Arabia, restrict what people in their countries can access on the Internet, especially political and religious content.
This is accomplished through software that filters domains and content so that they may not be easily accessed or obtained without elaborate circumvention.
In Norway, Denmark, Finland and Sweden, major Internet service providers have voluntarily, possibly to avoid such an arrangement being turned into law, agreed to restrict access to sites listed by authorities.
While this list of forbidden URLs is only supposed to contain addresses of known child pornography sites, the content of the list is secret.
Many countries, including the United States, have enacted laws against the possession or distribution of certain material, such as child pornography, via the Internet, but do not mandate filtering software.
There are many free and commercially available software programs, called content-control software, with which a user can choose to block offensive websites on individual computers or networks, in order to limit a child's access to pornographic materials or depiction of violence.
The Internet has been a major outlet for leisure activity since its inception, with entertaining social experiments such as MUDs and MOOs being conducted on university servers, and humor-related Usenet groups receiving much traffic.
Today, many Internet forums have sections devoted to games and funny videos; short cartoons in the form of Flash movies are also popular.
Over 6 million people use blogs or message boards as a means of communication and for the sharing of ideas.
The pornography and gambling industries have taken advantage of the World Wide Web, and often provide a significant source of advertising revenue for other websites.
Although many governments have attempted to restrict both industries' use of the Internet, this has generally failed to stop their widespread popularity.
One main area of leisure activity on the Internet is multiplayer gaming.
This form of recreation creates communities, where people of all ages and origins enjoy the fast-paced world of multiplayer games.
These range from MMORPG to first-person shooters, from role- playing video games to online gambling.
This has revolutionized the way many people interact while spending their free time on the Internet.
While online gaming has been around since the 1970s, modern modes of online gaming began with subscription services such as GameSpy and MPlayer.
Non-subscribers were limited to certain types of game play or certain games.
Many people use the Internet to access and download music, movies and other works for their enjoyment and relaxation.
Free and fee-based services exist for all of these activities, using centralized servers and distributed peer-to-peer technologies.
Some of these sources exercise more care with respect to the original artists' copyrights than others.
Many people use the World Wide Web to access news, weather and sports reports, to plan and book vacations and to find out more about their interests.
People use chat, messaging and email to make and stay in touch with friends worldwide, sometimes in the same way as some previously had pen pals.
The Internet has seen a growing number of Web desktops, where users can access their files and settings via the Internet.
31 Cyber slacking can become a drain on corporate resources; the average UK employee spent 57 minutes a day surfing the Web while at work, according to a 2003 study by Peninsula Business Services.
Internet addiction disorder is excessive computer use that interferes with daily life.
Some psychologists believe that Internet use has other effects on individuals for instance interfering with the deep thinking that leads to true creativity.
Internet usage has been correlated to users' loneliness.
Lonely people tend to use the Internet as an outlet for their feelings and to share their stories with others, such as in the "I am lonely will anyone speak to me" thread.
4.0 CONCLUSION: Internet is a short form of the technical term internetwork, the result of interconnecting computer networks with special gateways or routers.
The Internet is also often referred to as the Net.
5.0 SUMMARY: In this unit, you have learnt: • Definition of the Internet • History of the Internet • Similar and distinguishing elements of the Internet and WWW • Different Search Engines • Sociology of the Internet 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (cid:1) Define the Internet (cid:1) Differentiate between the Internet and the WWW (cid:1) List other things WWW can be used to do 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources • Abbate, Janet.
Inventing the Internet.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999.
• Bemer, Bob, "A History of Source Concepts for the Internet/Web" • Campbell-Kelly, Martin; Aspray, William.
Computer: A History of the Information Machine.
New York: BasicBooks, 1996.
• Clark, David D., "The Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet Protocols", Computer Communications Review 18:4, August 1988, pp.
106–114 • Graham, Ian S. The HTML Sourcebook: The Complete Guide to HTML.
New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1995.
• Krol, Ed.
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Internet, 1987.
• Krol, Ed.
Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalog.
O'Reilly & Associates, 1992.
• Scientific American Special Issue on Communications, Computers, and Networks, September, 1991 U NIT TWO – Understanding the WWW 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 32 4.0 MAIN CONTENT 4.1 – How the WWW works 4.2 – How do URLs work 4.3 -How to Use a Web Browser 4.4 How to Use a Hypertext link 5.0 CONCLUSION 6.0 SUMMARY 7.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 8.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the best things about the World Wide Web is that it is just as easy to create Web pages as it is to browse them.
The key to publishing on the Web is having a firm understanding of Hypertext Markup Language (HTML).
Despite the intimidating name, HTML is extremely simple to learn and use.
By the time you finish this course material, you will be well on your way to becoming an HTML wizard.
Before diving head-first into the language of HTML itself, it will help you to understand a little bit about how the World Wide Web works.
After all, HTML is designed to guide users through the vast and tangled resources of the Web.
As a student of this course , you will need to understand some of the basics behind the architecture of the World Wide Web.
Knowing how the Web works, as well as when it doesn't and why, can help you make important decisions about how to construct your own Web pages.
It would be impossible to describe in detail the inner workings of the Web in a single Unit.
With that in mind, this Unit provides you with a "refresher course" on the basics.
Armed with this basic knowledge, you'll be able to move on to writing your own Web pages in a very short time.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Explain the meaning of WWW (cid:1) Describe how WWW works (cid:1) Explain parts of URLs 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 How the WWW works The World Wide Web is a system of hypertext documents that are linked to each other.
Internet is the means to access this set of interlinked documents.
These hypertext documents can contain text, images or even audio and video data.
The World Wide Web, serving as an enormous information base, has also facilitated the spread of this information across the globe.
It has led to the emergence of the Internet age.
It will not be an exaggeration to say that the Internet owes its popularity to the World Wide Web.
33 Before understanding how World Wide Web works, let us delve into the history behind the creation of this smart information base, popularly known as 'www'.
It was the genius of Sir Tim Berners-Lee, an English computer scientist and MIT professor, who created the World Wide Web.
While he was working at CERN in Switzerland, he built ENQUIRE, a closed database of information containing bidirectional links that could be edited from the server.
ENQUIRE was, in many ways, similar to the modern-day World Wide Web.
In 1989, Berners-Lee wrote a proposal describing an information management system.
True, the concept of hypertext originated from projects such as the Hypertext Editing System at Brown University and similar projects by Ted Nelson and Andries van Dam, both working in the field of computers and Internet technology.
But Berners-Lee accomplished the feat of combining the concepts of hypertext and Internet.
He also developed a system of globally unique identifiers for web resources, which later came to be known as Uniform Resource Identifiers.
On April 30, 1993, it was decided the the World Wide Web would be free to everyone.
After leaving CERN, Tim Berners-Lee founded the World Wide Web Consortium at the MIT Laboratory for Computer Science.
Asking how the Internet works is not the same as asking how the world wide web works.
Well, Internet and the World Wide Web are not one and the same, although they are often used as synonyms.
While the Internet is an infrastructure providing interconnectivity between network computers, the web is one of the services of the Internet.
It is a collection of documents that can be shared across Internet-enabled computers.
The network of web servers serves as the backbone of the World Wide Web.
The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is used to gain access to the web.
A web browser makes a request for a particular web page to the web server, which in turn responds with the requested web page and its contents.
It then displays the web page as rendered by HTML or other web languages used by the page.
Each resource on the web is identified by a globally unique identifier (URI).
Each web page has a unique address, with the help of which a browser accesses it.
With the help of the domain name system, a hierarchical naming system for computers and resources participating in the Internet, the URL is resolved into an IP address.
Presence of hyperlinks, the worldwide availability of content and universal readership is some of the striking features of the World Wide Web.
The interlinked hypertext documents form a web of information.
Hyperlinks present on web pages allow the web users to choose their paths of traversal across information on the web.
They provide an efficient cross-referencing system and create a non-linear form of text.
Moreover, they create a different reading experience.
The information on the web is available 24/7 across the globe.
It is updated in real time and made accessible to web users around the world.
Except for certain websites requiring user login, all the other websites are open to everyone.
This all-time availability of information has made the Internet, a platform for knowledge-sharing.
Thanks to the use of a common HTML format for rendering web content and a common access method using the HTTP protocol, the web has achieved universal readership.
The World Wide Web, a compilation of millions of hypertext documents, has brought together information from all over the world, 'just a click away'.
3.2 – How do URLs work 34 Almost every item of information on the WWW can be accessed directly.
That is because every document, file and image has a specific address.
These addresses are called Uniform Resource Locators (URLs).
A URL is a formatted text string used by Web browsers, email clients and other software to identify a network resource on the Internet.
Network resources are files that can be plain Web pages, other text documents, graphics, or programs.
URLs are used by Web browser to locate and access information on the WWW.
A URL is also known as a Web address.
Think of URLs as a postal addresses for the Internet.
Figure 1: Showing parts of Uniform Resource Locator.
The first part of the URL parts is known as the protocol.
This is almost always http://, which is short for Hypertext Transfer Protocol.
Some URLs start with a different protocol, such as ftp:// or news://.
If you're accessing a document on your local machine instead of on the Web, the URL will begin with file://.
The second part of the URL is known as the domain name.
If you've used e-mail on the Internet, you're probably already familiar with domains.
The domain represents the name of the server that you're connecting to.
A domain name, to put it simple, is your address on the World Wide Web.
This is where you put up your website and it is what internet users will type in their address bar in order to locate your site while online.
Your domain name should be short, simple, and easy to remember.
But, one must keep in mind that domain names are only available for one individual or business.
This is to maintain uniqueness and to avoid confusion among the millions of websites and internet users.
A most common example of a domain name is www yahoo.com.
The first part, the www identifies the server name of the domain.
Yahoo, the second element, is the name of the company, individual or organization; and the suffix .com is the domain name extension, which identifies the purpose of the website.
The most important part of the entire domain name is the second element, which states the unique name of an individual, an organization, or a company.
This is what sets it apart from all the other addresses present on the web, as some people would try to change a part of the domain name in order to direct traffic to their site instead.
Another example of a domain name is www nasa.gov.
This is the NASA website, and since it is a government office, it uses the extension dot gov.
Users need to bear in mind that the domain name extensions are there for a purpose.
It indicates the purpose why the website exists.
The third part of the URL is called the directory path.
This is the specific area on the server where the item resides.
Directory paths on Web servers work a lot like they do on your desktop computer.
To locate a particular file on a server, you need to indicate its directory path first.
35 The fourth part of the URL is called the document file name.
This indicates the specific file being accessed.
This is usually an HTML file, but it can also be an image, sound, or another file.
Sometimes the URL contains a fifth part, known as the anchor name.
This is a pointer to a specific part of an HTML document.
It's always preceded by the pound sign (#).
Anchors are especially useful for large documents.
Absolute vs.
Relative URLs Full URLs featuring all substrings are called absolute URLs.
In some cases such as within Web pages, URLs can contain only the one location element.
These are called relative URLs.
Relative URLs are used for efficiency by Web servers and a few other programs when they already know the correct URL protocol and host.
3.3- How to Use a Web Browser Many people can successfully navigate the World Wide Web without any problem at all and may even consider themselves experts of the Web.
On the other hand, there are thousands of other people who do not even know the first thing about operating a web browser.
If you would like to know how to operate a web browser (the tool you use to navigate the internet), such asNetscape, Microsoft's Internet Explorer or Mozilla's Firefox without taking an expensive computer-learning class then here are the basics of using a web browser of your choice.
36  Figure 2: A Web Browser.
Instructions 1.
Get acquainted with the web browser you are using.
All web browsers are relatively similar, but the two most popular web browsers are Microsoft Internet Explorer and Mozilla Firefox.
Open the web browser by double- clicking on the icon on your desktop or right-clicking the icon and choosing "Open."
2.
Once the browser is open, notice the Address Bar, which is the URL (website address) where you are located.
To easily identify the Address Bar, it will be located at the top of the browser itself and the URL in the Address Bar will usually begin with "http://www."
3.
Next, notice the tools that are surrounding the Address Bar.
For example, there will usually be a "Page Back" and "Page Forward" button, usually indicated by a forward and backward arrow.
There may even be a picture or icon that will stand for "Home Page," which is the first web page that is viewed when the web browser is opened.
4.
Above the web browser's icons that you've just looked at, you'll notice a series of help menus, such as "File," "Edit," "View," "History," "Bookmarks" or "Favorites,", as well as "Tools," and "Help."
All of these menus are placed there because they may be able to help you at one time or the other.
For 37 example, clicking once on "Bookmarks" or "Favorites" will show you a list of all the websites that you have placed in your "favorite" list.
5.
Two important things to know how to do are to get to a specific website destination of your choice and make that website one of your "favorites" or "bookmarks.
"We will start with navigating to a specific website of your choice.
If you have a specific URL of a website in mind then feel free to use that.
For this example, we'll use the Google Search Engine home page.
In the Address Bar which is located at the top of the web browser, type in the full URL of the website you would like to go to.
In this example, we'll type in "http://www.google.com."
After you've typed in the full URL, either press "Enter" on the keyboard or click on the arrow icon or "go" button located at the very right end of the Address Bar.
After you have done that the website should appear on your web browser's screen.
6.
We will now put this website, the website of your choice or in this example we're using www.google.com, in your "Favorites" or "Bookmarks" list.
Click on the "Bookmark" or "Favorites" menu at the top of the web browser and choose the option that says either, "Bookmark this page," or "Add to Favorites."
Your website is now in the "Favorites" or "Bookmarks" list and all you will need to do to get back to that website is to click on the "Bookmarks" or "Favorites" menu again and click on the website that you have favorited or bookmarked.
7.
You have just learned how to do two very important tasks in two of the most popular web browsers that are used for navigating the internet.
For any other help that is needed, the web browser's own "Help" section can be read by clicking on the "Help" menu at the top of the web browser and choosing the browser help section.
In Mozilla Firefox, this section is called "Help Contents," while in Microsoft's Internet Explorer it is called "Contents and Index."
Experiment with your Web browser to get an understanding of how navigation works on the World Wide Web.
It is a good idea to use a few different browsers and note the differences.
Knowing how users browse the Web is an important part of understanding how you should construct your own HTML pages.
3.4 How to Use a Hypertext link Using a hypertext link to move from one place to another is one of the most common activities on the World Wide Web.
In fact, hypertext links are the very essence of the Web.
The following steps explain how to use links and describe a little of what happens behind the scenes.
38 1. find a link on the page, look for text that's displayed in a different color.
By default, hypertext links you haven't used are blue and underlined.
Links you've already visited are purple.
These colors can be changed, however.
2.
Using your mouse, place the pointer over the hypertext link and click.
There will be a brief delay after you press on the hypertext link.
3.
During this delay, your browser client is contacting the Web server referenced in the hypertext link's URL.
It is attempting to retrieve the referenced document.
Figure 3: An example of HTML document.
4.
Once the contact has been established, your browser begins displaying the new document.
5.
Not all links appear as text.
Many links appear in images, such as buttons or icons.
Sometimes a colored border will appear around the image, or it will be designed to look like a button.
In many browsers, the cursor will change to a hand when it passes over a hypertext link.
These visual clues help the reader understand that it is a link.
However, sometimes there are no visual clues.
Understanding the need to provide visual clues is an important part of being an HTML author.
4.0 CONCLUSION: Hypertext is one the most common activities on the WWW.
It is the very essence of the Web.
5.0 SUMMARY: In this unit, you have learnt: • The working method of WWW • The work of the URLs in the system • How hypertext links are used.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (cid:1) What is the difference between Absolute and Relative URLs?
(cid:1) Explain the term WWW (cid:1) What is the work of Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)?
39 (cid:1) Give three examples of domain names?
7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources • Abbate, Janet.
Inventing the Internet.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999.
• Bemer, Bob, "A History of Source Concepts for the Internet/Web" • Campbell-Kelly, Martin; Aspray, William.
Computer: A History of the Information Machine.
New York: BasicBooks, 1996.
• Clark, David D., "The Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet Protocols", Computer Communications Review 18:4, August 1988, pp.
106–114 • Graham, Ian S. The HTML Sourcebook: The Complete Guide to HTML.
New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1995.
• Krol, Ed.
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Internet, 1987.
• Krol, Ed.
Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalog.
O'Reilly & Associates, 1992.
• Scientific American Special Issue on Communications, Computers, and Networks, September, 1991 40 UNIT THREE – HTML AND THE WEB 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
What is HTML 3.2.
History of HTML 3.3.
How HTML works with the Web 3.3.1 How HTML works on the Web 3.3.2.
What are the tags up to?
3.3.3 Is there anything HTML cannot do?
3.4.
Things you can do with HTML 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION Web designers utilize markup language, most notably HTML for structure and CSS for presentation to develop pages that can be read by web browsers.
This unit will deal on only HTML structures.
HTML is not the only way to present information on the Web, but it is the glue that holds everything together.
In addition to begin a markup language for displaying text, images, and multimedia, HTML provides instructions to Web browsers in order to control how documents are viewed and how they relate to each other.
For all its simplicity, HTML is a very powerful language.
In this unit, we will take a look at how HTML interacts with the Web and students are expected to explore some of the ways that it is begin used today on popular web sites.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Define HTML (cid:1) Describe the History of HTML (cid:1) Explain how HTML works 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
What is HTML?
41 HTML is a computer language devised to allow website creation.
These websites can then be viewed by anyone else connected to the Internet.
It is relatively easy to learn, with the basics being accessible to most people in one sitting; and quite powerful in what it allows you to create.
It is constantly undergoing revision and evolution to meet the demands and requirements of the growing Internet audience under the direction of the World Wide Web Consortium, W3C, the organisation charged with designing and maintaining the language.
The full meaning of HTML is HyperText Markup Language.
• HyperText is the method by which you move around on the web — by clicking on special text called hyperlinks which bring you to the next page.
The fact that it is hyper just means it is not linear — i.e.
you can go to any place on the Internet whenever you want by clicking on links — there is no set order to do things in.
• Markup is what HTML tags do to the text inside them.
They mark it as a certain type of text (italicised text, for example).
• HTML is a Language, as it has code-words and syntax like any other language.
3.1.1 How does HTML works?
HTML consists of a series of short codes typed into a text-file by the site author — these are the tags.
The text is then saved as a html file, and viewed through a browser, like Internet Explorer or firefox.
This browser reads the file and translates the text into a visible form, rendering the page as the author had intended.
Writing your own HTML entails using tags correctly to create your vision.
You can use anything from a rudimentary text-editor to a powerful graphical editor to create HTML pages.
3.1.2 What are the tags up to?
The tags are what separate normal text from HTML code.
You might know them as the words between the <angle-brackets>.
They allow all the cool stuff like images and tables and stuff, just by telling your browser what to render on the page.
Different tags will perform different functions.
The tags themselves don’t appear when you view your page through a browser, but their effects do.
The simplest tags do nothing more than apply formatting to some text, like this: <b>These words will be bold</b>, and these will not.
In the example above, the <b> tags were wrapped around some text, and their effect will be that the contained text will be bolded when viewed through an ordinary web browser.
3.1.3 Is there anything HTML cannot do?
Of course, but since making websites became more popular and needs increased many other supporting languages have been created to allow new stuff to happen, plus HTML is modified every few years to make way for improvements.
Cascading Stylesheets are used to control how your pages are presented, and make pages more accessible.
Basic special effects and interaction is provided by JavaScript, which adds a 42 lot of power to basic HTML.
Most of this advanced stuff is for later down the road, but when using all of these technologies together, you have a lot of power at your disposal.
3.2.
History of HTML A markup language combines text as well as coded instructions on how to format that text and the term "markup" originates from the traditional practice of 'marking up' the margins of a paper manuscript with printer's instructions.
Nowadays, however, if you mention the term 'markup' to any knowledgeable web author, the first thing they are likely to think of is 'HTML'.
In the Beginning HTML —which is short for HyperText Markup Language— is the official language of the World Wide Web and was first conceived in 1990.
HTML is a product of SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language) which is a complex, technical specification describing markup languages, especially those used in electronic document exchange, document management, and document publishing.
HTML was originally created to allow those who were not specialized in SGML to publish and exchange scientific and other technical documents.
HTML especially facilitated this exchange by incorporating the ability to link documents electronically using hyperlinks.
Thus the name Hypertext Markup Language.
However, it was quickly realized by those outside of the discipline of scientific documentation that HTML was relatively easy to learn, was self contained and lent itself to a number of other applications.
With the evolution of the World Wide Web, HTML began to proliferate and quickly spilled over into the mainstream.
Browser Wars Soon, companies began creating browsers —the software required to view an HTML document, i.e., a web page— and as they gained popularity it gave rise to competition and other web browsers.
It may surprise some that back in late 1995, Netscape —which now plays a distant second to the King Kong of browsers, Internet Explorer— was the dominant browser on the market.
In fact, Netscape was the first browser to support Javascript, animated gifts and HTML frames.
Thus began the so-called 'browser wars' and, along with seeing who could implement more 'bells and whistles' than the other guy, browser makers also began inventing proprietary HTML elements that only worked with their browsers.
Some examples of these are the <marquee>...</marquee> tags (scrolling text) which originally only worked with Internet Explorer and the <blink>...</blink> tags (blinking text) which still only works with Gecko- based browsers such as Mozilla or Netscape.
A side effect of all this competition was that HTML became fragmented and web authors soon found that their web pages looked fine in one browser but not in another.
Hence it became increasingly difficult and time consuming to create a web page that would display uniformly across a number of different browsers.
(This phenomenon remains to some extent to this very day.)
43  Meanwhile, an organization known as the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C for short) was working steadily along in the background to standardize HTML.
Several recommendations were published by the W3C during the late 1990s which represented the official versions of HTML and provided an ongoing comprehensive reference for web authors.
Thus the birth of HTML 2.0 in September 1995, HTML 3.2 in January 1997 and HTML 4.01 in December 1999.
By now, Internet Explorer (IE) had eclipsed Netscape Navigator as the browser to use while surfing the net due to its superior capabilities but also largely due to the fact that the IE came bundled with the Windows operating system.
Essentially when people bought computers using the Windows OS, it had the 'internet installed on it'.
This tended to suit people just fine since the typical newcomer to computers was someone who was tentatively striking forth to take on this intimidating new-fangled technology that was crammed to the rafters with indecipherable acronyms, software help files that made no sense and buggy programs.
Hence, the more 'instant' solutions this new technology offered, the better it was.
3.3.
How HTML works with the Web HTML allows the individual elements on the Web to be brought together and presented as a collection.
Text, images, multimedia, and other files can all be packaged together using HTML.
This section of unit three explains the basic principles behind the interaction between HTML and the WWW.
You can always view the HTML source code for a particular page through your browser.
Once you've mastered the basics of HTML, this is a great way to learn how other authors put together their HTML documents.
To view the source code of the current document in Netscape, choose Document Source from the View menu.
44 Figure 1: Document Source from the View menu 1.
The author of the Web page assembles all of the materials necessary, including text, charts, images, and sounds.
2.
All of the material for the Web page is linked together using HTML.
HTML codes control the appearance, layout, and flow of the page.
The amazing thing about HTML is that it is all done with simple text codes that anyone can understand.
3.
When someone connects to a Web server from his or her computer, the HTML file is transferred from server to client.
Because an HTML file is simple text, this usually happens very quickly.
4.
The Web browsing software (the client) interprets the layout and markup commands specified in the HTML file and then display the text exactly as the HTML author intended.
5.
Any images and charts on the page are retrieved as well.
The HTML file tells the Web browser what images to download and how to display them on the page.
3.3.1.
How HTML works on the Web a) Your Computer The browser on your computer sends a request for an HTML document from a remote server using addresses called URLs (Uniform Resource Locators).
When the data is located and returned, your browser displays the web page (text and graphics) according to the HTML tags in the document.
b) Connection to the Internet A dial up modem in your computer or a direct high speed data transmission line connects your computer to an internet service provider.
c) Internet Service Provider Your internet service provider is probably an internet web server and is connected to all the other computers on the web.
Your web server sends your request for an HTML document and sends back the file to you.
d) Internet The internet is a collection of web servers around the world.
Each server has a URL and will forward your request on until it reaches the server you are looking for.
When the data is returned to you, it may travel a totally different route over different computers.
e) Remote server The remote web server with the URL you are looking for has all the HTML files including text, graphics, sound, and video.
It may also have gateway scripts that are programs running on the server to process data.
45  3.4.
Things you can do with HTML There are many ways you can use HTML to publish content on the World Wide Web.
This unit will teach you the techniques you need to know to create timely, informative, and compelling HTML documents.
3.4.1 Six Cool Things You Can Do with HTML 1.
You can create a personal home page and leave your mark on the World Wide Web.
Figure 2 : An example of a personal home page 2.
You can create a page for your company to advertise and promote products and services.
46  Figure 3 : An example of a home page for your company 3.
You can build a catalog on the World Wide Web, complete with product descriptions and photographs.
You can even incorporate fill-in order forms so that your customers can order products from you on line.
Figure 4: An example catalog on the World Wide Web 47 4.
You can create a searchable phone directory for your company or organization.
Figure 5: An example of searchable phone directory for a company 5.
You can create a newsletter on the Web, with pictures and sounds.
Using some of the advanced HTML tricks explained in this book, you can format the newsletter to give it a slick, professional appearance.
48  Figure 6: An example of how to create newsletter on the Web 4.0 CONCLUSION: HTML is a computer language devised to allow website creation.
Its tags are embedded in angle brackets.
HTML is made up of different tags that perform different functions .
5.0 SUMMARY: In this unit, you have learnt : • The meaning of HTML • How HTML worked with the Web • How HTML worked on the Web • Things that can be done with HTML 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (cid:1) List five Things You Can Do with HTML (cid:1) Define HTML (cid:1) Describe the History of HTML 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES • Abbate, Janet.
Inventing the Internet.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999.
• Bemer, Bob, "A History of Source Concepts for the Internet/Web" • Campbell-Kelly, Martin; Aspray, William.
Computer: A History of the Information Machine.
New York: BasicBooks, 1996.
• Clark, David D., "The Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet Protocols", Computer Communications Review 18:4, August 1988, pp.
106–114 49 • Graham, Ian S. The HTML Sourcebook: The Complete Guide to HTML.
New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1995.
• Krol, Ed.
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Internet, 1987.
• Krol, Ed.
Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalog.
O'Reilly & Associates, 1992.
• Scientific American Special Issue on Communications, Computers, and Networks, September, 1991 50  MODULE TWO –THE BASICS OF HTML UNIT ONE - GETTING STARTED WITH HTML 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1– How to Use Notepad 3.2– How to Use Markup Tags 3.3 - How to Write a Simple HTML Document 3.4 - How to Use Special HTML Editing Software 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION This Unit will introduce you to the basics of HTML.We will take a quick look at Notepad, which is one of the tools you really need to write HTML documents.
We will also go over the fundamentals of a basic HTML document.
You will even learn how to write your first Web page!
It might be tempting to skip ahead and check out the "cool stuff" in the later Modules of this Course Material.
But if you spend some time going over the basics, it will serve you well in the long run.
Enough chatter.
Let's get going.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Describe how to open a Notepad • Describe markup tag in HTML • Write a simple HTML Document using Notepad editor 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 – How to Use Notepad HTML is not really anything more than plain text.
For that reason, you don't need any special editors or compilers to create HTML files.
In fact, you can create all of your HTML files with the simplest of text editors.
There are many specialized 51 HTML editors and converters available, and you may decide to choose one of them based on your particular needs.
But for all the HTML examples in this unit, we will use Windows Notepad to illustrate just how simple creating HTML can be.
Figure 1: A Symbol of Notepad 1.
To open Notepad, click on the Start button in the lower-left corner of your screen.
Then choose Programs, followed by Accessories.
Click on the Notepad icon.
Figure 2: Processes of Clicking on the Notepad Icon Notepad begins with a blank document.
You can begin typing to create a new document.
To open an existing text file from disk, pull down the File menu and choose Open.
52  Figure 3: Notepad Environment 2.
Choose the file name from the Open File dialog box.
Notepad's Open File dialog window normally only shows files with the extension .txt.
You'll want to change the Files of Type selection to All Files if you're opening or saving an HTML file, which uses the extension .htm or .html.
3.
Once you've opened an existing file or begun typing a new one, you can easily edit your text.
Notepad has all the basic editing functions of a word processor.
For example, you can select blocks of text for cut and paste operations.
4.
HTML files usually contain very long lines that will run off the edge of the page.
Notepad has a feature called Word Wrap that will format these lines to fit entirely within the window, making them much easier to read.
To activate this feature, pull down the Edit menu and select Word Wrap.
Figure 3: Notepad Environment – Word Wrap 53 5.
TTTooo sssaaavvveee yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL fffiiillleee,,, fffiiirrrsssttt pppuuullllll dddooowwwnnn ttthhheee FFFiiillleee mmmeeennnuuu... IIIfff ttthhhiiisss iiisss aaa nnneeewww fffiiillleee ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu ssstttaaarrrttteeeddd fffrrrooommm ssscccrrraaatttccchhh,,, ccchhhoooooossseee SSSaaavvveee AAAsss aaannnddd ttthhheeennn tttyyypppeee aaa fffiiillleee nnnaaammmeee... RRReeemmmeeemmmbbbeeerrr tttooo uuussseee ..hhttmm oorr ..hhttmmll aass tthhee ffiillee eexxtteennssiioonn.. ((CChheecckk wwiitthh yyoouurr WWeebb sseerrvveerr aaddmmiinniissttrraattoorr ttoo ffiinndd ooouuuttt wwwhhhiiiccchhh eeexxxttteeennnsssiiiooonnn yyyooouuu ssshhhooouuulllddd uuussseee...))) IIIfff ttthhhiiisss iiisss aaannn eeexxxiiissstttiiinnnggg fffiiillleee ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu ooopppeeennneeeddd fffrrrooommm NNootteeppaadd,, yyoouu ccaann jjuusstt cchhoooossee SSaavvee ffrroomm tthhee FFiillee mmeennuu.. 3.2– HHooww ttoo UUssee MMaarrkk uupp TTaaggss TThhee uussee ooff mmaarrkkuupp ttaaggss iiss wwhhaatt sseeppaarraatteess HHTTMMLL ffrroomm ppllaaiinn tteexxtt.. MMaarrkkuupp ttaaggss aarree uusseedd eeexxxttteeennnsssiiivvveeelllyyy iiinnn HHHTTTMMMLLL,,, aaannnddd ttthhheeeyyy ppprrrooovvviiidddeee wwwaaayyysss tttooo cccooonnntttrrrooolll ttteeexxxttt fffooorrrmmmaaattttttiiinnnggg,,, cccrrreeeaaattteee llliiinnnkkksss tttooo ooottthhheeerrr dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss,,, aaannnddd eeevvveeennn iiinnncccooorrrpppooorrraaattteee iiimmmaaagggeeesss aaannnddd sssooouuunnndddsss... IIInnn ssshhhooorrrttt,,, mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp tttaaagggsss aaarrreee ttthhheee kkkeeeyyy tttooo making HTML pages worrkk.. MMaarrkkuupp ttaaggss aarree nnoott ccaassee sseennssiittiivvee.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, tthhee bbooddyy eelleemmeenntt ttaagg ((wwhhiicchh yyoouu''llll lleeaarrnn aabboouutt iinn tthhee nneexxtt uunniitt)) ccaann bbee ttyyppeedd aass <<BBOODDYY>>, <body>, or even <BoDy>.
Figure 4 : AAnn eexxaammppllee ooff bbooddyy eelleemmeenntt ttaagg 1.
OOppeenn aa nneeww ffiillee iinn NNootteeppaadd aanndd ttyyppee iinn tthhee wwoorrddss “the bboolldd nneeww ffrroonnttiieerr”.
In this eexxaammppllee,, wwee''llll mmaakkee tthhiiss tteexxtt aappppeeaarr iinn bboollddffaaccee ttyyppee ffrroomm tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg sseenntteennccee::.
2.
HHHTTTMMMLLL mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp tttaaagggsss aaarrreee eeeaaasssyyy tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee... TTThhheeeyyy cccooonnnsssiiisssttt ooofff aaa llleeefffttt aaannngggllleee bbbrrraaaccckkkeeettt,,, ttthhheee nnnaaammmeee ooofff ttthhheee tttaaaggg,,, aaannnddd aaa rrriiiggghhhttt aaannngggllleee bbbrrraaaccckkkeeettt... TTThhheee llleeefffttt aaannnddd rrriiiggghhhttt aaannngggllleee bbbrrraaaccckkkeeetttsss aaarrreee aaalllsssooo kkknnnooowwwnnn to some as less-tthhaann aanndd ggrreeaatteerr-tthhaann ssyymmbboollss.. TToo ssttaarrtt aa bboollddffaaccee mmaarrkkuupp ttaagg,, ttyyppee <B> wwhheerree yyoouu''dd lliikkee tthhee bboollddffaaccee ttyyppee ttoo bbeeggiinn.. 3.
LLLooocccaaattteee ttthhheee ppplllaaaccceee wwwhhheeerrreee yyyooouuu'''ddd llliiikkkeee ttthhheee bbbooollldddfffaaaccceee tttooo ssstttoooppp... AAAttt ttthhhiiisss pppoooiiinnnttt,,, yyyooouuu nnneeeeeeddd tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaannn eeennndddiiinnnggg tttaaaggg fffooorrr ttthhheee bbbooollldddfffaaaccceee tttyyypppeee... AAAnnn eeennndddiiinnnggg tttaaaggg lllooooookkksss jjjuuusssttt llliiikkkeee aaa ssstttaaarrrtttiiinnnggg tttaaaggg,,, eexxcceepptt iitt iiss pprreecceeddeedd bbyy aa ffoorrwwaarrdd ssllaasshh cchhaarraacctteerr ((//)).. TToo mmaarrkk tthhee eenndd ooff tthhee bboollddffaaccee tag, type </B>.
54  4.
WWhheenn vviieewweedd wwiitthh aa WWeebb bbrroowwsseerr,, tthhee tteexxtt bbeettwweeeenn tthhee <B> and <<//BB>> tags will appear in boldface.
Figure 5: AAnn eexxaammppllee of Bold Tag 5.
AAAlllmmmooosssttt eeevvveeerrryyy mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp tttaaaggg iiinnn HHHTTTMMMLLL rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreeesss bbbooottthhh aaa ssstttaaarrrtttiiinnnggg tttaaaggg aaannnddd aaannn eeennndddiiinnnggg tttaaaggg... OOOnnneee nnnoootttaaabbbllleee eeexxxccceeeppptttiiiooonnn iiisss ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh mmmaaarrrkkkeeerrr,,, <<<PPP>>>,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh dddoooeeesss nnnooottt rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreee aaannn ending </P> tag.
3.3 HHooww ttoo WWrriittee aa SSiimmppllee HHTTMMLL DDooccuummeenntt NNNooowww ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee llleeeaaarrrnnneeeddd hhhooowww tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp tttaaagggsss,,, ttthhheee nnneeexxxttt sssttteeeppp iiisss tttooo llleeeaaarrrnnn hhhooowww tttooo pppuuuttt ttthhheeemmm tttooogggeeettthhheeerrr tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa sssiiimmmpppllleee HHHTTTMMMLLL DDDooocccuuummmeeennnttt... TTThhheee bbbaaasssiiiccc HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt cccooonnntttaaaiiinnnsss tttwwwooo parts: the head and the body... TTThhheee hhheeeaaaddd ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn cccooonnntttaaaiiinnnsss iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannnttt iiinnnfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn aaabbbooout the dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt iiitttssseeelllfff,,, sssuuuccchhh aaasss ttthhheee tttiiitttllleee... TTThhheee aaaccctttuuuaaalll ttteeexxxttt,,, iiimmmaaagggeeesss,,, aaannnddd mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp tttaaagggsss aaarrreee ppplllaaaccceeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee bbbooodddyyy ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn... YYYooouuu wwwiiillllll llleeeaaarrrnnn ttthhheee ssspppeeeccciiifffiiicccsss ooofff bbbooottthhh ssseeeccctttiiiooonnnsss iiinnn ttthhheee nnneeexxxttt uuunnniiittt...
Figure 6: A Simple HHTTMMLL DDooccuummeenntt 55 1.
TTThhheee fffiiirrrsssttt mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp tttaaaggg iiinnn eeevvveeerrryyy HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt iiisss ttthhheee <<<HHHTTTMMMLLL>>> tttaaaggg... TTThhhiiisss llleeetttsss WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss kkknnnooowww ttthhhaaattt eeevvveeerrryyyttthhhiiinnnggg iiinnn ttthhheee fffiiillleee iiisss HHHTTTMMMLLL ttteeexxxttt... OOOpppeeennn aaa nnneeewww bbblllaaannnkkk dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt in Notepad.
Type <<HHTTMMLL>> oonn oonnee lliinnee,, aanndd tthheenn oonn tthhee nneexxtt lliinnee,, cclloossee tthhee ttaagg bbyy typing </HTML>... FFFrrrooommm nnnooowww ooonnn,,, eeevvveeerrryyyttthhhiiinnnggg yyyooouuu tttyyypppeee iiinnn ttthhhiiisss dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt ssshhhooouuulllddd gggooo bbeettwweeeenn tthheessee ttwwoo ttaaggss..
Figure 7: HTML Taagg.. 2.
TThhee hheeaadd sseeccttiioonn ccoommeess nneexxtt.. TTyyppee <HEAD> oonn tthhee lliinnee aafftteerr tthhee ffiirrsstt HHTTMMLL ttaagg,, followed by <<//HHEEAADD>> on the next line to create the section.
3.
OOOnnneee ooofff ttthhheee kkkeeeyyy hhheeeaaaddd eeellleeemmmeeennntttsss iiisss ttthhheee tttiiitttllleee ooofff yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt... TTTooo ssstttaaarrrttt ttthhheee tttiiitttllleee tttaaaggg,,, ssstttaaarrrttt aaa nnneeewww llliiinnneee bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheee <<<HHHEEEAAADDD>>> aaannnddd <<<///HHHEEEAAADDD>>> tttaaagggsss aaannnddd tttyyypppeee <TITLE>.
NNooww eenntteerr aa ttiittllee ffoorr yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt,, ssuucchh aass My First Web Page.. FFiinnaallllyy,, eenndd tthhee title by typing <<//TTIITTLLEE>> on the same line.
4.
TTThhheee nnneeexxxttt ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt iiisss ttthhheee bbbooodddyyy... TTThhhiiisss ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn cccooonnntttaaaiiinnnsss mmmooosssttt ooofff tthhee eelleemmeennttss ooff yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt.. TToo ccrreeaattee tthhee bbooddyy sseeccttiioonn,, ttyyppee <<BBOODDYY>> on the nneexxtt lliinnee.. OOnn tthhee nneexxtt lliinnee aafftteerr tthhaatt,, ttyyppee </BODY> to mark the eenndd ooff tthhee sseeccttiioonn.. MMMooosssttt ooofff yyyooouuurrr ttteeexxxttt aaannnddd HHHTTTMMMLLL cccooodddeeesss wwwiiillllll bbbeee ppplllaaaccceeeddd bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheeessseee tttwwwooo tttaaagggsss... 56  5.
RRRiiiggghhhttt nnnooowww,,, yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt iiisss ppprrrooopppeeerrrlllyyy fffooorrrmmmaaatttttteeeddd,,, bbbuuuttt iiittt dddoooeeesss nnnooottt hhhaaavvveee aaannnyyy cccooonnnttteeennnttt... FFFooorrrtttuuunnnaaattteeelllyyy,,, ttthhhaaattt iiisss sssiiimmmpppllleee eeennnooouuuggghhh tttooo ccchhhaaannngggeee... OOOnnn aaa nnneeewww llliiinnneee bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheee beggiinnnniinngg aanndd eennddiinngg bbooddyy ttaaggss,, bbeeggiinn ttyyppiinngg ssoommee tteexxtt,, ssuucchh aass TThhiiss iiss mmyy ffiirrsstt HTML document.
6.
SSSaaavvveee yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL fffiiillleee iiinnn NNNooottteeepppaaaddd wwwiiittthhh aaa dddeeessscccrrriiippptttiiivvveee fffiiillleee nnnaaammmeee,,, sssuuuccchhh aaasss first.htm.
7.
UUUsssiiinnnggg yyyooouuurrr WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr,,, ooopppeeennn yyyooouuurrr nnneeewww HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt... BBBeeecccaaauuussseee yyyooouuurrr fffiiillleee iiisss ooonnn yooouuurrr lllooocccaaalll dddeeessskkktttoooppp mmmaaaccchhhiiinnneee aaannnddd nnnooottt ooonnn ttthhheee WWWeeebbb,,, yyyooouuu wwwiiillllll nnneeeeeeddd tttooo uuussseee ttthhheee OOOpppeeennn FFFiiillleee oooppptttiiiooonnn iiinnn yyyooouuurrr WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr... WWWiiittthhh NNNeeetttssscccaaapppeee,,, ccchhhoooooossseee OOOpppeeennn FFFiiillleee fffrrrooommm ttthhheee FFFiiillleee mmmeeennnuuu,,, ggoo ttoo tthhee ffoollddeerr wwhheerree yyoouu ssaavveedd yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt,, aanndd sseelleecctt iitt.. 8.
There it is-yyoouurr ffiirrsstt HHTTMMLL ddooccuummeenntt.. IItt mmaayy nnoott llooookk lliikkee mmuucchh aatt tthhiiss ppooiinntt,, bbuutt yyyooouuu ssshhhooouuulllddd gggiiivvveee yyyooouuurrrssseeelllfff aaa pppaaattt ooonnn ttthhheee bbbaaaccckkk... YYYooouuu aaarrreee nnnooowww aaannn HHHTTTMMMLLL aaauuuttthhhooorrr... 33..44 HHooww ttoo UUssee SSppeecciiaall HHTTMMLL EEddiittiinngg SSooffttwwaarree TTThhhrrrooouuuggghhhooouuuttt ttthhhiiisss CCCooouuurrrssseee MMMaaattteeerrriiiaaalll,,, yyyooouuu wwwiiillllll llleeeaaarrrnnn tttooo wwwrrriiittteee HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee sssiiimmmpppllleeesssttt ooofff tttoooooolllsss::: aaa ttteeexxxttt eeedddiiitttooorrr... CCCrrreeeaaatttiiinnnggg HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss wwwiiittthhh aaa ttteeexxxttt eeedddiiitttooorrr iiisss ttthhheee bbbeeesssttt wwwaaayyy tttooo llleeeaaarrrnnn the language.
HHoowweevveerr,, bbeeffoorree yyoouu ccoonnttiinnuuee,, yyoouu sshhoouulldd kknnooww tthhaatt tthheerree aarree aa nnuummbbeerr ooff ssppeecciiaalliizzeedd HHHTTTMMMLLL eeedddiiitttiiinnnggg ppprrrooogggrrraaammmsss aaavvvaaaiiilllaaabbbllleee... SSSooommmeee hhhaaavvveee gggrrraaappphhhiiicccaaalll iiinnnttteeerrrfffaaaccceeesss,,, ooottthhheeerrrsss fffeeeaaatttuuurrreee ooonnnllliiinnneee hhheeelllppp... AAAllllll ooofff ttthhheeemmm mmmaaakkkeee cccrrreeeaaatttiiinnnggg HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss mmmuuuccchhh eeeaaasssiiieeerrr... OOOnnnccceee yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee mmmaaasssttteeerrreeeddd ttthhheee HHTTMMLL bbaassiiccss,, yyoouu mmaayy wwaanntt ttoo ttrryy oouutt oonnee ooff tthheessee pprrooggrraammss.. IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, wwee wwiillll sshhooww yyoouu wwhhaatt yyoouu sshhoouulldd llooookk ffoorr iinn aann HHTTMMLL eeddiittoorr.. • MMaannyy ooff tthhee bbeesstt HHTTMMLL eeddiittoorrss aavvaaiill-aabbllee oonn tthhee IInntteerrnneett aarree sshhaarreewwaarree.. SShhaarreewwaarree iiss aa ttyyppee ooff ssooffttwwaarree mmaarrkkeettiinngg tthhaatt aalllloowwss yyoouu ttoo ttrryy tthhee ssoofftt-wwaarree bbeeffoorree yyoouu ppuurrcchhaassee it.
IIIfff yyyooouuu dddeeeccciiidddeee ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu llliiikkkeee ttthhheee sssoooffftttwwwaaarrreee aaannnddd wwwaaannnttt tttooo kkkeeeeeeppp iiittt,,, yyyooouuu pppaaayyy ttthhheee aaauuuttthhhooorrr dddiiirrreeeccctttlllyyy,,, aaaccccccooorrrdddiiinnnggg tttooo ttthhheee dddooocccuuummmeeennntttaaatttiiiooonnn sssuuuppppppllliiieeeddd wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee ppprrrooogggrrraaammm... IIIfff yyyooouuu dddooonnn'''ttt llliiikkkeee ttthhheee ppprrrooogggrrraaammm,,, sssiiimmmppplllyyy dddeeellleeettteee iiittt aaannnddd fffooorrrgggeeettt iiittt... SSShhhaaarrreeewwwaaarrreee iiisss aaa gggrrreeeaaattt wwwaaayyy tttooo fffiiinnnddd aaa ppprrrooogggrrraaammm thhaatt''ss rriigghhtt ffoorr yyoouurr ttaasstteess.. • EEEvvveeennn iiifff yyyooouuurrr fffaaavvvooorrriiittteee HHHTTTMMMLLL eeedddiiitttooorrr dddoooeeesss nnnooottt sssuuuppppppooorrrttt ttthhheee lllaaattteeesssttt HHHTTTMMMLLL tttaaagggsss aaannnddd fffeeeaaatttuuurrreeesss,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn aaalllwwwaaayyysss aaadddddd ttthhheeemmm lllaaattteeerrr uuusssiiinnnggg NNNooottteeepppaaaddd... BBBeeecccaaauuussseee HHHTTTMMMLLL fffiiillleeesss aaarrreee ppplllaaaiiinnn ttteeexxxttt,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn wwwooorrrkkk ooonnn yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss wwwiiittthhh jjjuuusssttt aaabbbooouuuttt aaannnyyy eeedddiiitttooorrr yyyooouuu llliiikkkeee... 57 1.
Make sure the HTML editing software has support for all the HTML features.
If it does not, you would not be able to use all the cool HTML tricks you will learn in this Course Material.
Figure 8: Some Features of HTML 2.
Look for toolbars and other features that make creating HTML easier.
To create a markup tag, you can click on a button instead of typing it in.
3.
Many WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) HTML editors are now available.
These allow you to see what your HTML document will look like as you're putting it together.
This feature will save you the trouble of having to load your page with a Web browser every time you want to see how things are progressing.
4.
Another feature to look for is HTML syntax checking.
Editors with this capability can check your document for HTML errors.
Some will even fix the errors for you automatically.
5.
Many of the best HTML editors are available right on the World Wide Web as shareware.
That means you can download them and try them out before buying them.
There are plenty of places on the Web to find HTML editors.
One of the best places to start looking is the HTML Editors section in the Yahoo directory.
4.0 CONCLUSION: The markup tags are the key to making HTML pages work.
They are not case sensitive.
Almost every markup tag in HTML requires both a starting tag and an ending tag.
5.0 SUMMARY: In this unit, you have learnt: • How to use Notepad • How to use Markup tags • How to write a simple HTML documents 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT • Mention 5 uses of Markup tags • List 5 markup tags you know 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES • Abbate, Janet.
Inventing the Internet.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999.
• Bemer, Bob, "A History of Source Concepts for the Internet/Web" • Campbell-Kelly, Martin; Aspray, William.
Computer: A History of the Information Machine.
New York: BasicBooks, 1996.
• Clark, David D., "The Design Philosophy of the DARPA Internet Protocols", Computer Communications Review 18:4, August 1988, pp.
106–114 58 • Graham, Ian S. The HTML Sourcebook: The Complete Guide to HTML.
New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1995.
• Krol, Ed.
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Internet, 1987.
• Krol, Ed.
Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalog.
O'Reilly & Associates, 1992.
• Scientific American Special Issue on Communications, Computers, and Networks, September, 1991 UNIT TWO UNDERSTANDING THE BASICS OF HTML 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1– How to Use the Head Section 3.2- How to Use the Body Section 3.3 - How to Use Headings 3.4 - How to Use the Paragraph Tag 3.5 - How to Use Special Characters 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading And Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION Now that you have learned how to use markup tags and have even written your first HTML document, you are ready to dig a little deeper and learn the basics of the HTML language.
In this Unit, you will cover the different sections of an HTML document, such as the head and body, and learn what type of information goes in each.
You will also discover how to include basic paragraphs in your document, as well as insert headlines and special characters.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Describe the head and body section of HTML • Create a headline for your document using head section • Describe the paragraph marker.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
How to Use the Head Section 59 TTThhheee llleeeaaasssttt ttthhhiiinnnggg yyyooouuu mmmuuusssttt iiinnncccllluuudddeee iiinnn ttthhheee HHHEEEAAADDD ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff aaallllll yyyooouuurrr wwweeebbbpppaaagggeeesss iiinnn ooorrrdddeeerrr tttooo wwwrrriiittteee vvaalliidd HHMMTTLL ddooccuummeennttss iiss tthhee TITLE eelleemmeenntt.. TThhee ttiittllee ooff aa wweebbppaaggee aappppeeaarrss iinn yyoouurr bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr´´´sss tttiiitttllleee bbbaaarrr wwwhhheeennn yyyooouuu vvviiieeewww ttthhheee pppaaagggeee... TTThhheee ssscccrrreeeeeennnssshhhooottt bbbeeelllooowww ssshhhooowwwsss yyyooou the title of this webpage: Figure 1: AAnn eexxaammppllee ooff HHTTMMLL Head Section TTThhheee tttiiitttllleee tttaaaggg iiisss uuussseeeddd eeexxxttteeennnsssiiivvveeelllyyy bbbyyy WWWeeebbb ssseeeaaarrrccchhh eeennngggiiinnneeesss;;; ssseeeaaarrrccchhh eeennngggiiinnneeesss uuussseee ttthhheee ttteeexxxttt iiinnnsssiiidddeee aaa tttiiitttllleee tttaaaggg aaasss aaa wwwaaayyy tttooo dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnneee ttthhheee aaaccctttuuuaaalll cccooonnnttteeennntttsss ooofff yyyooouuurrr pppaaagggeee... SSSooo mmmaaakkkeee sssuuurrreee yyyooouuurrr tttiiitttllleee iiisss descriptive.
• DDoonn''tt ttyyppee aannyy eexxttrraa tteexxtt iinn bbeettwweeeenn tthhee <<HHEEAADD>> aanndd <<//HHEEAADD>> ttaaggss.. IInn mmoosstt ccaasseess,, ttthhheee ooonnnlllyyy llliiinnneee yyyooouuu'''llllll iiinnnssseeerrrttt bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhhooossseee tttwwwooo tttaaagggsss iiisss yyyooouuurrr dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt tttiiitttllleee...
Figure 2: AA NNoottee ppaadd EEnnvviirroonnmmeenntt 1.
OOppeenn aa nneeww ddooccuummeenntt iinn NNootteeppaadd aanndd ttyyppee <HTML>.. TToo bbeeggiinn tthhee hheeaadd sseeccttiioonn,, iinnsseerrtt aann ooppeenniinngg ttaagg iinnttoo yyoouurr HHTTMMLL ddooccuummeenntt bbyy ttyyppiinngg <<HHEEAADD>>.
2.
TTThhheee ooonnnlllyyy eeellleeemmmeeennnttt rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee hhheeeaaaddd ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn iiisss ttthhheee TTTiiitttllleee ooofff yyyooouuurrr dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt... YYYooouuurrr tttiiitttllleee ssshhhooouuulllddd bbbeee ssshhhooorrrttt eeennnooouuuggghhh tttooo fffiiittt iiinnn ttthhheee tttiiitttllleee bbbaaarrr ooofff aaa tttyyypppiiicccaaalll bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr wwwiiinnndddooowww,,, bbbuuuttt dddeeessscccrrriiippptttiiivvveee eeennnooouuuggghhh tttooo eeexxxppplllaaaiiinnn wwwhhhaaattt yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt cccooonnntttaaaiiinnnsss... 3.
Insert a title tag withiinn tthhee hheeaadd sseeccttiioonn bbyy ttyyppiinngg <TITLE>,, ffoolllloowweedd bbyy tthhee aaccttuuaall ttiittllee ooff yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt.. IInn tthhiiss eexxaammppllee,, wwee''llll nnaammee tthhiiss ddooccuummeenntt HHTTMMLL:: EEaassiieerr Than We Thought... GGGooo aaahhheeeaaaddd aaannnddd tttyyypppeee iiinnn ttthhhaaattt tttiiitttllleee,,, ttthhheeennn ccclllooossseee ttthhheee tttaaaggg bbbyyy tttyyypppiiinnnggg </TITLE> oonn tthhee ssaammee lliinnee.. 60 4.
CClloossee tthhee hheeaadd sseeccttiioonn bbyy ttyyppiinngg </HEAD> oonn tthhee lliinnee bbeellooww tthhee ttiittllee lliinnee.. 3.2– HHooww ttoo UUssee tthhee BBooddyy SSeeccttiioonn TTThhheee bbbooodddyyy ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt cccooonnntttaaaiiinnnsss mmmooosssttt ooofff ttthhheee ttteeexxxttt,,, gggrrraaappphhhiiicccsss,,, hhhyyypppeeerrrttteeexxxttt lliinnkkss,, aanndd ootthheerr iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn tthhaatt wwiillll aappppeeaarr oonn tthhee ppaaggee.. AAllll ooff yyoouurr HHTTMMLL ffoorrmmaattttiinngg ttaaggss,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh dddeeessscccrrriiibbbeee ttthhheee cccooonnnttteeennnttt aaannnddd aaappppppeeeaaarrraaannnccceee ooofff yyyooouuurrr dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt,,, aaarrreee ppplllaaaccceeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee bbbooodddyyy ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn... TThheessee ttaaggss wwiillll bbee eexxppllaaiinneedd iinn ddeettaaiill iinn tthhee nneexxtt ttwwoo uunniittss.. • SSSooommmeeetttiiimmmeeesss iiittt iiisss eeeaaasssiiieeerrr tttooo tttyyypppeee bbbooottthhh ttthhheee <<<BBBOOODDDYYY>>> aaannnddd <<<///BBBOOODDDYYY>>> tttaaagggsss ooonnn separate lines rrriiiggghhhttt aaawwwaaayyy,,, aaannnddd ttthhheeennn fffiiillllll iiinnn ttthhheee rrreeesssttt ooofff yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheeemmm...
Figure 3: AAnn eexxaammppllee ooff HHTTMMLL BBooddyy SSeeccttiioonn 1.
IInnsseerrtt tthhee ooppeenniinngg bbooddyy ttaagg bbyy ttyyppiinngg <BODY> oonn aa nneeww lliinnee iinn yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt.. MMMaaakkkeee sssuuurrreee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee nnneeewww bbbooodddyyy tttaaaggg fffooollllllooowwwsss ttthhheee eeennnddd ooofff ttthhheee hhheeeaaaddd ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff yyyooouuurrr document.
2.
FFFooollllllooowwwiiinnnggg ttthhheee <<<BBBOOODDDYYY>>> tttaaaggg,,, bbbeeegggiiinnn eeennnttteeerrriiinnnggg ttthhheee aaaccctttuuuaaalll ttteeexxxttt ooofff yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt... FFoorr tthhiiss eexxaammppllee,, wwee wwiillll jjuusstt iinnsseerrtt aa ssiimmppllee sseenntteence.
Type HHTTMMLL iiss mmuucchh eeaassiieerr than I thought.
61 3.
CClloossee tthhee bbooddyy sseeccttiioonn ooff yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt bbyy ttyyppiinngg </BODY> oonn aa nneeww lliinnee.. MMaakkee sssuuurrreee ttthhhaaattt ttthhhiiisss ccclllooosssiiinnnggg tttaaaggg aaappppppeeeaaarrrsss bbbeeefffooorrreee ttthhheee <<<///HHHTTTMMMLLL>>> tttaaaggg aaattt ttthhheee vvveeerrryyy bbbooottttttooommm ooofff yyyooouuurrr document.
4.
HHeerree iiss wwhhaatt yyoouurr HHTTMMLL ddooccuummeenntt llooookkss lliikkee ssoo ffaarr wwhheenn vviieewweedd wwiitthh NNeettssccaappee.. NNoottiiccee tthhee ppllaacceemmeenntt ooff tthhee ddooccuummeenntt ttiittllee aanndd tthhee bbooddyy tteexxtt..
Figure 4: AA eexxaammppllee ooff HHeeaadd aanndd BBooddyy SSeeccttiioonn 5.
At this point, you ssshhhooouuulllddd sssaaavvveee yyyooouuurrr fffiiillleee iiinnn NNNooottteeepppaaaddd... MMMaaakkkeee sssuuurrreee yyyooouuu sssaaavvveee iiittt wwwiiittthhh aaannn eexxtteennssiioonn ooff ..hhttmm oorr..hhttmmll ((iitt ddooeessnn''tt mmaatttteerr wwhhiicchh-aallll bbrroowwsseerrss wwiillll hhaannddllee bbootthh tttyyypppeeesss)))... KKKeeeeeeppp ttthhhiiisss fffiiillleee ooopppeeennn,,, bbbeeecccaaauuussseee yyyooouuu wwwiiillllll bbbeee aaaddddddiiinnnggg tttooo iiittt iiinnn ttthhheee nnneeexxxttt uuunnniiittt... 3.3 How to Use Headings Headingggsss aaarrreee uuussseeeddd iiinnn HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss tttooo iiinnndddiiicccaaattteee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt ssseeeccctttiiiooonnnsss... TTThhheeerrreee aaarrreee sssiiixxx dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt HHHeeeaaadddiiinnnggg sssiiizzzeeesss,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh rrraaannngggeee fffrrrooommm vvveeerrryyy lllaaarrrgggeee tttooo vvveeerrryyy sssmmmaaallllll (((sssmmmaaalllllleeerrr ttthhhaaannn ttthhheee dddeeefffaaauuulllttt bbbooodddyyy ttteeexxxttt)))... YYYooouuu ssshhhooouuulllddd uuussseee hhheeeaaadddiiinnngggsss jjjuuudddiiiccciiiooouuussslllyyy,,, kkkeeeeeepppiiinnnggg ttthhheeemmm ssshhhooorrrttt aaannnddd cccooonnnccciiissseee... TTThhheee mmmooost common use fffooorrr aaa hhheeeaaadddiiinnnggg iiisss aaasss ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt llliiinnneee ooofff aaa hhhooommmeee pppaaagggeee... IIInnn eeesssssseeennnccceee,,, iiittt bbbeeecccooommmeeesss aaa hhheeeaaadddllliiinnneee fffooorrr yyyooouuurrr document.
• HHHeeeaaadddiiinnngggsss aaarrreee aaannn eeexxxccceeelllllleeennnttt wwwaaayyy tttooo bbbrrreeeaaakkk uuuppp lllaaarrrgggeee aaammmooouuunnntttsss ooofff ttteeexxxttt iiinnntttooo sssmmmaaalllllleeerrr,,, ddiiggeessttiibbllee sseeccttiioonnss.. BBuutt bbee ccaarreeffuull nnoott ttoo oovveerruussee hheeaaddiinngg ttaaggss,, oorr tthheeyy''llll mmaakkee yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt aappppeeaarr ccoonnffuussiinngg.. • TTThhhiiinnnkkk ooofff hhheeeaaadddiiinnnggg tttaaagggsss aaasss hhheeeaaadddllliiinnneeesss... GGGeeennneeerrraaallllllyyy,,, yyyooouuu'''llllll ooonnnlllyyy hhhaaavvveee ooonnneee bbbiiiggg hhheeeaaadddllliiinnneee fffooorrr yyyooouuurrr dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt aaannnddd aaa fffeeewww sssmmmaaalllllleeerrr sssuuubbbhhheeeaaadddsss tttooo bbbrrreeeaaakkk ttthhheee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt iiinnntttooo sssmmmaaalllllleeerrr sections.
62 • IItt iiss aa ggoooodd iiddeeaa ttoo rreeppeeaatt tthhee ddooccuummeenntt ttiittllee aass aa LLeevveell 11 HHeeaaddiinngg aatt tthhee vveerryy ttoopp ooff yyyooouuurrr pppaaagggeee... TTThhhiiisss llleeetttsss yyyooouuurrr rrreeeaaadddeeerrrsss kkknnnooowww ttthhheee tttiiitttllleee ooofff ttthhheee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt wwwiiittthhhooouuuttt hhhaaavvviiinnnggg tttooo llooookk aatt tthhee ttiittllee bbaarr ooff tthheeiirr bbrroowwsseerrss.. • HHHeeeaaadddiiinnngggsss cccaaannn bbbeee cccooommmpppaaarrreeeddd iiinnn mmmaaannnyyy wwwaaayyysss tttooo ooouuutttllliiinnneeesss... WWWhhheeennn ssstttrrruuuccctttuuurrriiinnnggg yyyooouuurrr dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss wwwiiittthhh hhheeeaaadddiiinnngggsss,,, uuussseee ttthhheee sssaaammmeee tttyyypppeee ooofff hhheeeaaadddiiinnnggg fffooorrr eeellleeemmmeeennntttsss ooofff eeeqqquuuaaalll importance.
Figure 5: LLeevveellss ooff HHeeaaddiinngg TTaaggss 1.
TToo iinnsseerrtt aa hheeaaddiinngg iinnttoo yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt,, ppllaaccee aann ooppeenniinngg ttaagg aannyywwhheerree iinn tthhee bbooddyy sseeccttiioonn.. AA hheeaaddiinngg ttaagg ffoolllloowwss tthhee ffoorrmmaatt ooff <<HHx>, where x iiss aa nnuummbbeerr ffrroomm 11 ttoo 66,, iiinnndddiiicccaaatttiiinnnggg ttthhheee sssiiizzzeee fffrrrooommm lllaaarrrgggeeesssttt tttooo sssmmmaaalllllleeesssttt... TTTooo eeennnttteeerrr aaa llleeevvveeelll 111 hhheeeaaadddiiinnnggg,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss ttthhheee largest, type <H1>.
2.
AAnnyy tteexxtt yyoouu eenntteerr iimmmmeeddiiaatteellyy aafftteerr tthhee <<HH11>> ttaagg wwiillll bbee ddiissppllaayyeedd iinn llaarrggee bboolldd ttyyppee bbyy aa WWeebb bbrroowwsseerr.. 3.
CClloossee tthhee hheeaaddiinngg ttaagg bbyy ttyyppiinngg </H1>.
63 4.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn eeexxxpppeeerrriiimmmeeennnttt wwwiiittthhh dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt sssiiizzzeeeddd hhheeeaaadddiiinnngggsss bbbyyy ccchhhaaannngggiiinnnggg ttthhheee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr ooofff ttthhheee hheeaaddiinngg ttaagg ttoo aannyy vvaalluuee bbeettwweeeenn 11 aanndd 66.. TThhee rreessuulltt wwiillll llooookk ssoommeetthhiinngg lliikkee tthhiiss.. 33..44 HHooww ttoo UUssee tthhee PPaarraaggrraapphh TTaagg OOOnnneee ooofff ttthhheee mmmooosssttt cccooommmmmmooonnnlllyyy uuussseeeddd tttaaagggsss iiinnn HHHTTTMMMLLL iiisss ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh mmmaaarrrkkkeeerrr,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss uuussseeeddd tttooo bbbrrreeeaaakkk aaapppaaarrrttt bbbllloooccckkksss ooofff ttteeexxxttt iiinnntttooo ssseeepppaaarrraaattteee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhhsss... AAAnnnyyy fffooorrrmmmaaattttttiiinnnggg ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu pppeeerrrfffooorrrmmm iiinnn Notepad, such aaasss ppplllaaaccciiinnnggg cccaaarrrrrriiiaaagggeee rrreeetttuuurrrnnnsss,,, eeexxxtttrrraaa ssspppaaaccceeesss,,, ooorrr tttaaabbb ssstttooopppsss,,, wwwiiillllll bbbeee iiigggnnnooorrreeeddd bbbyyy WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss... TTThhheee ooonnnlllyyy wwwaaayyy tttooo iiinnndddiiicccaaattteee ssseeepppaaarrraaattteee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhhsss iiisss bbbyyy uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh mmmaaarrrkkkeeerrr... UUUnnnfffooorrrtttuuunnnaaattteeelllyyy,,, dddeeessspppiiittteee iiitttsss sssiiimmmpppllliiiccciiitttyyy,,, ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh mmmaaarrrkkkeeerrr iiisss aaalllsssooo ooonnneee ooofff ttthhheee mmmooosssttt missuunnddeerrssttoooodd ttaaggss iinn HHTTMMLL.. • RRReeemmmeeemmmbbbeeerrr ttthhhaaattt iiinnn HHHTTTMMMLLL,,, pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh tttaaagggsss aaarrreee cccooonnnsssiiidddeeerrreeeddd tttooo bbbeee cccooonnntttaaaiiinnneeerrrsss ooofff ttteeexxxttt... TTThhhaaattt mmmeeeaaannnsss eeeaaaccchhh pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh ssshhhooouuulllddd hhhaaavvveee aaa ssstttaaarrrtttiiinnnggg <<<PPP>>> tttaaaggg aaannnddd aaannn eeennndddiiinnnggg <<<///PPP>>> tttaaaggg... EEEaaarrrlllyyy vveerrssiioonnss ooff HHTTMMLL uusseedd tthhee <<PP>> ttaagg aass aa ppaarraaggrraapphh sseeppaarraattoorr.. • PPPaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhhsss cccaaannn cccooonnntttaaaiiinnn mmmooorrreee ttthhhaaannn ppplllaaaiiinnn ttteeexxxttt... YYYooouuu cccaaannn ppplllaaaccceee iiimmmaaagggeeesss,,, hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkksss,,, aaannnddd mmmaaannnyyy ooottthhheeerrr HHHTTTMMMLLL eeellleeemmmeeennntttsss iiinnnsssiiidddeee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhhsss aaasss wwweeellllll... YYYooouuu wwwiiillllll llleeeaaarrrnnn mmmooorrreee aaabbbooouuuttt tthheessee eelleemmeennttss iinn llaatteerr modules.
1.
TThhee mmoosstt iimmppoorrttaanntt tthhiinngg ttoo rreemmeemmbbeerr aabboouutt tthhee ppaarraaggrraapphh ttaagg iiss tthhaatt iitt mmaarrkkss tthhee bbbeeegggiiinnnnnniiinnnggg ooofff aaa pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh,,, nnnooottt ttthhheee eeennnddd... TTThhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnnaaalll HHHTTTMMMLLL ssstttaaannndddaaarrrddd uuussseeeddd ttthhheee ppaarraaggrraapphh mmaarrkkeerr ddiiffffeerreennttllyy,, wwhhiicchh hhaass lleedd ttoo ssoommee ccoonnffuussiioonn.. 2.
TToo iinnsseerrtt aa nneeww ppaarraaggrraapphh,, ttyyppee <P> aannyywwhheerree iinn tthhee bbooddyy sseeccttiioonn ooff yyoouurr HHTTMMLL document.
This willll ttteeellllll ttthhheee bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr tttooo iiinnnssseeerrrttt aaa llliiinnneee ssspppaaaccceee aaannnddd ssstttaaarrrttt aaa nnneeewww pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh... 3.
EEEnnnttteeerrr ttthhheee ttteeexxxttt ooofff ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh aaafffttteeerrr ttthhhiiisss tttaaaggg... RRReeemmmeeemmmbbbeeerrr ttthhhaaattt aaannnyyy cccaaarrrrrriiiaaagggeee rrreeetttuuurrrnnnsss ooorrr llliiinnneee bbbrrreeeaaakkksss yyyooouuu eeennnttteeerrr iiinnntttooo NNNooottteeepppaaaddd wwwiiillllll bbbeee iiigggnnnooorrreeeddd bbbyyy aaa WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr... TTThhheee bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr will continue to tttrrreeeaaattt ttthhheee ttteeexxxttt aaasss pppaaarrrttt ooofff ttthhheee cccuuurrrrrreeennnttt pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh uuunnntttiiilll iiittt ssseeeeeesss aaannnooottthhheeerrr <<<PPP>>> tag.
64  Figure 6: AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff Paragraph Tag.
4.
YYoouu ccaann iinnddiiccaattee tthhee eenndd ooff aa ppaarraaggrraapphh bbyy ttyyppiinngg <<//PP>>.. HHoowweevveerr,, tthhiiss ttaagg iiss ooppttiioonnaall.. TTThhheee eeennnddd ooofff ttthhheee cccuuurrrrrreeennnttt pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh iiisss iiimmmpppllliiieeeddd wwwhhheeennneeevvveeerrr aaa nnneeewww pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh mmmaaarrrkkkeeerrr iiisss found by a browser.
5.
CCCooonnntttiiinnnuuueee eeennnttteeerrriiinnnggg nnneeewww pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhhsss ooofff ttteeexxxttt,,, uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee <<<PPP>>> tttaaaggg tttooo iiinnndddiiicccaaattteee ttthhheee bbbeeegggiiinnnnnniiinnnggg of each.
3.5 How to Use Speciall CChhaarraacctteerrss BBByyy nnnooowww,,, yyyooouuu mmmaaayyy hhhaaavvveee nnnoootttiiiccceeeddd aaa pppooottteeennntttiiiaaalll ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm wwwiiittthhh HHHTTTMMMLLL... AAAllllll ooofff ttthhheee mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp tttaaagggsss aaarrreee iinnddiiccaatteedd bbyy lleefftt aanndd rriigghhtt aannggllee bbrraacckkeettss ((ggrreeaatteerr-than and less-tthhaann ssyymmbboollss)).. TThheessee cchhaarraacctteerrss aarree rreesseerrvveedd bbyy HHTTMMLL ffoorr uussee wwiitthh ttaaggss.. WWhhaatt hhaappppeennss wwhheenn yyoouu wwaanntt ttoo iinncclluuddee oonnee ooff tthheessee cchhaarraacctteerrss iinn yyoouurr tteexxtt??
TTThhhaaattt'''sss aaa gggooooooddd qqquuueeessstttiiiooonnn,,, aaannnddd ttthhheee ppprrrooobbbllleeemmm iiisssnnn'''ttt llliiimmmiiittteeeddd tttooo jjjuuusssttt ttthhhooossseee tttwwwooo sssyyymmmbbbooolllsss... AAA nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr ooofff ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrrsss cccaaannn'''ttt bbbeee tttyyypppeeeddd dddiiirrreeeccctttlllyyy iiinnntttooo ttthhheee bbbooodddyyy ttteeexxxttt HHHTTTMMMLLL,,, iiinnncccllluuudddiiinnnggg mmmaaannnyyy fffooorrreeeiiigggnnn lllaaannnggguuuaaagggeee symbols.
Forttuunnaatteellyy,, HHTTMMLL pprroovviiddeess aa ssoolluuttiioonn tthhrroouugghh tthhee uussee ooff cchhaarraacctteerr entities.
By 65 uussiinngg ssppeecciiaall ccooddeess,, HHTTMMLL ccaann ddiissppllaayy aallll ooff tthhee cchhaarraacctteerrss iinn tthhee IISSOO-LLaattiinn-1 (ISO 8859) ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr ssseeettt... HHHTTTMMMLLL 333...222 aaalllsssooo iiinnncccllluuudddeeesss sssuuuppppppooorrrttt fffooorrr mmmaaannnyyy mmmaaattthhheeemmmaaatttiiicccaaalll sssyyymmmbbbooolllsss... 1.
Locate your cccuuurrrsssooorrr aaattt ttthhheee pppooosssiiitttiiiooonnn iiinnn ttthhheee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhheee ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr eeennntttiiitttyyy fffooorrr ttthhheee ssppeecciiaall cchhaarraacctteerr iiss ttoo bbee ppllaacceedd.. 2.
AAA ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr eeennntttiiitttyyy bbbeeegggiiinnnsss wwwiiittthhh aaannn aaammmpppeeerrrsssaaannnddd (((&&&))),,, fffooollllllooowwweeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee cccooodddeee,,, aaannnddd eeennndddsss wwwiiittthhh aa sseemmiiccoolloonn.. TToo ppllaaccee aa ddoouubbllee qquuoottee iinn yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt,, ffoorr eexxaammppllee,, ttyyppee &quot;.
3.
OOOttthhheeerrr cccooommmmmmooonnn ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr eeennntttiiitttiiieeesss fffooorrr ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrrsss ttthhhaaattt aaarrreee rrreeessseeerrrvvveeeddd fffooorrr HHHTTTMMMLLL tttaaagggsss aaarrreee &lt; for the less-tthhaann ssyymmbbooll;; &gt; for the greater-tthhaann ssyymmbbooll;; aanndd &amp; for the aammppeerrssaanndd.. NNoottee tthhaatt tthheessee nnaammeedd cchhaarraacctteerr eennttiittiieess aarree ccaassee-sseennssiittiivvee.. 4.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn aaalllsssooo uuussseee nnnaaammmeeeddd ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr eeennntttiiitttiiieeesss fffooorrr mmmaaannnyyy fffooorrreeeiiigggnnn lllaaannnggguuuaaagggeee sssyyymmmbbbooolllsss... FFFooorrr eexxaammppllee,, ttoo ccrreeaattee tthhee uummllaauutt uusseedd iinn tthhee GGeerrmmaann pphhrraassee,, üübbeerr aalllleess, you would type in &uuml;ber alles.
5.
IIInnn aaaddddddiiitttiiiooonnn tttooo nnnaaammmeeeddd ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr eeennntttiiitttiiieeesss,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn uuussseee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrreeeddd ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr eeennntttiiitttiiieeesss... HHTTMMLL uusseess aa ssuubbsseett ooff tthhee IISSOO 88885599//11 88-bbiitt cchhaarraacctteerr sseett,, aanndd sseevveerraall cchhaarraacctteerrss,, iiinnncccllluuudddiiinnnggg ttthhheee cccooopppyyyrrriiiggghhhttt sssyyymmmbbbooolll,,, tttrrraaadddeeemmmaaarrrkkk sssyyymmmbbbooolll,,, aaannnddd mmmaaattthhheeemmmaaatttiiicccaaalll sssyyymmmbbbooolllsss,,, aaarrre aavvaaiillaabbllee wwhheenn rreeffeerreenncceedd bbyy tthheeiirr nnuummbbeerreedd cchhaarraacctteerr eennttiittyy.. 6.
TTTooo iiinnnssseeerrrttt aaa nnnuuummmeeerrriiicccaaalll ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr eeennntttiiitttyyy iiinnntttooo HHHTTTMMMLLL,,, tttyyypppeee aaannn aaammmpppeeerrrsssaaannnddd,,, fffooollllllooowwweeeddd bbbyyy aaa pppooouuunnnddd sssiiigggnnn,,, ttthhheee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr ooofff ttthhheee ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr aaannnddd aaa ssseeemmmiiicccooolllooonnn... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo eeennnttteeerrr ttthhheee rreeggiisstteerreedd ttrraaddeemmaarrkk ssyymmbbol into your document, you would type &&##117744;;.
You can ffiinndd aa ppaarrttiiaall lliisstt ooff nnuummeerriiccaall cchhaarraacctteerr eennttiittiieess iinn tthhee AAppppeennddiixx.. 4.0 CCOONNCCLLUUSSIIOONN:: TTThhheee tttwwwooo mmmaaajjjooorrr ssseeeccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff aaannn HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt aaarrreee ttthhheee hhheeeaaaddd aaannnddd bbbooodddyyy ssseeeccctttiiiooonnnsss... TThhee ttwwoo sseeccttiioonnss aarree always within the HTML tags.
5.0 SUMMARY: IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee lleeaarrnntt:: 66 • How to use the head and the body sections • How to use headings and • How to insert paragraphs tags.
• How to use special characters 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT • Given 5 line document, insert 3 new paragraphs on the document • What are the uses of the head section of HTML document • What are the steps of inserting paragraph tags in a document.
7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES 1.
`Arpajian, S., and R. Mullen.
1996.
How to use HTML 3.2.
Emeryville, Ziff-Davis Press.
219 pp.
2.
Castro, E. 1998.
HTML 4 for the world wide web.Berkeley, Peachpit Press.
336 pp.
3.
Graham, I. S. 1997.
HTML sourcebook, third edition.
New York, John Wiley & Sons.
620 pp.
4.
Williams, R. 1994.
The non-designer’s design book.
Design and typographic principles for the visual novice.
Berkeley, Peachpit Press.
144 pp.
5.
Williams, R., and J. Tollett.
1998.
The non-designer’s web book.
An easy guide to creating, designing , and posting your own web site.
Berkeley, Peachpit Press.
288 pp.
UNIT THREE - FORMATTING TEXT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1– How to Format Characters with Physical Tags 3.2– How to Format Characters with Logical Markup Tags 3.3 - How to Format Paragraphs 3.4- How to Use Text Breaks 3.5 How to Use Preformatted Text 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 67  1.0 INTRODUCTION HTML was originally designed as a markup language, not as a formatting and layout specification.
The key difference is that HTML allows the author to specify how certain elements are to be used, not necessarily how they are supposed to look.
The actual details of presentation are left up to the client-the Web browser.
That is how HTML was originally designed, but that is not necessarily how things turned out.
Increasingly, HTML designers are demanding greater control over the look and feel of their documents.
HTML provides that control, and yet still allows HTML authors to take the first approach and allow formatting to be handled entirely by the browser.
As the author of your own document, you will decide how you want your page to look.
In this unit, you will learn how to handle basic formatting for text and paragraphs.
You will also learn a few valuable techniques for breaking large amounts of text into readable chunks.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Describe the physical markup tags • Describe the logical markup tags • State the difference between formatting tags and preformatted text 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 How to Format Characters with Physical Tags HTML provides two general ways to apply formatting to text.
The first group of formatting tags is collectively known as physical markup tags.
This type of tag gets its name because it indicates a specific change in appearance.
Bold and italic tags, for example, are known as physical markup tags because they directly specify how the text should appear on screen.
In this section of the unit, we will look at how you can use physical tags in HTML.
68  Figure 1: An EExxaammppllee ooff SSoommee ffoorrmmaattttiinngg TTaaggss 1.
IIInnn gggeeennneeerrraaalll,,, aaallllll ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr fffooorrrmmmaaattttttiiinnnggg tttaaagggsss wwwooorrrkkk ttthhheee sssaaammmeee... EEEaaaccchhh hhhaaasss aaa ssstttaaarrrtttiiinnnggg tttaaaggg aaannnddd aaannn eeennndddiiinnnggg tttaaaggg... AAAllllll ooofff ttthhheee ttteeexxxttt ttthhhaaattt fffaaallllllsss bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheee tttwwwooo tttaaagggsss iiinnnhhheeerrriiitttsss ttthhheee ssspppeeeccciiifffiiieeeddd fffooorrrmmmaaattt... IIInnn aaaddddddiiitttiiiooonnn,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn nnneeesssttt fffooorrrmmmaaattttttiiinnnggg tttaaagggsss iiinnnsssiiidddeee ooonnneee aaannnooottthhheeerrr tttooo cccooommmbbbiiinnneee effects.
2.
TToo ccrreeaattee iittaalliicc tteexxtt,, iinnsseerrtt aann <I> ttaagg iinn tthhee ddooccuummeenntt,, ffoolllloowweedd bbyy aa </I> tag.
Any ttteeexxxttt bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheeessseee tttwwwooo tttaaagggsss wwwiiillllll bbbeee dddiiisssppplllaaayyyeeeddd iiinnn iiitttaaallliiicccsss wwwhhheeennn vvviiieeewwweeeddd bbbyyy aaa bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr... 3.
TToo ccrreeaattee bboolldd tteexxtt,, iinnsseerrtt <B> and </B> ttaaggss.. AAnnyy tteexxtt ffaalllliinngg bbeettwweeeenn tthheessee ttwo ttaaggss wwiillll aappppeeaarr iinn bboollddffaaccee ttyyppee.. 4.
TTTooo cccrrreeeaaattteee ttteeexxxttt ttthhhaaattt iiisss dddiiisssppplllaaayyyeeeddd iiinnn aaa mmmooonnnooossspppaaaccceeeddd fffooonnnttt (((sssuuuccchhh aaasss CCCooouuurrriiieeerrr))),,, uuussseee ttthhheee <TT> and </TT> tttaaagggsss... TTTeeexxxttt fffaaalllllliiinnnggg bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthhheeessseee tttwwwooo tttaaagggsss wwwiiillllll bbbeee dddiiisssppplllaaayyyeeeddd iiinnn aaa fffiiixxxeeeddd-width ffoonntt,, ssiimmiillaarr ttoo tthhee oouuttppuutt ffrroomm aa tteelleettyyppe machine or typewriter.
5.
To create strike-ttthhhrrrooouuuggghhh ttteeexxxttt,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss ttteeexxxttt wwwiiittthhh aaa sssiiinnngggllleee hhhooorrriiizzzooonnntttaaalll llliiinnneee rrruuunnnnnniiinnnggg through it, use the <<SSTTRRIIKKEE>> and </STRIKE> tags.
69  6.
UUnnddeerrlliinneedd tteexxtt ccaann bbee ddiissppllaayyeedd uussiinngg tthhee <U> and </U> ttaagg ppaaiirr.. YYoouu sshhoouulldd uussee these tags onnnlllyyy wwwhhheeennn aaabbbsssooollluuuttteeelllyyy nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrryyy,,, aaasss uuunnndddeeerrrllliiinnneeeddd ttteeexxxttt iiisss nnnooottt wwwiiidddeeelllyyy ssuuppppoorrtteedd bbyy WWeebb bbrroowwsseerrss.. 7.
YYoouu ccaann cchhaannggee tthhee ffoonntt ssiizzee ooff nnoorrmmaall tteexxtt.. UUssiinngg tthhee <BIG> and <<//BBIIGG>> tags will iinnccrreeaassee tthhee ssiizzee ooff tthhee iinnddiiccaatteedd tteexxtt rreellaattiivvee ttoo tthhee ddeeffaauulltt ssiizzee.. <<SSMMAALLLL>> and </SMALL> wwiillll mmaakkee tthhee tteexxtt ssmmaalllleerr.. 8.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn aaalllsssooo fffooorrrmmmaaattt ttteeexxxttt aaasss eeeiiittthhheeerrr sssuuupppeeerrrssscccrrriiipppttt ooorrr sssuuubbbssscccrrriiipppttt,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh iiisss ttteeexxxttt ttthhhaaattt aaappppppeeeaaarrrsss sssllliiiggghhhtttlllyyy aaabbbooovvveee ooorrr bbbeeelllooowww ttthhheee cccuuurrrrrreeennnttt llliiinnneee,,, rrreeessspppeeeccctttiiivvveeelllyyy... SSSuuupppeeerrrssscccrrriiipppttt aaannnddd sssuuubbbssscccrrriiipppttt nnuummbbeerrss aarree oofftteenn uusseedd iinn mmaatthheemmaattiiccaall eeqquuaattiioonnss oorr ttoo iinnddiiccaattee ffoooottnnootteess.. UUssiinngg the <SUP> and <<//SSUUPP>> ttaaggss wwiillll mmaarrkk tteexxtt aass ssuuppeerrssccrriipptt ((sslliigghhttllyy aabboovvee tthhee ccuurrrreenntt line).
<SUB> and <<//SSUUBB>> wwiillll mmaarrkk tteexxtt aass ssuubbssccrriipptt ((sslliigghhttllyy bbeellooww tthhee ccuurrrreenntt lliinnee)) 3.2 – HHooww ttoo FFoorrmmaatt CChhaarraacctteerrss wwiitthh LLooggiiccaall Markup Tags OOOnnn ttthhheee ppprrreeevvviiiooouuusss pppaaagggeee,,, yyyooouuu llleeeaaarrrnnneeeddd hhhooowww tttooo ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy ttthhheee aaappppppeeeaaarrraaannnccceee ooofff ttteeexxxttt uuusssiiinnnggg ppphhhyyysssiiicccaaalll mmaarrkkuupp ttaaggss.. HHoowweevveerr,, tthheerree iiss aa sseeccoonndd mmeetthhoodd ffoorr ffoorrmmaattttiinngg tteexxtt-tthhrroouugghh tthhee uussee ooff logical markup tags, ssoommeettiimmeess kknnoowwnn aass information style elements.
Loggiiccaall ttaaggss ttaakkee tthhee aapppprrooaacchh tthhaatt wwhhaatt iiss rreeaallllyy iimmppoorrttaanntt iiss tthhee type ooff iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn bbeeiinngg ddiissppllaayyeedd,, rraatthheerr tthhaann eexxaaccttllyy how it is ddiissppllaayyeedd.. LLooggiiccaall ttaaggss lleeaavvee tthhee aaccttuuaall aappppeeaarraannccee decisions-ssuucchh aass wwhheetthheerr ttoo ddiissppllaayy tteexxtt iinn bboollddffaaccee,, iittaalliiccss,, oorr llaarrggeerr ssiizzeess-up to the browser (and ultimately the reader).
70  Figure 2: AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff EEmmpphhaassiiss TTaagg.. 1.
WWWhhheeennn yyyooouuu wwwaaannnttt tttooo aaadddddd iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannnccceee tttooo aaa ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ttteeexxxttt,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn uuussseee ttthhheee lllooogggiiicccaaalll ssstttyyyllleee tag called emphasis.. UUssiinngg tthhee <EM> and </EM> ttaaggss wwiillll uussuuaallllyy ddiissppllaayy tthhee iiinnndddiiicccaaattteeeddd ttteeexxxttt iiinnn iiitttaaallliiicccsss... HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, rrreeemmmeeemmmbbbeeerrr ttthhhaaattt wwwiiittthhh lllooogggiiicccaaalll tttaaagggsss,,, ttthhheee aaaccctttuuuaaalll appearance of theee ttteeexxxttt iiisss dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnneeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee eeennnddd uuussseeerrr'''sss WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr,,, nnnooottt yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL document.
2.
IIIfff aaa pppaaarrrtttiiicccuuulllaaarrr ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ttteeexxxttt iiisss vvveeerrryyy iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannnttt,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn mmmaaarrrkkk iiittt wwwiiittthhh strong emphasis by using the <<SSTTRROONNGG>> and </STRONG> ttaagg ppaaiirr.. MMoosstt bbrroowwsseerrss tteenndd ttoo ddiissppllaayy strongly emphhaassiizzeedd tteexxtt iinn bboollddffaaccee.. 3.
The <CODE> and <<//CCOODDEE>> ttaaggss iinnddiiccaattee tthhaatt tthhee tteexxtt iiss ttoo bbee pprreesseenntteedd aass aann example of pprrooggrraammmmiinngg code.. IInn mmoosstt bbrroowwsseerrss,, tthhiiss tteexxtt wwiillll bbee ddiissppllaayyeedd iinn aa mmmooonnnooossspppaaaccceeeddd fffooonnnttt,,, sssuuuccchhh aaasss CCCooouuurrriiieeerrr... TTThhheee <<<CCCOOODDDEEE>>> tttaaagggsss aaarrreee uuussseeeddd eeexxxttteeennnsssiiivvveeelllyyy in iinntteerraaccttiivvee ccoommppuutteerr mmaannuuaallss.. 71  4.
The <SAMP> and <<//SSAAMMPP>> ttaaggss aarree vveerryy ssiimmiillaarr ttoo tthhee <<CCOODDEE>> ttaaggss,, aanndd aarree uusseedd ttoo iiinnndddiiicccaaattteee sssaaammmpppllleee ttteeexxxttt ttthhhaaattt iiisssnnn'''ttt ssspppeeeccciiifffiiicccaaallllllyyy ppprrrooogggrrraaammmmmmiiinnnggg cccooodddeee... MMMooosssttt WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss wwiillll hhaannddllee bbootthh sseettss ooff ttaaggss iinn tthhee ssaammee wwaayy.. 5.
The <KBD> and <<//KKBBDD>> ttaaggss iinnddiiccaattee tteexxtt tthhaatt iiss ssuuppppoosseedd ttoo bbee ttyyppeedd iinn bbyy tthhee rrreeeaaadddeeerrr... BBByyy dddeeefffaaauuulllttt,,, mmmooosssttt bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss wwwiiillllll dddiiisssppplllaaayyy ttthhhiiisss ttteeexxxttt iiinnn aaa sssiiimmmiiilllaaarrr fffaaassshhhiiiooonnn tttooo ttthhheee <<CCOODDEE>> aanndd <<SSAAMMPP>> ttaaggss.. 6.
The <CITE> and <<//CCIITTEE>> ttaaggss aarree uusseedd ttoo iinnsseerrtt aa cciittaattiioonn ttoo ggiivvee ccrreeddiitt ffoor a short qqquuuoootttaaatttiiiooonnn iiinnn ttthhheee bbbooodddyyy ooofff ttthhheee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt... CCCiiitttaaatttiiiooonnnsss aaarrreee tttyyypppiiicccaaallllllyyy dddiiisssppplllaaayyyeeeddd iiinnn iiitttaaallliiicccsss... 7.
The <DFN> and <<//DDFFNN>> tags are used to highlight the defining iinnssttaannccee of a term.
TTThhhiiisss iiisss aaa wwwooorrrddd ooorrr ppphhhrrraaassseee ttthhhaaattt iiisss bbbeeeiiinnnggg dddeeefffiiinnneeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee cccooonnnttteeexxxttt ooofff ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh iiinnn which it appears.
3.3 - HHooww ttoo FFoorrmmaatt PPaarraaggrraapphhss NNNooowww ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee llleeeaaarrrnnneeeddd aaallllll ttthhheee wwwaaayyysss tttooo fffooorrrmmmaaattt iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrrsss,,, wwwooorrrdddsss,,, aaannnddd ppphhhrrraaassseeesss,,, you are ready to eeexxxaaammmiiinnneee ttthhheee oooppptttiiiooonnnsss yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee fffooorrr ppprrreeessseeennntttiiinnnggg eeennntttiiirrreee ssseeeccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ttteeexxxttt... AAAsss wwwiiittthhh nnnooorrrmmmaaalll dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss,,, ttthhheee bbbaaasssiiiccc ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ttteeexxxttt iiinnn HHHTTTMMMLLL iiisss ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh... HHHTTTMMMLLL ppprrrooovvviiidddeeesss mmmaaannnyyy nneeww wwaayyss ttoo pprreesseenntt,, ffoorrmmaatt,, aanndd aalliiggnn ppaarraaggrraapphhss.. 1.
TThhee bbaassiicc ppaarraaggrraapphh ttaagg iiss aallwwaayyss uusseedd ttoo ssttaarrtt aa nneeww ppaarraaggrraapphh.. TToo iinnddiiccaattee aa ppaarraaggrraapphh,, ttyyppee <P>.. TThhiiss tteellllss tthhee WWeebb bbrroowwsseerr ttoo iinnsseerrtt aa lliinnee ssppaaccee aanndd bbbeeegggiiinnn aaa nnneeewww pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh... TTThhheee <<<PPP>>> tttaaaggg aaalllwwwaaayyysss cccrrreeeaaattteeesss aaa sssiiimmmpppllleee,,, llleeefffttt-justified pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh... AAAlllttthhhooouuuggghhh ttthhheee ccclllooosssiiinnnggg <<<PPP>>> tttaaaggg iiisss oooppptttiiiooonnnaaalll,,, yyyooouuu mmmaaayyy wwwaaannnttt to include iitt ttoo hheellpp yyoouu rreemmeemmbbeerr wwhheerree aa ppaarraaggrraapphh eennddss.. 72  2.
YYoouu ccaann cchhaannggee tthhee jjuussttiiffiiccaattiioonn ooff tthhee ppaarraaggrraapphh wwiitthh tthhee AALLIIGGNN attribute.
TTTooo ccchhhaaannngggeee ttthhheee aaallliiigggnnnmmmeeennnttt ooofff aaa pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh,,, pppuuuttt ttthhheee AAALLLIIIGGGNNN ssstttaaattteeemmmeeennnttt iiinnn ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh tttaaaggg,,, fffooollllllooowwweeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee tttyyypppeee ooofff jjjuuussstttiiifffiiicccaaatttiiiooonnn yyyooouuu wwwaaannnttt... TTTooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa right-jjuussttiiffiieedd ppaarraaggrraapphh,, ttyyppee <P ALIGN=RIGHT>.
3.
TToo ccrreeaattee aa cceenntteerreedd ppaarraaggrraapphh,, ttyyppee <P ALIGN=CENTER>.. TToo ccrreeaattee aa ppaarraaggrraapphh tthhaatt iiss jjuussttiiffiieedd oonn bbootthh ssiiddeess,, ttyyppee <<PP AALLIIGGNN==JJUUSSTTIIFFYY>>.
You can aallssoo ccrreeaattee aa lleefftt-justified paragraph by typing <<PP AALLIIGGNN==LLEEFFTT>>.
However, ssiinnccee tthhiiss iiss tthhee ddeeffaauulltt,, jjuusstt ttyyppiinngg <P> wwiillll hhaavvee tthhee ssaammee eeffffeecctt.. 1.
By default, thhheee WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr wwwiiillllll wwwrrraaappp llliiinnneeesss ooofff ttteeexxxttt tttooo kkkeeeeeeppp ttthhheee eeennntttiiirrreee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh iiinnn vvviiieeewww... YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee ttthhheee oooppptttiiiooonnn ooofff tttuuurrrnnniiinnnggg oooffffff wwwooorrrddd wwwrrraaappppppiiinnnggg bbbyyy iiinnncccllluuudddiiinnnggg ttthhheee NOWRAP cccooommmmmmaaannnddd iiinnn ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh tttaaaggg... TTTooo tttuuurrrnnn oooffffff wwwooorrrddd wwwrrraaappppppiiinnnggg iiinnn aaa pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh,,, tttyyypppeee <P NOWRAP>.. TThhiiss wwiillll aallllooww yyoouu ttoo eexxpplliicciittllyy ppllaaccee lliinnee bbrreeaakkss uussiinngg tthhee <<BBRR>> ttaagg,, wwhhiicchh iiss eexxppllaaiinneedd iinn tthhee nneexxtt sseeccttiioonn.. 2.
NNNooorrrmmmaaallllllyyy,,, pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhhsss wwwiiillllll wwwrrraaappp aaarrrooouuunnnddd aaannn ooobbbjjjeeecccttt iiinnn ttthhheee mmmaaarrrgggiiinnn,,, sssuuuccchhh aaasss aaa fffiiiggguuurrreee ooorrr tttaaabbbllleee... TTTooo fffooorrrccceee ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh tttooo bbbeeegggiiinnn bbbeeelllooowww ttthhheee ooobbbjjjeeecccttt,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn uuussseee ttthhheee CLEAR attribute.
Typing <<PP CCLLEEAARR==LLEEFFTT>> mmoovveess tthhee ppaarraaggrraapphh ddoowwnn uunnttiill tthhee lleefftt mmaarrggiinn iiss clear.
CLEAR=RIGHT fffooorrrccceeesss ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh dddooowwwnnn tttooo aaa pppoooiiinnnttt wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhheee rrriiiggghhhttt mmmaaarrrgggiiinnn iiisss clear.
CLEAR=ALL fffooorrrccceeesss ttthhheee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh tttooo wwwaaaiiittt uuunnntttiiilll bbbooottthhh mmmaaarrrgggiiinnnsss aaarrreee cccllleeeaaarrr... 73  Figure 3: AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff SSppeecciiaall FFoorrmmaattttiinngg 3.
TTTooo cccooommmbbbiiinnneee fffooorrrmmmaaattttttiiinnnggg cccooommmmmmaaannndddsss iiinnn ttthhheee sssaaammmeee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh,,, tttyyypppeee aaallllll ttthhheee aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteeesss ttooggeetthheerr iinn tthhee ssaammee <<PP>> tag.
For example, to create a center-aalliiggnneedd ppaarraaggrraapphh wwiitthh nnoo wwoorrdd wwrraappppiinngg,, ttyyppee <P ALIGN=CENTER NOWRAP>.
3.4 - HHooww ttoo UUssee TTeexxtt BBrreeaakkss NNNooottt aaallllll ttteeexxxttt fffiiitttsss nnneeeaaatttlllyyy iiinnntttooo pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhhsss... SSSooommmeeetttiiimmmeeesss yyyooouuu wwwaaannnttt ttthhheee rrreeeaaadddeeerrr'''sss WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr tttooo eeennnddd a line of text at a spppeeeccciiifffiiiccc pppoooiiinnnttt... IIIfff yyyooouuu'''rrreee uuusssiiinnnggg HHHTTTMMMLLL tttooo dddiiisssppplllaaayyy pppoooeeetttrrryyy,,, lllyyyrrriiicccsss,,, iiinnnssstttrrruuuccctttiiiooonnnaaalll mmmaaattteeerrriiiaaalllsss,,, ooorrr aaannnyyy ooottthhheeerrr tttyyypppeee ooofff iiinnnfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn wwwhhheeerrreee ssspppeeeccciiifffiiiccc fffooorrrmmmaaattttttiiinnnggg iiisss nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrryyy,,, yyyooouuu wwwiiillllll wwaanntt ttoo hhaavvee ccoonnttrrooll oovveerr tthhee ffllooww ooff tteexxtt iinn tthhee ddooccuummeenntt.. 74  Figure 4: AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff LLiinnee BBrreeaakk 1.
TToo iinnsseerrtt aa lliinnee bbrreeaakk aatt aa ssppeecciiffiicc ppooiinntt,, ttyyppee <BR>.. TThhiiss iinnssttrruuccttss tthhee WWeebb bbrroowwsseerr tttooo iiimmmmmmeeedddiiiaaattteeelllyyy eeennnddd ttthhheee cccuuurrrrrreeennnttt llliiinnneee aaannnddd bbbeeegggiiinnn ppplllaaaccciiinnnggg ttteeexxxttt ooonnn ttthhheee nnneeexxxttt llliiinnneee... AAA llliiinnneee bbrreeaakk ddooeess nnoott ssttaarrtt aa nneeww ppaarraaggrraapphh.. 2.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn uuussseee mmmuuullltttiiipppllleee llliiinnneee bbbrrreeeaaakkksss tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa ssshhhooorrrttt,,, iiinnnfffooorrrmmmaaalll llliiisssttt ooofff iiittteeemmmsss... BBByyy cccrrreeeaaatttiiinnnggg aaa nnneeewww pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh bbbeeefffooorrreee aaannnddd aaafffttteeerrr ttthhheee llliiisssttt,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn ssseeepppaaarrraaattteee iiittt fffrrrooommm ttthhheee rrreeesssttt ooofff yyyooouuurrr text.
3.
SSSooommmeeetttiiimmmeeesss yyyooouuu'''llllll wwwaaannnttt tttooo vvviiisssuuuaaallllllyyy bbbrrreeeaaakkk aaapppaaarrrttt ssseeeccctttiiiooonnnsss ooofff ttteeexxxttt uuusssiiinnnggg aaa vvviiisssible line.
HHTTMMLL ssuuppppoorrttss tthhiiss tthhrroouugghh tthhee uussee ooff horizontal rules.. TThheessee ccaann bbee aaddddeedd aannyywwhheerree iinn tthhee ddooccuummeenntt bbyy ttyyppiinngg <HR>.. AA tthhiinn lliinnee ssttrreettcchhiinngg aaccrroossss tthhee eennttiirree wwwiiinnndddooowww wwwiiillllll bbbeee ppplllaaaccceeeddd aaattt ttthhhaaattt pppoooiiinnnttt iiinnn ttthhheee ttteeexxxttt... HHHooorrriiizzzooonnntttaaalll rrruuullleeesss,,, llliiikkkeee pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhhsss,,, suppooorrrttt ttthhheee cccllleeeaaarrr aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee tttooo aaallllllooowww yyyooouuu tttooo bbbeeegggiiinnn ttthhheee llliiinnneee wwwhhheeennn ttthhheee mmmaaarrrgggiiinnnsss aaarrreee cccllleeeaaarrr... 4.
TToo ppllaaccee aann eennttiirree sseeccttiioonn ooff tteexxtt aappaarrtt ffrroomm tthhee rreesstt,, uussee tthhee <<BBLLOOCCKKQQUUOOTTEE>> and </BLOCKQUOTE> tttaaaggg pppaaaiiirrr... TTThhhiiisss tttaaaggg,,, uuussseeeddd iiinnn ppplllaaaccceee ooofff aaa pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh tttaaaggg,,, wwwiiillllll oooffffffssseeettt aaannn 75 entire pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhh fffrrrooommm ttthhheee mmmaaaiiinnn bbbooodddyyy ooofff ttteeexxxttt,,, uuusssuuuaaallllllyyy bbbyyy iiinnndddeeennntttiiinnnggg iiittt aaannnddd aaaddddddiiinnnggg eeexxxtttrrraaa ssspppaaaccceeesss tttooo ttthhheee tttoooppp aaannnddd bbbooottttttooommm... IIIttt iiisss cccooommmmmmooonnnlllyyy uuussseeeddd tttooo hhhiiiggghhhllliiiggghhhttt lllooonnnggg qqquuuoootttaaatttiiiooonnnsss aaannnddd passages.
3.5 HHooww ttoo UUssee PPrreeffoorrmmaatttteedd TTeexxtt PPPrrreeefffooorrrmmmaaatttttteeeddd ttteeexxxttt aaallllllooowwwsss yyyooouuu bbbrrreeeaaakkk aaawwwaaayyy fffrrrooommm ttthhheee nnnooorrrmmmaaalll rrruuullleeesss ooofff HHHTTTMMMLLL aaannnddd qqquuuiiiccckkklllyyy ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy eeexxxaaaccctttlllyyy hhhooowww aaa ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ttteeexxxttt wwwiiillllll aaappppppeeeaaarrr iiinnn ttthhheee rrreeeaaadddeeerrr'''sss WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr... WWWhhheeennn yyyooouuu aaarrreee uuusssiiinnnggg pprreeffoorrmmaatttteedd tteexxtt,, yyoouu ddoonn''tt nneeeedd ttoo uussee tthhee HHTTMMLL mmaarrkkuupp ttaaggss-tthhee tteexxtt wwiillll appear exactly aaasss yyyooouuu hhhaaavvveee tttyyypppeeeddd iiittt,,, cccooommmpppllleeettteee wwwiiittthhh ssspppaaaccceeesss,,, llliiinnneee bbbrrreeeaaakkksss,,, aaannnddd eeemmmppptttyyy llliiinnneeesss... PPPrrreeefffooorrrmmmaaatttttteeeddd ttteeexxxttt iiisss aallwwaayyss ddiissppllaayyeedd iinn aa mmoonnoossppaacceedd,, ffiixxeedd-width font.
1.
TToo bbeeggiinn aa sseeccttiioonn ooff pprreeffoorrmmaatttteedd tteexxtt,, ttyyppee <PRE>.
NNooww ttyyppee tthhee sseeccttiioonn ooff tteexxtt eexxaaccttllyy hhooww yyoouu wwaanntt iitt ttoo aappppeeaarr.. IItt''ss aa ggoooodd iiddeeaa ttoo llliiimmmiiittt ttthhheee llleeennngggttthhh ooofff yyyooouuurrr llliiinnneeesss tttooo 666555 ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrrsss ooorrr llleeessssss,,, sssooo ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu cccaaannn aaaccccccooommmmmmooodddaaattteee ttthhheee ssscccrrreeeeeennn wwwiiidddttthhh ooofff mmmooosssttt bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss... (((RRReeemmmeeemmmbbbeeerrr ttthhhaaattt bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss wwwiiillllll nnnooottt wwwooorrrddd wwwrrraaappp preformatted text.)
Figure 4 : AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff pprreeffoorrmmaatttteedd tteexxtt 2.
WWhheenn yyoouu''rree ffiinniisshheedd eenntteerriinngg yyoouurr pprreeffoorrmmaatttteedd tteexxtt,, ttyyppee <<//PPRREE>> to mark the end of the section.
76  3.
YYoouu ccaann aappppllyy cchhaarraacctteerr ffoorrmmaattttiinngg ssttyylleess,, ssuucchh aass bboolldd aanndd iittaalliicc,, iinn pprreeffoorrmmaatttteedd ttteeexxxttt... HHHeeeaaadddiiinnngggsss aaannnddd pppaaarrraaagggrrraaappphhhsss wwwiiillllll nnnooottt wwwooorrrkkk iiinnn ppprrreeefffooorrrmmmaaatttttteeeddd ttteeexxxttt bbbllloooccckkksss,,, hhhooowwweeevvveeerrr... 4.0 CCOONNCCLLUUSSIIOONN:: TTThhheee ppphhhyyysssiiicccaaalll aaannnddd lllooogggiiicccaaalll mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp tttaaagggsss aaarrreee ttthhheee tttwwwooo gggeeennneeerrraaalll wwwaaayyysss ooofff fffooorrrmmmaaattttttiiinnnggg ttteeexxxttt... TThheeyy aarree wwiitthh ddiiffffeerreenntt mmaarrkkuupp ttaaggss.. 5.0 SUMMARY: IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee lleeaarrnntt tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg:: • PPhhyyssiiccaall MMaarrkkuupp ttaaggss • LLooggiiccaall MMaarrkkuupp ttaaggss • PPaarraaggrraapphh ffoorrmmaattttiinngg 6.0 TTUUTTOORR MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT • LLiisstt tthhee pphhyyssiiccaall MMaarrkkuupp ttaaggss yyoouu kknnooww??
• DDiissttiinngguuiisshh bbeettwweeeenn pphhyyssiiccaall aanndd llooggiiccaall mmaarrkkuupp ttaaggss 7.0 FUURRTTHHEERR RREEAADDIINNGG AANNDD OOTTHHEERR RREESSOOUURRCCEESS • ``AArrppaajjiiaann,, SS..,, aanndd RR.. MMuulllleenn.. 11999966.. HHooww ttoo uussee HHTTMMLL 33..22.. Emeryville, Ziff- DDaavviiss PPrreessss.. 221199 pppp.. • CCaassttrroo,, EE.. 11999988.. HTML 4 for the world wide web.BBeerrkkeelleeyy,, PPeeaacchhppiitt PPrreessss.. 336 pp.
• GGrraahhaamm,, II.. SS.. 11999977.. HTML sourcebook, third edition.. NNeeww YYoorrkk,, JJoohhnn WWiilleeyy && SSoonnss.. 662200 pppp.. • WWiilllliiaammss,, RR.. 11999944..
The non-ddeessiiggnneerr’’ss ddeessiiggnn bbooookk.. DDeessiiggnn aanndd ttyyppooggrraapphhiicc pprriinncciipplleess ffoorr tthhee vviissuuaall nnoovviiccee.. BBeerrkkeelleeyy,, PPeeaacchhppiitt PPrreessss.. 114444 pppp.. • WWiilllliiaammss,, RR..,, aanndd JJ.. TToolllleetttt.. 11999988..
The non-ddeessiiggnneerr’’ss wweebb bbooookk.. AAnn eeaassyy ggguuuiiidddeee tttooo cccrrreeeaaatttiiinnnggg,,, dddeeesssiiigggnnniiinnnggg ,,, aaannnddd pppooossstttiiinnnggg yyyooouuurrr ooowwwnnn wwweeebbb sssiiittteee... Berkeley, PPeeaacchhppiitt PPrreessss.. 228888 pppp.. UNIT FOUR – UUSSIINNGG HHYYPPEERRTTEEXXTT LLIINNKKSS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 HHooww ttoo CCrreeaattee aa HHyyppeerrlliinnkk 3.2 HHooww ttoo UUssee tthhee IIDD AAttttribute 3.4 HHooww ttoo UUssee RReellaattiivvee PPaatthh NNaammeess 4.0 Conclusion 77 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading And Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION The single greatest feature of the World Wide Web is its diverse collection of documents, which number in the millions.
All of these documents are brought together through the use of hypertext links.
Users navigate the Web by clicking on the links that HTML authors provide.
Hypertext links are a crucial part of HTML-which, after all, is short for Hypertext Markup Language.
In this unit, we will look at the simple process behind how hyperlinks work in HTML documents.
You will also learn how to link to a specific point in a large document by using the ID attribute.
Finally, we will take a look at the difference between using absolute and relative path names in your hyperlink references.
Linking is one of the easiest and most important parts of using HTML.
So warm up your Web browser and Notepad and get ready to explore.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define hypertext link • List types and uses of hypertext link • State the steps of creating hyperlinks • Create hyperlinks 3.0 MAIN CONT 3.1 What is hypertext link Hypertext is text displayed on a computer or other electronic device with references (hyperlinks) to other text that the reader can immediately access, usually by a mouse click or key press sequence.
Apart from running text, hypertext may contain tables, images and other presentational devices.
Hypertext is the underlying concept defining the structure of the World Wide Web.
It is an easy-to-use and flexible format to share information over the Internet.
Types and uses of hypertext Hypertext documents can either be static (prepared and stored in advance) or dynamic (continually changing in response to user input).
Static hypertext can be used to cross- reference collections of data in documents, software applications, or books on CDs.
A well- constructed system can also incorporate other user-interface conventions, such as menus and command lines.
Hypertext can develop very complex and dynamic systems of linking and cross-referencing.
The most famous implementation of hypertext is the World Wide Web , first deployed in 1992.
78  3.2 How to Create a Hyperlink Hyperlinks connect two different documents.
You can link to one of your own documents or to any other document on the World Wide Web.
You can even link to a different section in the same document.
It is very easy to create links with HTML, and you only need to follow a few simple steps.
Figure 1 : An Example of Hyperlink Document 1.
Use your Web browser to locate the document you want to link.
You can link to any other document on the World Wide Web.
2.
Make a note of the Uniform Resource Locator (URL) of the document you want to link to.
The URL is prominently displayed by your Web browser, usually near the top.
Make sure to note the complete URL.
3.
To make a link to another document, you need to use a special type of HTML tag known as an anchor tag, also commonly known as a link tag.
Locate the place in your HTML document where you want to insert the hypertext link.
Type <A HREF=", followed by the URL of the document you want to link to.
Then close the tag by typing ">.
79  Figure 2: An EExxaammppllee ooff LLiinnkk TTaagg 4.
TTyyppee ssoommee ddeessccrriippttiivvee tteexxtt ((aallssoo kknnoowwnn aass tthhee link text)) aafftteerr tthhee aanncchhoorr ttaagg ttoo lleett rreeaaddeerrss kknnooww ssoommeetthhiinngg aabboouutt wwhheerree tthhiiss lliinnkk wwiillll ttaakkee tthheemm.. 5.
FFiinniisshh tthhee aanncchhoorr ttaagg bbyy ttyyppiinngg </A> on the same line.
6.
OOnnccee yyoouu''vvee ccrreeaatteedd yyoouurr lliinnkk,, cchheecckk ttoo mmaakkee ssuurree iitt wwoorrkkss bbyy cclliicckkiinngg oonn iitt wwhhiillee uuusssiiinnnggg yyyooouuurrr WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr... NNNooottteee ttthhhaaattt bbbyyy dddeeefffaaauuulllttt,,, mmmooosssttt WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss dddiiisssppplllaaayyy hhhyyypppeeerrrttteeexxxttt llliiinnnkkksss aaasss uuunnndddeeerrrllliiinnneeeddd ttteeexxxttt iiinnn aaa dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt cccooolllooouuurrr ttthhhaaannn nnnooorrrmmmaaalll ttteeexxxttt... TTThhhiiisss llleeetttsss yyyooouuurrr rrreeeaaadddeeerrrsss kknnooww tthhaatt cclliicckkiinngg oonn tthhee tteexxtt wwill take them to another document.
3.3 HHooww ttoo UUssee tthhee IIDD AAttttrriibbuuttee WWWhhheeennn yyyooouuu cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa sssiiimmmpppllleee llliiinnnkkk tttooo aaa WWWeeebbb pppaaagggeee uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee ttteeeccchhhnnniiiqqquuueee yyyooouuu llleeeaaarrrnnneeeddd in section 3.1, ttthhheee rrreeeaaadddeeerrr iiisss aaalllwwwaaayyysss tttaaakkkeeennn tttooo ttthhheee tttoooppp ooofff ttthhheee nnneeewww pppaaagggeee... WWWhhhaaattt iiifff yyyooouuu wwwaaannnttt tttooo llliiinnnkkk tttooo aaa pppaaarrrtttiiicccuuulllaaarrr sseeccttiioonn ooff aa ddooccuummeenntt aanndd ttaakkee tthhee rreeaaddeerr iimmmmeeddiiaatteellyy ttoo tthhaatt ppooiinntt??
AAAssssssiiigggnnniiinnnggg aaannn IIIDDD tttooo aaannn eeellleeemmmeeennnttt iiinnn yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt aaallllllooowwwsss hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkksss tttooo pppoooiiinnnttt dddiiirrreeeccctttly to ttthhhaaattt eeellleeemmmeeennnttt iiinnnsssttteeeaaaddd ooofff tttooo ttthhheee vvveeerrryyy tttoooppp ooofff ttthhheee pppaaagggeee... TTThhheee HHHTTTMMMLLL 333...000 IIIDDD aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee dddiiiddd nnnooottt mmmaaakkkeee iiittt iiinnntttooo ttthhheee HHHTTTMMMLLL 333...222 ssstttaaannndddaaarrrddd,,, bbbuuuttt iiittt iiisss rrreeennndddeeerrreeeddd bbbyyy sssooommmeee bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss... YYYooouuu cccaaannn uuussseee ttthhheee IIIDDD aattttrriibbuuttee ffoorr mmoosstt HHTTMMLL eelleemmeennttss,, ssuucchh aass ppaarraaggrraapphhss,, hheeaaddiinnggss,, aanndd lliissttss.. 1.
LLLooocccaaattteee ttthhheee eeellleeemmmeeennnttt yyyooouuu'''ddd llliiikkkeee tttooo nnnaaammmeee wwwiiittthhh aaannn IIIDDD... TTThhhiiisss cccaaannn bbbeee aaalllmmmooosssttt aaannnyyy eeellleeemmmeeennnttt iiinnn yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt,, bbuutt iitt iiss uussuuaallllyy aa ppaarraaggrraapphh oorr hheeaaddiinngg.. 80  Figure 3: An Example of ID Document 2.
Inside the element's opening tag, just after the letter P, insert a space and type ID=.
3.
Your element ID needs a name.
The hyperlinks will use this name to take readers directly to this section of your document.
In this example, we'll simply name the element "MyParagraph".
4.
Type the name of your ID, inside quotation marks.
Figure 4: Another Example of ID Document 5.
To create a hyperlink directly to this element, add a pound sign and the ID name inside your hyperlink tag.
For example, to link directly to "MyParagraph", a typical hyperlink might look like the one above.
3.3 How to Use Relative Path Names In the beginning of this unit, you learned how to create a hyperlink by pointing to the full URL of another document.
However, if you are linking to different documents on the same Web server (usually your own), you do not always need to use the full URL.
You can use relative path names.
Web browsers, even when running on PC or Macintosh machines, always follow UNIX style path names.
This means that directories (folders) are separated by forward slash marks (/), and higher-level directories are indicated by two periods (..).
(cid:2) The simplest relative path name is no path name at all.
If you are linking to another document that is in the same directory, all you have to do is type in the file name of the new document in place of the full URL.
For example, to link 81 ttoo aa ddooccuummeenntt nnaammeedd nneewwffiillee..hhttmmll,, ttyyppee <<AAHHRREEFF==""nneewwffiillee..hhttmmll"">>.
(cid:2) TTTooo llliiinnnkkk tttooo dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss ooorrr fffiiillleeesss iiinnn aaa sssuuubbbdddiiirrreeeccctttooorrryyy,,, aaallllll yyyooouuu nnneeeeeeddd tttooo ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy iiisss ttthhheee pppaaattthhh aaannnddd fffiiillleee nnnaaammmeee rrreeelllaaatttiiivvveee tttooo ttthhheee cccuuurrrrrreeennnttt dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo llliiinnnkkk tttooo aaa dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt cccaaalllllleeeddd bbbuuudddgggeeettt...hhhtttmmmlll iiinnn aaa sssuuubbbdddiiirrreeeccctttooorrryyy nnnaaammmeeeddd bbbuuudddgggeeettt999666,,, yyyooouuu wwwooouuulllddd type <<AA HHRREEFF==""bbuuddggeett9966//bbudget.html">.
(cid:2) YYYooouuu cccaaannn aaalllsssooo nnnaaavvviiigggaaattteee uuuppp ttthhheee dddiiirrreeeccctttooorrryyy tttrrreeeeee ooofff yyyooouuurrr ssseeerrrvvveeerrr bbbyyy uuusssiiinnnggg tttwwwooo pppeeerrriiiooodddsss (((......))) tttooo mmmooovvveee uuuppp ooonnneee llleeevvveeelll... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo llliiinnnkkk fffrrrooommm ttthhheee bbbuuudddgggeeettt...hhhtttmmmlll fffiiillleee iiinnn ttthhheee ppprrreeevvviiiooouuusss eeexxxaaammmpppllleee bbbaaaccckkk tttooo ttthhheee mmmaaaiiinnn dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt,,, yyyooouuu wwwooouuulllddd tttyyypppeee <<AA HHRREEFF==""....//mmaaiinn..hhttml">.
(cid:2) IIIfff ttthhheee nnneeewww dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt wwwaaasss tttwwwooo llleeevvveeelllsss aaabbbooovvveee ttthhheee cccuuurrrrrreeennnttt ooonnneee,,, yyyooouuu wwwooouuulllddd ssseeepppaaarrraaattteee eeaacchh lleevveell wwiitthh aa ssllaasshh,, aanndd ttyyppee <<AA HHRREEFF==""....//....//mmaaiinn..hhttmmll"">>.
• TTThhheee sssiiinnngggllleee gggrrreeeaaattteeesssttt aaadddvvvaaannntttaaagggeee tttooo uuusssiiinnnggg rrreeelllaaatttiiivvveee pppaaattthhh nnnaaammmeeesss iiisss pppooorrrtttaaabbbiiillliiitttyyy... IIIfff yyyooouuu ddoo yyoouurr HHTTMMLL ddeevveellooppmmeenntt oonn aa llooccaall mmaacchhiinnee,, aanndd tthheenn uuppllooaadd yyoouurr fffiiinnniiissshhheeeddd wwwooorrrkkk tttooo aaa WWWeeebbb ssseeerrrvvveeerrr,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn sssaaavvveee yyyooouuurrrssseeelllfff ttthhheee tttrrrooouuubbbllleee ooofff hhhaaavvviiinnnggg tttooo rrreeessseeettt aaallllll ooofff yyyooouuurrr hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkksss tttooo rrreeefffllleeecccttt ttthhheee nnneeewww lllooocccaaatttiiiooonnn... LLLiiikkkeeewwwiiissseee,,, rrreeelllaaatttiiivvveee pppaaattthhh nnaammeess wwiillll ssaavvee yyoouu tthhee hheeaaddaacchhee ooff cchhaannggiinngg yyoouurr hhyyppeerrlliinnkkss iiff yyoouu mmoovvee yyoouurr eexxiissttiinngg HHTTMMLL ffiilleess ttoo aann eennttiirreellyy nneeww WWeebb sseerrvveerr 4.0 CONCLUSION: HHHyyypppeeerrrttteeexxxttt sssyyysssttteeemmmsss aaarrreee pppaaarrrtttiiicccuuulllaaarrrlllyyy uuussseeefffuuulll fffooorrr ooorrrgggaaannniiizzziiinnnggg aaannnddd bbbrrrooowwwsssiiinnnggg ttthhhrrrooouuuggghhh lllaaarrrgggeee dddaaatttaaabbbaaassseeesss ttthhhaaattt cccooonnnsssiiisssttt ooofff dddiiissspppaaarrraaattteee tttyyypppeeesss ooofff iiinnnfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn... IIIttt iiisss ttthhheee uuunnndddeeerrrlllyyyiiinnnggg concept ddeeffiinniinngg tthhee ssttrruuccttuurree ooff tthhee World Wide Web.
5.0 SUMMARY IInn tthhiiss uunniitt,, yyoouu hhaavvee lleeaarrnntt tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg:: • DDeeffiinniittiioonn ooff hhyyppeerrtteexxtt lliinnkk??
• TTyyppeess aanndd UUsseess ooff hhyyppeerrtteexxtt • Stated tthhee sstteeppss iinn tthhee ccrreeaattiioonn ooff hhyyppeerrlliinnkk • 82 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT • Define hypertext link • Distinguish between hyperlink and hypertext • List the steps of creating a hyperlink 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES • Barnet, Belinda (2004).
Lost In The Archive: Vision, Artefact And Loss In The Evolution Of Hypertext.
University of New South Wales, PhD thesis.
• Bolter, Jay David (2001).
Writing Space: Computers, Hypertext, and the Remediation of Print.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
ISBN 0-8058-2919-9.
• Buckland, Michael (2006).
Emanuel Goldberg and His Knowledge Machine.
Libraries Unlimited.
ISBN 0-31331-332-6.
• Byers, T. J.
(April 1987).
"Built by association".
PC World 5: 244–251.
• Cicconi, Sergio (1999).
"Hypertextuality".
Mediapolis.
Ed.
Sam Inkinen.
Berlino & New York: De Gruyter.
: 21–43.
http://www.cisenet.com/cisenet/writing/essays/hypertextuality.htm.
• Conklin, J.
(1987).
"Hypertext: An Introduction and Survey".
Computer 20 (9): 17–41.
doi:10.1109/MC.1987.1663693.
• Crane, Gregory (1988).
"Extending the boundaries of instruction and research".
T.H.E.
Journal (Technological Horizons in Education) (Macintosh Special Issue): 51–54.
• Ensslin, Astrid (2007).
Canonizing Hypertext: Explorations and Constructions.
London: Continuum.
ISBN 0-8264-95583.
• Landow, George (2006).
Hypertext 3.0 Critical Theory and New Media in an Era of Globalization: Critical Theory and New Media in a Global Era (Parallax, Re-Visions of Culture and Society).
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
ISBN 0-8018-8257-5.
• van Dam, Andries (July 1988).
"Hypertext: '87 keynote address".
Communications of the ACM 31: 887–895.
doi:10.1145/48511.48519.
http://www.cs.brown.edu/memex/HT_87_Keynote_Address.html.
• Yankelovich, Nicole; Landow, George P., and Cody, David (1987).
"Creating hypermedia materials for English literature students".
SIGCUE Outlook 20 (3): All.
83  MODULE THREE –LISTS, TABLES AND FRAMES IN HTML UNIT ONE – Creating Lists in HTML 1.
0.
Introduction 2.0.
Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How to Create Unordered Lists 3.2 How to Create Ordered Lists 3.3.
How to Create Definition Lists 3.4.How to Create Lists within Lists 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading And Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION Everyone makes lists.
Whether you use them for groceries, to-do items, or holiday gifts and cards, lists are an important part of one’s life.
Lists are also important on the World Wide Web.
The environment of the Web calls for information to be presented in a concise and timely manner.
Lists are ideal vehicles for delivering all kinds of information on line.
In HTML, you have many choices for how to create and present lists.
In this unit, we will look at ways to create unordered lists, ordered (numbered) lists, and a special type of list known as a definition list.
You will also learn how to combine multiple levels of lists.
2.0 OBJECTIVES In this unit, you should be able to: • Define unordered lists, ordered list, definition list and list within list • State the steps in creating unordered lists, ordered list, definition list and list within list • Distinguish between Ordered list and list within list 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 How to Create Unordered Lists The simplest list in HTML is the unordered or bulleted list.
This is ideal for listing items that have no particular hierarchy or order of importance.
Unordered lists are very common on the Web and are used to convey items of note in a quick and concise manner.
Web browsers 84 usually place bullets orrr ooottthhheeerrr mmmaaarrrkkkeeerrrsss iiinnn fffrrrooonnnttt ooofff eeeaaaccchhh iiittteeemmm iiinnn aaannn uuunnnooorrrdddeeerrreeeddd llliiisssttt...
Figure 1: AAnn EExxaammppllee LLiisstt iinn HHTTMMLL.. 1.
LLLooocccaaattteee ttthhheee pppaaarrrttt ooofff yyyooouuurrr HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt wwwhhheeerrreee yyyooouuu wwwaaannnttt tttooo iiinnnssseeerrrttt aaa llliiisssttt... 2.
BBeeggiinn tthhee uunnoorrddeerreedd lliisstt bbyy ttyyppiinngg <UL>,, aanndd tthheenn pprreessss EEnntteerr.. TThhee <UL> tag tells the WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr tttooo tttrrreeeaaattt ttthhhiiisss ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn ooofff ttteeexxxttt aaasss aaannn uuunnnooorrrdddeeerrreeeddd llliiisssttt... UUUnnnooorrrdddeeerrreeeddd llliiissstttsss wwwiiillllll uuusssuuuaaallllllyyy bbbeee iiinnndddeeennnttteeeddd fffrrrooommm ttthhheee mmmaaaiiinnn dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt aaannnddd llliiisssttt iiittteeemmmsss wwwiiillllll bbbeee fffooorrrmmmaaatttttteeeddd wwwiiittthhh bbbuuulllllleeetttsss... TTThhheee sssiiizzzeee aaannnddd tttyyypppeee ooofff bbbuuulllllleeetttsss uuussseeeddd aaarrreee dddeeettteeerrrmmmiiinnneeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeer.
3.
CCCrrreeeaaattteee aaa hhheeeaaadddiiinnnggg fffooorrr yyyooouuurrr llliiisssttt... TTThhhiiisss iiisss aaannn oooppptttiiiooonnnaaalll bbbrrriiieeefff dddeeessscccrrriiippptttiiiooonnn ooofff wwwhhhaaattt yyyooouuurrr llliiisssttt ccoonnttaaiinnss.. TToo ccrreeaattee aa lliisstt hheeaaddeerr,, ttyyppee <LH>,, ffoolllloowweedd bbyy aa bbrriieeff ssuummmmaarryy ooff tthhee lliisstt contents.
Then type <<//LLHH>> ttoo cclloossee tthhee lliisstt hheeaaddiinngg ttaagg.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ttoo ccrreeate a list hheeaaddiinngg ffoorr aa ggrroocceerryy lliisstt,, yyoouu wwoouulldd ttyyppee <<LLHH>>MMyy GGrroocceerryy LLiisstt<<//LLHH>>.
4.
TToo ccrreeaattee tthhee ffiirrsstt iitteemm iinn yyoouurr lliisstt,, ttyyppee <LI>.. TThheenn ttyyppee tthhee tteexxtt ooff tthhee iitteemm iittsseellff.. <LI> iiisss aaannn ooopppeeennn tttaaaggg,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh mmmeeeaaannnsss ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu dddooo nnnooottt nnneeeeeeddd tttooo tttyyypppeee <<<///LLLIII>>> aaattt ttthhheee eeennnddd ooofff each item.
5.
Continue typing <LI> fffooollllllooowwweeeddd bbbyyy ttteeexxxttt fffooorrr eeeaaaccchhh iiittteeemmm iiinnn yyyooouuurrr llliiisssttt... PPPrrreeessssss EEEnnnttteeerrr aaafffttteeerrr each item.
85 6.
FFiinniisshh tthhee uunnoorrddeerreedd lliisstt bbyy ttyyppiinngg </UL>.
3.2 HHooww ttoo CCrreeaattee OOrrddeerreedd LLiissttss SSSooommmeeetttiiimmmeeesss yyyooouuu nnneeeeeeddd tttooo llliiisssttt iiittteeemmmsss iiinnn aaa ssspppeeeccciiifffiiiccc ooorrrdddeeerrr... EEExxxaaammmpppllleeesss ooofff ttthhhiiisss tttyyypppeee ooofff llliiisssttt iiinnncccllluuudddeee step-by-sssttteeeppp iiinnnssstttrrruuuccctttiiiooonnnsss aaannnddd """TTToooppp 111000""" llliiissstttsss... HHHTTTMMMLLL ppprrrooovvviiidddeeesss aaa wwwaaayyy tttooo dddooo ttthhhiiisss ttthhhrrrooouuuggghhh ooorrrdddeeerrreeeddd lliissttss.. WWeebb bbrroowwsseerrss wwiillll ppllaaccee aa nnuummbbeerr iinn ffrroonntt ooff eeaacchh iitteemm,, iinnccrreeaassiinngg tthhee nnuummbbeerr bbyy oonnee for each entry down the list.
Figure 2: AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff OOrrddeerreedd LLiisstt iinn HHTTMMLL 1.
TTTooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaannn ooorrrdddeeerrreeeddd llliiisssttt,,, lllooocccaaattteee ttthhheee ppplllaaaccceee iiinnn yyyooouuurrr dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt wwwhhheeerrreee yyyooouuu'''ddd llliiikkkeee ttto bbeeggiinn tthhee lliisstt aanndd ttyyppee <OL>.
2.
TToo ccrreeaattee aann ooppttiioonnaall hheeaaddiinngg ffoorr tthhee oorrddeerreedd lliisstt,, ttyyppee <LH> ffoolllloowweedd bbyy tthhee hheeaaddiinngg.. TThheenn cclloossee tthhee hheeaaddiinngg ttaagg bbyy ttyyppiinngg </LH>.
3.
TToo eenntteerr tthhee ffiirrsstt iitteemm ooff yyoouurr lliisstt,, ttyyppee <LI> ffoolllloowweedd bbyy tthhee iitteemm.. TThheerree iiss nnoo nneeeedd ttoo iinncclluuddee aa cclloossiinngg <<//LLII>> ttaagg.. 86  4.
Type </OL> ttoo cclloossee tthhee oorrddeerreedd lliisstt.. 3.3 HHooww ttoo CCrreeaattee DDeeffiinniittiioonn Lists DDDeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn llliiissstttsss aaarrreee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt fffrrrooommm ooottthhheeerrr llliiissstttsss iiinnn HHHTTTMMMLLL,,, bbbeeecccaaauuussseee eeeaaaccchhh iiittteeemmm iiinnn aaa dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn llliiisssttt cccooonnntttaaaiiinnnsss tttwwwooo pppaaarrrtttsss::: aaa ttteeerrrmmm aaannnddd aaa dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn... DDDeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn llliiissstttsss aaarrreee tttyyypppiiicccaaallllllyyy uuussseeeddd fffooorrr ggglllooossssssaaarrriiieeesss aanndd ddiiccttiioonnaarriieess.. WWiitthh aa lliittttllee ccrreeaattiivviittyy,, hhoowweevveerr,, tthheeyy ccaann bbee ppuutt ttoo uussee iinn mmaannyy ddiiffffeerreenntt wwwaaayyysss,,, sssuuuccchhh aaasss ppprrroooddduuucccttt cccaaatttaaalllooogggsss aaannnddd eeevvveeennn pppoooeeetttrrryyy... DDDeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn llliiissstttsss aaarrreee eeexxxtttrrreeemmmeeelllyyy fffllleeexxxiiibbbllleee... TTThhheee iiinnnfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn cccooonnntttaaaiiinnneeeddd iiinnn aaa <<<DDDDDD>>> tttaaaggg iiisss nnnooottt llliiimmmiiittteeeddd tttooo sssiiimmmpppllleee ttteeexxxttt... YYYooouuu cccaaannn iiinnncccllluuudddeee iiimmmaaagggeeesss,,, ttaabblleess,, aanndd ffuullll cchhaarraacctteerr ffoorrmmaatttting in your definitions.
Figure 3 : AA nn EExxaammppllee ooff ddeeffiinniittiioonn LLiisstt iinn HHTTMMLL 1.
TToo ccrreeaattee aa ddeeffiinniittiioonn lliisstt iinn yyoouurr HHTTMMLL ddooccuummeenntt,, ttyyppee <DL> aatt tthhee ppooiinntt wwhheerree yyoouu''dd lliikkee tthhee lliisstt ttoo bbeeggiinn.. 2.
AAAsss mmmeeennntttiiiooonnneeeddd eeeaaarrrllliiieeerrr,,, dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn llliiissstttsss aaarrreee sssllliiiggghhhtttlllyyy dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt fffrrrooommm ooorrrdddeeerrreeeddd aaannnddd uuunnnooorrrdddeeerrreeeddd llliiissstttsss... EEEaaaccchhh iiittteeemmm iiinnn aaa dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn llliiisssttt iiisss mmmaaadddeee uuuppp ooofff tttwwwooo ssseeepppaaarrraaattteee pppaaarrrtttsss::: ttthhheee term and the ddeeffiinniittiioonn.
Typically, broowwsseerrss wwiillll ddiissppllaayy tthhee tteerrmm oonn oonnee lliinnee aanndd tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn iinnddeenntteedd oonn tthhee nneexxtt lliinnee.. 87  3.
TToo ccrreeaattee aa ddeeffiinniittiioonn tteerrmm,, ttyyppee <DT> ffoolllloowweedd bbyy tteexxtt ddeessccrriibbiinngg tthhee eelleemmeenntt bbeeiinngg ddeeffiinneedd.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ttoo bbeeggiinn aa ddeeffiinniittiioonn ooff tthhee wwoorrdd apple,, yyoouu wwoouulldd ttyyppee <DT>Apple.
4.
TToo ccrreeaattee tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn,, ttyyppee <DD>,, ffoolllloowweedd bbyy tthhee tteexxtt ooff tthhee ddeeffiinniittiioonn.. FFoorr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa dddeeefffiiinnniiitttiiiooonnn fffooorrr ttthhheee ttteeerrrmmm iiinnn ttthhheee ppprrreeevvviiiooouuusss sssttteeeppp,,, yyyooouuu wwwooouuulllddd tttyyypppeee <<DDDD>>aa ffiirrmm,, eeddiibbllee,, rroouunnddeedd ffrruuiitt.
5.
AAAsss wwwiiittthhh ooorrrdddeeerrreeeddd aaannnddd uuunnnooorrrdddeeerrreeeddd llliiissstttsss,,, ttthhheeerrreee aaarrreee nnnooo ccclllooosssiiinnnggg tttaaagggsss fffooorrr llliiisssttt iiittteeemmmsss... TTThhheeerrreeefffooorrreee,,, iiittt iiisss nnnooottt nnneeeccceeessssssaaarrryyy tttooo tttyyypppeee <<<///DDDTTT>>> ooorrr <<<///DDDDDD>>> aaattt ttthhheee eeennnddd ooofff yyyooouuurrr ttteeerrrmmmsss aaannnddd definitions.
6.
Type </DL> ttoo cclloossee yyoouurr ddeeffiinniittiioonn lliisstt.. 3.4 HHooww ttoo CCrreeaattee LLiissttss wwiitthhiinn LLiissttss IIInnn ttthhheee bbbeeegggiiinnnnnniiinnnggg ooofff ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, wwweee llleeeaaarrrnnneeeddd ttthhhaaattt llliiissstttsss aaarrreee eeexxxtttrrreeemmmeeelllyyy fffllleeexxxiiibbbllleee aaannnddd pppooowwweeerrrfffuuulll tttoooooolllsss iiinnn HHHTTTMMMLLL... SSSooommmeeetttiiimmmeeesss yyyooouuu wwwiiillllll wwwaaannnttt tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee llliiissstttsss wwwiiittthhhiiinnn llliiissstttsss,,, eeessspppeeeccciiiaaallllllyyy wwwhhheeennn yyyooouuu nnneeeeeeddd tttooo ccrreeaattee aa hhiieerraarrcchhyy ooff iitteemmss,, ssuucchh aass iinn oouuttlliinneess oorr ddeettaaiilleedd iinnssttrruuccttiioonnss.. CCrreeaattiinngg lliissttss wwiitthhiinn llliiissstttsss iiisss eeeaaasssyyy iiinnn HHHTTTMMMLLL... IIIttt hhheeelllpppsss tttooo kkkeeeeeeppp yyyooouuurrr llliiissstttsss aaannnddd llliiisssttt iiittteeemmmsss iiinnndddeeennnttteeeddd iiinnn NNNooottteeepppaaaddd... EEEvvveeennn ttthhhooouuuggghhh WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss wwwiiillllll iiigggnnnooorrreee ttthhheee eeexxxtttrrraaa ssspppaaaccceeesss,,, kkkeeeeeepppiiinnnggg eeevvveeerrryyyttthhhiiinnnggg ooorrrgggaaannniiizzzeeeddd ttthhhiiisss wwwaaayyy wwiillll hheellpp yyoouu kkeeeepp aa hhaannddllee oonn yyoouurr HHTTMMLL ccooddee.. YYoouu ccaann nneesstt lliissttss aass mmaannyy lleevveellss ddeeeepp aass yyyooouuu llliiikkkeee... HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, iiittt iiisss gggooooooddd ppprrraaaccctttiiiccceee tttooo llliiimmmiiittt yyyooouuurrr nnneeessstttiiinnnggg tttooo ttthhhrrreeeeee llleeevvveeelllsss ooorrr llleeessssss iiinnn ooorrrdddeeerrr tttooo mmmaaakkkeee sssuuurrreee ttthhhaaattt ttthhheee llliiissstttsss ssstttaaayyy wwwiiittthhhiiinnn ttthhheee vvviiisssiiibbbllleee aaarrreeeaaa ooofff ttthhheee rrreeeaaadddeeerrr'''sss WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr...
Begin the first list by typing <<OOLL>>.. IInn tthhiiss eexxaammppllee,, wwee''rree aassssuummiinngg tthhaatt tthhee ffiirrsstt lliisstt iiss aann oorrddeerreedd lliisstt,, bbuutt iinn rreeaalliittyy,, iitt ccaann bbee aannyy ttyyppee ooff lliisstt yyoouu wwaanntt.. 1.
EEnntteerr yyoouurr lliisstt iitteemmss oonnee bbyy oonnee,, bbeeggiinnnniinngg eeaacchh iitteemm wwiitthh <<LLII>>.. 88  2.
WWhheenn yyoouu rreeaacchh aa sstteepp tthhaatt rreeqquuiirreess aa nneesstteedd lliisstt,, bbeeggiinn aannootthheerr lliisstt.. TThhee WWeebb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr wwwiiillllll aaauuutttooommmaaatttiiicccaaallllllyyy fffooorrrmmmaaattt ttthhhiiisss nnneeewww llliiisssttt tttooo fffaaallllll uuunnndddeeerrrnnneeeaaattthhh ttthhheee cccuuurrrrrreeennnttt iiittteeemmm iiinnn ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt llliiisssttt... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa nnneeesssttteeeddd llliiisssttt uuunnndddeeerrr SSSttteeeppp 222 iiinnn yyyooouuurrr ooorrriiigggiiinnnaaalll llliiisssttt,,, jjjuuusssttt type <UL>.
3.
SSttaarrtt eenntteerriinngg iitteemmss iinn yyoouurr nneeww lliisstt.. WWhheenn yyoouu''rree ffiinniisshheedd,, cclloossee tthhee nneeww lliisstt bbyy typing </UL>... YYYooouuu mmmuuusssttt ccclllooossseee ttthhheee nnneeewww llliiisssttt bbbeeefffooorrreee cccooonnntttiiinnnuuuiiinnnggg tttooo eeennnttteeerrr iiittteeemmmsss iiinnn ttthhheee original list.
Figure 4: AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff LLiissttss within Lists in HTML EEEnnnttteeerrr ttthhheee rrreeemmmaaaiiinnniiinnnggg iiittteeemmmsss iiinnn ttthhheee ooorrriiigggiiinnnaaalll llliiisssttt... TTThhheeennn ppprrreeessssss EEEnnnttteeerrr aaannnddd tttyyypppeee </OL> when you're finished.
89 4.0 CONCLUSION: HTML has generally three types of lists namely Unordered lists, Ordered list and Definition list, these are sometimes called numbered lists.
They are ideal vehicles for delivering all kinds of information online.
5.0 SUMMARY: In this unit, you have learnt the following: • Definitions of Unordered lists, Ordered list and Definition list • Markup tags for Unordered lists, Ordered list and Definition list • How to create Unordered lists, Ordered list and Definition list • How to create Lists within Lists 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT • Define Definition list in HTML • State the steps in creating an Ordered list • State the steps in creating Lists within Lists 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES • Byers, T. J.
(April 1987).
"Built by association".
PC World 5: 244–251.
• Cicconi, Sergio (1999).
"Hypertextuality".
Mediapolis.
Ed.
Sam Inkinen.
Berlino & New York: De Gruyter.
: 21–43.
http://www.cisenet.com/cisenet/writing/essays/hypertextuality.htm.
• Conklin, J.
(1987).
"Hypertext: An Introduction and Survey".
Computer 20 (9): 17–41.
doi:10.1109/MC.1987.1663693.
• Heim, Michael (1987).
Electric Language: A Philosophical Study of Word Processing.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
ISBN 0-300-07746-7.
• Nelson, Theodor H. (September 1970).
"No More Teachers’ Dirty Looks".
Computer Decisions.
http://www.newmediareader.com/excerpts.html.
• Nelson, Theodor H. (1973).
"A Conceptual framework for man-machine everything".
AFIPS Conference Proceedings VOL.
42. pp.
M22–M23.
• Nelson, Theodor H. (1992).
Literary Machines 93.1.
Sausalito CA: Mindful Press.
ISBN 0-89347-062-7.
• van Dam, Andries (July 1988).
"Hypertext: '87 keynote address".
Communications of the ACM 31: 887–895.
doi:10.1145/48511.48519.
http://www.cs.brown.edu/memex/HT_87_Keynote_Address.html.
• Yankelovich, Nicole; Landow, George P., and Cody, David (1987).
"Creating hypermedia materials for English literature students".
SIGCUE Outlook 20 (3) UNIT TWO – GETTING FEEDBACK WITH FORMS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 HTML form 90 3.2 How to Create a Simple Form 3.3 How to Use Input Fields in Forms 4.
0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.
0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION Until now, HTML has been a one-way street.
That is, we've only covered the tools to create and publish information for end users to read.
But what about feedback and interaction?
The World Wide Web isn't just about publishing.
It's designed for communication, which is a street that travels in more than one direction.
The biggest tool for allowing your readers to communicate with you via the Web is the HTML form.
Forms are special collections of markup tags that work with Web servers to produce a means of obtaining whatever information you need from visitors to your Web site.
In this unit, we will discover how to create a basic form in HTML, as well as how to use all the available types of input fields at your disposal.
Finally, we will discuss some basic principles behind CGI, the Common Gateway Interface, which is the system behind the scenes that make forms work.
2.0 OBJECTIVES In this unit, you should be able to: • Explain HTML form • List types of input field in HTML form • Create a simple HTML form 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HTML form A webform on a web page allows a user to enter data that is sent to a server for processing.
Webforms resemble paper or database forms because internet users fill out the forms using checkboxes, radio buttons, or text fields.
For example, webforms can be used to enter shipping or credit card data to order a product or can be used to retrieve data (e.g., searching on a search engine).
In addition to functioning as input templates for new information, webforms can also be used to query and display existing data in a similar manner to mail merge forms, with the same advantages.
The decoupling of message structure and underlying data allow both to vary independently.
The use of webforms for this purpose avoids the problems associated with explicitly creating separate web pages for each record in a database.
91 Webforms are defined in formal programming languages such as Perl, PHP, Java, Javascript or .NET (including ASP.NET).
The implementations of these languages often automatically invoke user interface idioms, such as grids and themes, minimizing programming time, costs and risks.
A form in HTML is by far the most common way to use a form online.
The following elements can make up the user-inputting portion of a form: • input field o text – a simple text box that allows input of a single line of text (an alternative, password, is used for security purposes, in which the characters typed in are invisible or replaced by symbols such as *) o checkbox – a check box o radio – a radio button o file – a file select control for uploading a file o reset – a reset button that, when activated, tells the browser to restore the values to their initial values.
o submit – a button that tells the browser to take action on the form (typically to send it to a server) • textarea – much like the text input field except a textarea allows for multiple rows of data to be shown and entered • select – a drop-down list that displays a list of items a user can select from These basic elements provide most possible graphical user interface (GUI) elements, but not all.
For example, there are no equivalents to a combo box, balloon help, tree view, or grid view.
A grid view, however, can be mimicked by using a standard HTML table with each cell containing a text input element.
A tree view could also be mimicked through nested tables or, more semantically appropriately, nested lists.
Many of these are available through JavaScript libraries 3.2 How to Create a Simple Form Fill-out forms in HTML are easy, quick, and painless.
In fact, you can create a simple fill-out form in just a few simple steps.
Long forms usually work best when placed in their own HTML documents.
If your form requires a lot of input, create a new HTML document just for the form and then create a hyperlink to it from your main page.
This will eliminate clutter and confusion.
You're not limited to just input fields in your form.
You can use all the normal HTML paragraph and character formatting codes.
It is often a good idea to place brief paragraphs in front of groups of input fields to help explain what needs to be entered in the form.
92  Figure 1: An Example of Simple Application form in HTML 1.
Type <FORM> in your HTML document as in figure 2 Figure 2: A Form Tag in an HTML Environment 1.
Each <FORM> tag has two important attributes that need to be set: Method and Action.
The Method attribute indicates how the information inside the form will be transferred to the Web server.
There are two choices for Method: GET and POST.
The critical difference between the two is that the POST method tells the server to process the form line by line, while the GET method tells the server to process the 93 eeennntttiiirrreee fffooorrrmmm aaasss ooonnneee lllooonnnggg cccooonnncccaaattteeennnaaattteeeddd ssstttrrriiinnnggg ooofff vvvaaallluuueeesss... YYYooouuu'''llllll aaalllmmmooosssttt aaalllwwwaaayyysss wwwaaannnttt tttooo uussee tthhee PPOOSSTT mmeetthhoodd wwiitthh yyoouurr ffoorms.
2.
The Action aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee ttteeellllllsss ttthhheee ssseeerrrvvveeerrr wwwhhhaaattt tttooo dddooo wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee dddaaatttaaa cccooonnntttaaaiiinnneeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee fffooorrrmmm... TTThhhiiisss aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee uuusssuuuaaallllllyyy cccooonnntttaaaiiinnnsss ttthhheee UUURRRLLL ooofff aaa ssspppeeeccciiiaaalll ppprrrooogggrrraaammm dddeeesssiiigggnnneeeddd tttooo ppprrroooccceeessssss ttthhheee dddaaatttaaa... YYYooouuu wwwiiillllll llleeeaaarrrnnn aaa llliiittttttllleee mmmooorrreee aaabbbooouuuttt hhhooowww ttthhhiiisss wwwooorrrkkksss aaattt ttthhheee eeennnddd ooofff ttthhheee uuunnniiit.
3.
EEEnnnttteeerrr yyyooouuurrr fffooorrrmmm lllaaabbbeeelllsss uuusssiiinnnggg nnnooorrrmmmaaalll HHHTTTMMMLLL mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp cccooodddeeesss... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa lllaaabbbeeelll tttooo ppprrrooommmpppttt ttthhheee uuussseeerrr tttooo eeennnttteeerrr ttthhheeeiiirrr lllaaasssttt nnnaaammmeee aaattt ttthhheee tttoooppp ooofff ttthhheee fffooorrrmmm,,, tttyyypppeee <P>Last Name:.
4.
TTTooo iiinnnssseeerrrttt aaa dddaaatttaaa fffiiieeelllddd tttooo aaallllllooowww ttthhheee uuussseeerrr tttooo eeennnttteeerrr iiinnnfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn iiinnntttooo ttthhheee fffooorm, type <INPUT>... TTThhhiiisss ttteeellllllsss ttthhheee WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr tttooo ppplllaaaccceee aaa dddaaatttaaa fffiiieeelllddd iiinnn ttthhheee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt aaannnddd tttooo aaacccccceeepppttt uuussseeerrr iiinnnpppuuuttt... TTThhheeerrreee aaarrreee ssseeevvveeerrraaalll tttyyypppeeesss ooofff iiinnnpppuuuttt fffiiieeellldddsss aaavvvaaaiiilllaaabbbllleee... OOOnnneee ooofff ttthhheee simplest types is the ssiinnggllee-line text field.
5.
To specify a single-lliinnee tteexxtt ffiieelldd,, enter TYPE=TEXT iinnssiiddee tthhee <<IINNPPUUTT>> ttaagg.. 6.
EEEaaaccchhh iiinnnpppuuuttt fffiiieeelllddd nnneeeeeedddsss tttooo bbbeee aaassssssiiigggnnneeeddd aaa nnnaaammmeee,,, sssooo ttthhhaaattt iiittt cccaaannn bbbeee dddiiissstttiiinnnggguuuiiissshhheeeddd fffrrrooommm ooottthhheeerrr iiinnnpppuuuttt fffiiieeellldddsss... YYYooouuu cccaaannn nnnaaammmeee ttthhheee iiinnnpppuuuttt fffiiieeelllddd aaannnyyyttthhhiiinnnggg yyyooouuu llliiikkkeee,,, bbbuuuttt ttthhheee nnnaaammmeee sshhoouulldd bbee kkeepptt sshhoorrtt aanndd sshhoouulldd nnoott ccoonnttaaiinn aannyy ssppaacceess oorr ssppeecciiaall cchhaarraacctteerrss.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ttoo nnaammee tthhee aabboovvee ffiieelldd lastname, type NNAAMMEE==""llaassttnnaammee"" inside the <INPUT> tag.
7.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy ttthhheee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm llleeennngggttthhh ooofff aaa ttteeexxxttt fffiiieeelllddd wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee sssiiizzzeee aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee bbbyyy tttyyypppiiinnnggg SIZE=,, ffoolllloowweedd bbyy tthhee lleennggtthh iinn qquuootteess.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ttoo lliimmiitt tthhee lleennggtthh ooff tthhee llaassttnnaammee ffiieelldd ttoo 2200 cchhaarraacctteerrss,, ttyyppee SIZE="20" iinnssiiddee tthhee <<IINNPPUUTT>> ttaagg.. 94  8.
TTThhheee lllaaasssttt tttwwwooo iiinnnpppuuuttt iiittteeemmmsss ttthhhaaattt eeevvveeerrryyy fffooorrrmmm ssshhhooouuulllddd hhhaaavvveee aaarrreee ttthhheee SSSuuubbbmmmiiittt aaannnddd RRReeessseeettt buttons.
The Submit bbuuttttoonn iiss pprreesssseedd bbyy tthhee uusseerr wwhheenn tthhee ffoorrmm iiss ccompleted, and ssseeennndddsss aaallllll ooofff ttthhheee iiinnnfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn tttooo ttthhheee ssseeerrrvvveeerrr... TTTooo iiinnncccllluuudddeee aaa SSSuuubbbmmmiiittt bbbuuuttttttooonnn iiinnn yyyooouuurrr fffooorrrmmm,,, type <<IINNPPUUTT TTYYPPEE==SSUUBBMMIITT>> nneeaarr tthhee bboottttoomm ooff tthhee ffoorrmm.. TThhee SSuubbmmiitt bbuuttttoonn iiss aa required element-wwiitthhoouutt iitt,, tthhee ffoorrmm ccaannnnoott bbee pprroocceesssseedd..
Figure 3 : The SSuubbmmiitt button 9.
The Reset button aaallllllooowwwsss ttthhheee uuussseeerrr tttooo cccllleeeaaarrr aaallllll ooofff ttthhheee fffiiieeellldddsss iiinnn ttthhheee fffooorrrmmm aaattt ooonnnccceee aaannnddd rreesseett tthheemm ttoo tthheeiirr iinniittiiaall vvaalluueess ssoo tthhaatt nneeww iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn ccaann bbee aaddddeedd.. AAlltthhoouugghh tthhee RRReeessseeettt bbbuuuttttttooonnn iiisss nnnooottt rrreeeqqquuuiiirrreeeddd,,, iiittt iiisss ssstttrrrooonnnggglllyyy rrreeecccooommmmmmeeennndddeeeddd... TTTooo iiinnncccllluuudddeee iiittt iiinnn yyyooouuurrr fffooorrrmmm,,, type <<IINNPPUUTT TTYYPPEE==RREESSEETT>>.
Figure 4 : TThhee RReesseett BBuuttttoonn 10.
Type </FORM> oonn aa nneeww lliinnee ttoo cclloossee tthhee ffoorrmm.. 3.3 HHooww ttoo UUssee IInnppuutt FFiieellddss iinn FFoorrmmss IIInnn mmmaaannnyyy cccaaassseeesss,,, sssiiimmmpppllleee ttteeexxxttt fffiiieeellldddsss aaarrreee nnnooottt eeennnooouuuggghhh wwwhhheeennn iiittt cccooommmeeesss tttooo ssspppeeeccciiifffyyyiiinnnggg ttthhheee tttyyypppeee ooofff iiinnnfffooorrrmmmaaatttiiiooonnn yyyooouuu wwwaaannnttt tttooo rrreeeccceeeiiivvveee fffrrrooommm yyyooouuurrr fffooorrrmmmsss... FFFooorrrtttuuunnnaaattteeelllyyy,,, HHHTTTMMMLLL fffooorrrmmmsss aaarrreee vvveeerrryyy fflleexxiibbllee,, aanndd iinncclluuddee mmaannyy ddiiffffeerreenntt ttyyppeess ooff ddaattaa ffiieellddss.. 95  Figure 5: AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff IInnppuutt FFiieelldd TTyyppeess 1.
You can insert a ppaasssswwoorrdd field iinnttoo yyoouurr ffoorrmm.. TThhiiss aaccttss lliikkee aa ssiinnggllee-line text field, bbuutt hhiiddeess tthhee iinnppuutt bbyy ddiissppllaayyiinngg aasstteerriisskkss ((****)) iinn ppllaaccee ooff tthhee aaccttuuaall cchhaarraacctteerrss eenntteerreedd.. TToo iinnsseerrtt aa ppaasssswwoorrdd ffiieelldd iinnttoo yyoouurr ffoorrmm,, ttyyppee <<IINNPPUUTT NNAAMMEE==""ppaasssswwoorrdd"" TYPE=PASSWORD>... YYYooouuu cccaaannn ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy ttthhheee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm llleeennngggttthhh ooofff ttthhheee pppaaasssssswwwooorrrddd uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee SIZE attribute.
2.
Checkbox fields aallllooww tthhee uusseerr ttoo sseelleecctt oorr ddeesseelleecctt aann iitteemm.. YYoouu ccaann aallssoo iinniittiiaalliizzee ttthhheee fffiiieeelllddd tttooo bbbeee ssseeellleeecccttteeeddd bbbyyy ssseeettttttiiinnnggg ttthhheee VVVAAALLLUUUEEE aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee tttooo """ccchhheeeccckkkeeeddd"""... TTThhheee lllaaabbbeeelll fffooorrr ttthhheee ccchhheeeccckkkbbboooxxx iiisss tttyyypppeeeddd iiinnn iiimmmmmmeeedddiiiaaattteeelllyyy aaafffttteeerrr ttthhheee <<<IIINNNPPPUUUTTT>>> tttaaaggg... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, yyyooouuu mmmiiiggghhhttt iinncclluuddee aa cchheecckkbbooxx ffiieelldd oonn yyoouurr ffoorrmm ttoo aallllooww uusseerrss ttoo ssppeecciiffyy wwhheetthheerr oorr nnoott tthheeyy''dd llliiikkkeee tttooo rrreeeccceeeiiivvveee aaa nnneeewwwsssllleeetttttteeerrr... TTTooo iiinnnssseeerrrttt ttthhhiiisss fffiiieeelllddd iiinnntttooo yyyooouuurrr fffooorrrmmm,,, tttyyypppeee <INPUT NNNAAAMMMEEE==="""gggeeetttnnneeewwwsss""" TTTYYYPPPEEE===ccchhheeeccckkkbbboooxxx VVVAAALLLUUUEEE=== """ccchhheeeccckkkeeeddd""">>>CCChhheeeccckkk hhheeerrreee tttooo rrreeeccceeeiiivvveee ooouuurrr newsletter.
3.
Radio button fields aaallllllooowww ttthhheee uuussseeerrr tttooo mmmaaakkkeee aaa ssseeellleeeccctttiiiooonnn fffrrrooommm aaa gggrrrooouuuppp ooofff ccchhhoooiiiccceeesss... OOOnnnlllyyy oonnee iitteemm iinn aa rraaddiioo bbuuttttoonn ggrroouupp ccaann bbee sseelleecctteedd.. 4.
TToo iinnsseerrtt aa rraaddiioo ggrroouupp iinnttoo yyoouurr ffoorrmm,, ttyyppee <<IINNPPUUTT NNAAMMEE== ""ggrroouuppnnaammee"" TTYYPPEE==rraaddiioo VVAALLUUEE==""vvaalluuee11"">>.. EEaacchh iitteemm iinn tthhee ggrroouupp iiss eenntteerreedd wwiitthh separate 96 <<<IIINNNPPPUUUTTT>>> tttaaagggsss aaannnddd uuunnniiiqqquuueee VVVAAALLLUUUEEE aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteeesss,,, bbbuuuttt aaallllll ooofff ttthhheee iiittteeemmmsss iiinnn ttthhheee sssaaammmeee rrraaadddiiiooo bbuuttttoonn ggrroouupp sshhoouulldd hhaavvee tthhee ssaammee NNAAMMEE aattttrriibbuuttee.. 5.
YYoouu ccaann aadddd ffiillee aattttaacchhmmeennttss ttoo tthhee ffoorrmm bbyy uussiinngg tthhee file type.. TThhiiss aalllloowwss uusseerrss ttoo aattttaacchh aa ffiillee ttoo tthhee ffoorrmm bbyy eeiitthheerr ttyyppiinngg tthhee ffiillee nnaammee oorr sseelleeccttiinngg iitt ffrroomm aa bbrroowwssee ddiiaalloogg.. TToo iinnsseerrtt aa ffiillee aattttaacchhmmeenntt ffiieelldd,, ttyyppee <<IINNPPUUTT NNAAMMEE==""aattttaacchhmmeenntt"" TYPE=file>.
6.
You can also insert a ffrreeee-form field ffoorr tteexxtt,, wwhhiicchh aalllloowwss tthhee uusseerr ttoo eenntteerr mmoorree than just a single line ooofff ttteeexxxttt... IIInnnsssttteeeaaaddd ooofff uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee <<<IIINNNPPPUUUTTT>>> tttaaaggg,,, uuussseee ttthhheee <<<TTTEEEXXXTTTAAARRREEEAAA>>> aanndd <<//TTEEXXTTAARREEAA>> ttaagg ppaaiirr.. 7.
TTThhheee <<<TTTEEEXXXTTTAAARRREEEAAA>>> tttaaaggg aaacccccceeeppptttsss ssseeevvveeerrraaalll rrrooowwwsss ooofff iiinnnpppuuuttt,,, uuuppp tttooo ttthhheee mmmaaaxxxiiimmmuuummm yyyooouuu ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee RRROOOWWWSSS aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee... YYYooouuu cccaaannn aaalllsssooo ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy ttthhheee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr ooofff cccooollluuummmnnnsss (((ttthhheee llliiinnneee width) iiinnn ttthhheee TTTEEEXXXTTTAAARRREEEAAA fffiiieeelllddd wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee CCCOOOLLLSSS aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa fffiiieeelllddd ttoo aallllooww aa uusseerr ttoo eenntteerr ccoommmmeennttss,, yyoouu wwoouulldd ttyyppee <<TTEEXXTTAARREEAA NNAAMMEE== ""ccoommmmeennttss"" ROWS=6 COLS=65>... TTThhhiiisss wwwooouuulllddd llleeeaaavvveee rrroooooommm fffooorrr sssiiixxx llliiinnneeesss ooofff uuuppp tttooo 666555 ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrrsss eeeaaaccchhh... 8.
Sometimes you'll wwwaaannnttt tttooo iiinnncccllluuudddeee aaa ssseeellleeeccctttiiiooonnn mmmeeennnuuu ooonnn yyyooouuurrr fffooorrrmmm... TTThhhiiisss aaallllllooowwwsss yyyooouuu tttooo ppprrreeessseeennnttt ttthhheee uuussseeerrr wwwiiittthhh aaa lllaaarrrgggeee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr ooofff ccchhhoooiiiccceeesss wwwiiittthhhooouuuttt uuusssiiinnnggg uuuppp tttoooooo mmmuuuccchhh ssspppaaaccceee ooonnn yyoouurr ffoorrmm.. TThhee mmeennuu ccaann aallllooww eeiitthheerr aa ssiinnggllee oorr mmuullttiippllee-cchhooiiccee sseelleeccttiioonn.. 9.
TTTooo iiinnnssseeerrrttt aaa ssseeellleeeccctttiiiooonnn mmmeeennnuuu,,, uuussseee ttthhheee <<<SSSEEELLLEEECCCTTT>>> aaannnddd <<<///SSSEEELLLEEECCCTTT>>> tttaaaggg pppaaaiiirrr... AAAsss wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee <<<IIINNNPPPUUUTTT>>> tttaaaggg,,, yyyooouuu nnneeeeeeddd tttooo aaassssssiiigggnnn aaa NNNAAAMMMEEE aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee fffooorrr yyyooouuurrr ssseeellleeeccctttiiiooonnn mmmeeennnuuu... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa ssseeellleeeccctttiiiooonnn mmmeeennnuuu ttthhhaaattt aaallllllooowwwsss ttthhheee uuussseeerrr tttooo ccchhhoooooossseee aaa cccooolllooorrr,,, tttyyypppeee <SELECT NAME="colloorr"">>.. IIff yyoouu wwaanntt ttoo aallllooww mmuullttiippllee sseelleeccttiioonnss ttoo bbee mmaaddee,, iinnsseerrtt tthhee aattttrriibbuuttee MMUULLTTIIPPLLEE iinnssiiddee tthhee <<SSEELLEECCTT>> ttaagg.. 97 10.
EEEaaaccchhh iiittteeemmm iiinnn aaa ssseeellleeeccctttiiiooonnn mmmeeennnuuu iiisss tttyyypppeeeddd iiinnn uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee <<<OOOPPPTTTIIIOOONNN>>> tttaaaggg (((mmmuuuccchhh llliiikkkeee ttthhheee uunnoorrddeerreedd lliisstt)).. EEnntteerr eeaacchh mmeennuu cchhooiiccee oonn aa sseeppaarraattee lliinnee.
Figure 6: AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff aann OOppttiioonn TTaagg 11.
WWhheenn yyoouu''vvee ffiinniisshheedd ttyyppiinngg iinn aallll ooff tthhee ooppttiioonn iitteemmss,, ttyyppee <<//SSEELLEECCTT>>.
3.3 HHooww CCGGII MMaakkeess YYoouurr FFoorrmmss WWoorrkk OOOfff cccooouuurrrssseee,,, eeevvveeerrryyyttthhhiiinnnggg yyyooouuu llleeeaaarrrnnneeeddd aaabbbooouuuttt fffooorrrmmmsss wwwooouuulllddd nnnooottt aaammmooouuunnnttt tttooo mmmuuuccchhh iiifff ttthhheeerrreee wwweeerrreee nnnooottt aaa way to process the informatiooonnn ttthhheeeyyy cccooonnntttaaaiiinnneeeddd... TTThhheeerrreee iiisss aaa wwwaaayyy,,, aaannnddd iiittt'''sss cccaaalllllleeeddd CGI, which is short for common gateway iinntteerrffaaccee.
CCCGGGIII iiisss aaa uuunnniiivvveeerrrsssaaalll wwwaaayyy tttooo eeexxxeeecccuuuttteee ppprrrooogggrrraaammmsss ooonnn ttthhheee WWWeeebbb... TTThhheeessseee ppprrrooogggrrraaammmsss aaarrreee kkknnnooowwwnnn aaasss CGI scripts,,, aaannnddd aaarrreee dddeeesssiiigggnnneeeddd tttooo ppprrroooccceeessssss dddaaatttaaa sssuuubbbmmmiiitttttteeeddd vvviiiaaa fffooorrrmmmsss fffrrrooommm WWWeeebbb bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss ooofff aaallllll tttyyypppeeesss... CCCGGGIII ssscccrrriiippptttsss cccaaannn bbbeee wwwrrriiitttttteeennn aaannnddd cccooommmpppiiillleeeddd uuusssiiinnnggg aaa vvvaaarrriiieeetttyyy ooofff dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt ppprrrooogggrrraaammmmmmiiinnnggg lllaaannnggguuuaaagggeeesss,,, sssuuuccchhh aaasss PPPeeerrrlll ooorrr VVViiisssuuuaaalll BBBaaasssiiiccc... TTThhheee lllaaannnggguuuaaagggeee uuussseeeddd dddeeepppeeennndddsss ooonnn ttthhheee tttyyypppeee ooofff ssseeerrrvvveeerrr that the CGI script needs to be run on.
IIInnn ttthhhiiisss uuunnniiittt,,, wwweee wwwiiillllll tttaaakkkeee aaa bbbrrriiieeefff ooovvveeerrrvvviiieeewww ooofff hhhooowww CCCGGGIII wwwooorrrkkksss bbbeeehhhiiinnnddd ttthhheee sssccceeennneeesss tttooo hhhaaannndddllleee dddaaatttaaa from your forms.
1.
TTThhheee uuussseeerrr sssuuuppppppllliiieeesss dddaaatttaaa bbbyyy fffiiilllllliiinnnggg ooouuuttt ttthhheee fffooorrrmmm,,, aaannnddd ttthhheeennn ppprrreeesssssseeesss ttthhheee SSSuuubbbmmmiiittt bbbuuuttttttooonnn... 2.
The browser sends ttthhheee dddaaatttaaa fffiiieeellldddsss fffrrrooommm ttthhheee fffooorrrmmm tttooo aaa CCCGGGIII ssscccrrriiipppttt... TTThhheee aaapppppprrroooppprrriiiaaattteee ssccrriipptt iiss ssppeecciiffiieedd wwiitthh tthhee AACCTTIIOONN aattttrriibbuuttee iinn tthhee <<FFOORRMM>> ttaagg.. <<FFOORRMM MMEETTHHOODD == PPOOSSTT AACCTTIIOONN == ““--/cgi-bin/process-data” 98 3.
The CGI script processes the data supplied by the browser.
4.
At this CGI point, the CGI script may update a database on the server, instructs the server to perform additional functions, or even execute additional CGI scripts.
5.
The script finishes and returns information to the server, usually in the form of a new HTML document that is created by the script.
6.
The server sends the new information along to the Web browser, which displays it.
4.0 CONCLUSION: Forms are a vital tool for the webmaster to receive information from the web surfer, such as: their name, email address, credit card, etc .Every web form must have Submit and Reset buttons in addition to other input fields.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • Definition of Web form • Types of Input fields in Web form • How to create a simple web form 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT • Describe a web form • List the last input field of a web form • Create a simple web form 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES • Crane, Gregory (1988).
"Extending the boundaries of instruction and research".
T.H.E.
Journal (Technological Horizons in Education) (Macintosh Special Issue): 51–54.
• Engelbart, Douglas C. (1962).
Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework, AFOSR-3233 Summary Report, SRI Project No.
3579. http://www.dougengelbart.org/pubs/augment-3906.html.
• Ensslin, Astrid (2007).
Canonizing Hypertext: Explorations and Constructions.
London: Continuum.
ISBN 0-8264-95583.
• Heim, Michael (1987).
Electric Language: A Philosophical Study of Word Processing.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
ISBN 0-300-07746-7 99 UNIT THREE – USING TABLES 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1.
How to create a simple Table 3.
2 How to Format Table 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0.INTRODUCTION: One of the most significant additions to HTML is support for tables.
Tables give HTML authors much greater control over the display and layout of their pages.
Typically, you would use tables to display any type of data that looks best in rows and columns.
A good rule of thumb is if it looks good as a spreadsheet, then it belongs in a table.
Tables are not just for numerical data.
They can be used to creatively solve a number of challenges with presenting information in HTML.
Tables can be used to enhance a number of existing HTML elements, such as lists and forms.
You can even use tables to gain precision control over the layout of your HTML document.
Of course, there's always a catch.
Tables are notoriously difficult and tedious to create in HTML.
And because the specification for HTML is still not final, some of the formatting details for tables are subject to change.
2.0 OBJECTIVES In this unit, you should be able to: • Create a simple Table • Create a Table with Border • Format Tables 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1.
How to Create a Simple Table 100 Creating a simple table in HTML is fairly straightforward.
All you need to do is supply the data.
The client-side Web browser takes care of all the dirty work by determining how to display it.
The key thing to remember about tables in HTML is that they are organized in rows, which go horizontally from left to right.
Once you begin to think of the data you want to place in your table in terms of rows, you will be all set to perform some HTML wizardry.
In this unit, you will get started by stepping through the process of creating your first table in HTML.
Figure 1: An Example of a Table in HTML 1.
Type <TABLE BORDER> in your HTML document to create a table with a thin border around all of the table cells.
Figure 2: A Table Border Tag 2.
You can type in a caption for your table, which most browsers will display at the top.
It's sometimes easier to think of the caption as the title of your table.
Type 101 <CAPTION>,,, fffooollllllooowwweeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee aaaccctttuuuaaalll ttteeexxxttt ooofff yyyooouuurrr tttaaabbbllleee cccaaappptttiiiooonnn... TTThhheeennn tttyyypppeee< /CAPTION> ttoo cclloossee tthhee ttaagg.. 3.
TTaabblleess aarree bbuuiilltt rrooww bbyy rrooww uussiinngg tthhee <<TTRR>> aanndd <<//TTRR>> ttaagg ppaaiirr.. TToo ssttaarrtt yyoouurr ffiirrsstt table row, type <TR>.. 4.
NNNooowww iiittt'''sss tttiiimmmeee tttooo eeennnttteeerrr iiinnn ttthhheee dddaaatttaaa fffooorrr ttthhheee iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll ccceeellllllsss ooofff ttthhheee tttaaabbbllleee... BBBeeecccaaauuussseee ttthhhiiisss iiisss ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt rrrooowww ooofff ttthhheee tttaaabbbllleee,,, iiittt'''sss llliiikkkeeelllyyy ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu'''llllll wwwaaannnttt ttthhhiiisss rrrooowww tttooo cccooonnntttaaaiiinnn hhheeeaaadddiiinnngggsss fffooorrr each of the cccooollluuummmnnnsss ooofff dddaaatttaaa... TTTaaabbbllleee hhheeeaaadddiiinnngggsss aaarrreee cccrrreeeaaattteeeddd uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee <<<TTTHHH>>> aaannnddd <<<///TTTHHH>>> tttaaaggg pppaaaiiirrr... TTTooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa hhheeeaaadddiiinnnggg fffooorrr aaa cccooollluuummmnnn ooofff lllaaasssttt nnnaaammmeeesss,,, yyyooouuu wwwooouuulllddd tttyyypppeee <TH>Last Name</TH>.
5.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn tttyyypppeee aaallllll ooofff yyyooouuurrr cccooollluuummmnnn hhheeeaaadddiiinnngggsss ooonnneee aaafffttteeerrr aaannnooottthhheeerrr,,, eeeaaaccchhh cccooonnntttaaaiiinnneeeddd iiinnn iiitttsss ooowwwnnn <TH> aanndd <<//TTHH>> ttaagg ppaaiirr.. 6.
AAAfffttteeerrr yyyooouuu'''vvveee cccooommmpppllleeettteeeddd yyyooouuurrr fffiiirrrsssttt rrrooowww,,, tttyyypppeee <<<///TTTRRR>>> tttooo fffiiinnniiissshhh iiittt... SSSiiinnnccceee yyyooouuu'''llllll bbbeee aaaddddddiiinnnggg aaannnooottthhheeerrr rrrooowww iiimmmmmmeeedddiiiaaattteeelllyyy aaafffttteeerrr iiittt,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn tttyyypppeee <<<TTTRRR>>> ooonnn ttthhheee nnneeexxxttt llliiinnneee tttooo ssstttaaarrrttt ttthhheee nnneeewww row.
7.
NNooww yyoouu ccaann ssttaarrtt aaddddiinngg tthhee aaccttuuaall ttaabbllee ddaattaa cceellll bbyy cceellll uussiinngg tthhee <<TTDD>> aanndd <<//TTDD>> ttaagg ppaaiirr.. TToo eenntteerr tthhee ddaattaa iinn tthhee ffiirrsstt cceellll ooff tthhee sseeccoonndd rrooww,, ttyyppee <<TTDD>> followed by tthhee aaccttuuaall ddaattaa aanndd tthhee cclloossiinngg </TD> tag.
8.
TTTyyypppeee iiinnn yyyooouuurrr rrreeemmmaaaiiinnniiinnnggg dddaaatttaaa,,, uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee <<<TTTDDD>>> aaannnddd <<<///TTTDDD>>> tttaaagggsss tttooo ssseeepppaaarrraaattteee eeeaaaccchhh ccceeellllll and the <TR> annnddd <<<///TTTRRR>>> tttaaagggsss tttooo ssseeepppaaarrraaattteee eeeaaaccchhh rrrooowww... WWWhhheeennn yyyooouuu'''rrreee fffiiinnniiissshhheeeddd,,, tttyyypppeee </TABLE>ttoo ssiiggnnaall tthhee eenndd ooff tthhee ttaabbllee.. 102  3.2.
How to Format Tables BBBeeecccaaauuussseee HHHTTTMMMLLL iiisss aaa mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp lllaaannnggguuuaaagggeee aaannnddd nnnooottt aaa lllaaayyyooouuuttt lllaaannnggguuuaaagggeee,,, ttthhheee aaaccctttuuuaaalll dddiiisssppplllaaayyy ooofff HHHTTTMMMLLL tables is left up to the Web bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr... TTThhheee hhheeeiiiggghhhttt aaannnddd wwwiiidddttthhh ooofff ttthhheee iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll ccceeellllllsss aaarrreee cccaaalllcccuuulllaaattteeeddd bbbyyy ttthhheee bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr bbbaaassseeeddd ooonnn ttthhheeeiiirrr cccooonnnttteeennntttsss... IIInnn gggeeennneeerrraaalll,,, bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss dddooo aaa gggooooooddd jjjooobbb ooofff dddiiisssppplllaaayyyiiinnnggg tttaaabbbllleee cccooonnnttteeennntttsss aaallllll bbbyyy ttthhheeemmmssseeelllvvveeesss... SSSooommmeeetttiiimmmeeesss,,, hhhooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, yyyooouuu'''llllll wwwaaannnttt tttooo eeexxxeeerrrccciiissseee aaa little more controlll ooovvveeerrr hhhooowww yyyooouuurrr tttaaabbbllleeesss aaarrreee dddiiisssppplllaaayyyeeeddd... HHHTTTMMMLLL 333'''sss tttaaabbbllleee fffooorrrmmmaaattttttiiinnnggg cccooodddeeesss llleeettt you do just that.
1.
TToo ccrreeaattee aa ttaabbllee wwiitthh nnoo bboorrddeerr aatt aallll,, ssiimmppllyy ttyyppee <TABLE>.. YYoouu ccaann aallssoo ggiivvee your table a 3-DDD bbbeeevvveeellleeeddd lllooooookkk bbbyyy aaadddjjjuuussstttiiinnnggg ttthhheee sssiiizzzeee ooofff ttthhheee ooouuutttsssiiidddeee bbbooorrrdddeeerrr... TTThhhiiisss fffeeeaaattture iiisss ooonnnlllyyy sssuuuppppppooorrrttteeeddd bbbyyy NNNeeetttssscccaaapppeee bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrrsss... TTTooo aaadddjjjuuusssttt ttthhheee sssiiizzzeee ooofff ttthhheee ooouuutttsssiiidddeee tttaaabbbllleee bbbooorrrdddeeerrr,,, uuussseee ttthhheee BBBOOORRRDDDEEERRR aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa tttaaabbbllleee wwwiiittthhh aaa bbbooorrrdddeeerrr ttthhhaaattt iiisss 888 pixels wide, type <<TTAABBLLEE BBOORRDDEERR==88>>.
Figure 3: TTaabbllee BBoorrddeerr CCeellll Spacing = 5j 2.
NNNeeetttssscccaaapppeee aaalllsssooo aaaddddddsss eeexxxttteeennnsssiiiooonnnsss tttooo gggiiivvveee yyyooouuu eeevvveeennn gggrrreeeaaattteeerrr cccooonnntttrrrooolll ooovvveeerrr ttthhheee bbbooorrrdddeeerrrsss aaannnddd ssspppaaaccciiinnnggg ooofff ttthhheee ccceeellllllsss iiinnnsssiiidddeee yyyooouuurrr tttaaabbbllleee... TTTooo ccchhhaaannngggeee ttthhheee sssiiizzzeee ooofff ttthhheee iiinnnttteeerrrnnnaaalll bbbooorrrdddeeerrrsss,,, aaadddddd ttthhheee CCCEEELLLLLLSSSPPPAAACCCIIINNNGGG aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee tttooo yyyooouuurrr <<<TTTAAABBBLLLEEE>>> tttaaaggg... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa tttaaabbbllleee with a wwiiddee iinntteerrnnaall bboorrddeerr,, ttyyppee <<TTAABBLLEE BBOORRDDEERR CCEELLLLSSPPAACCIINNGG==55>>.
103  Figure 4: TTaabbllee BBoorrddeerr CCeellll Spacing = 3 3.
Yooouuu cccaaannn aaalllsssooo """pppaaaddd""" ttthhheee iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll ccceeellllllsss ooofff yyyooouuurrr tttaaabbbllleee tttooo aaadddddd ssspppaaaccceee ooonnn aaallllll sides.
This kkkeeeeeepppsss ttthhheee bbbooorrrdddeeerrr fffrrrooommm rrruuunnnnnniiinnnggg uuuppp aaagggaaaiiinnnsssttt ttthhheee aaaccctttuuuaaalll ccceeellllll cccooonnnttteeennntttsss... IIIttt'''sss vvveeerrryyy uuussseeefffuuulll iiifff yyyooouuu ppplllaaannn ooonnn iiinnncccllluuudddiiinnnggg iiimmmaaagggeeesss iiinnnsssiiidddeee yyyooouuurrr tttaaabbbllleee... TTTooo aaadddddd ssspppaaaccceee,,, uuussseee ttthhheee CCCEEELLLLLLPPPAAADDDDDDIIINNNGGG aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee iiinnnsssiiidddeee yyyooouuurrr <<<TTTAAABBBLLLEEE>>> tttaaaggg... TTTooo aaadddddd 333 pppiiixxxeeelllsss ooofff ssspppaaaccceee ooonnn each side of eevveerryy cceellll,, ttyyppee <<TABLE CELLPADDING=3>.
4.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn fffooorrrmmmaaattt ttteeexxxttt iiinnn eeeaaaccchhh iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll ccceeellllll uuusssiiinnnggg aaallllll ooofff ttthhheee ssstttaaannndddaaarrrddd ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr-level mmmaaarrrkkkuuuppp cccooodddeeesss,,, sssuuuccchhh aaasss <<<BBB>>>,,, <<<III>>>,,, aaannnddd <<<SSSTTTRRROOONNNGGG>>>... YYYooouuu cccaaannn aaalllsssooo iiinnncccllluuudddeee llliiinnneee bbbrrreeeaaakkksss iinnssiiddee cceellllss uussiinngg tthhee <<BBRR>> ttaagg.. EEaacchh cceellll ccaann bbee ffoorrmmaatttteedd iinnddeeppeennddeennttllyy ooff tthhee others.
5.
TTTooo cccooonnntttrrrooolll ttthhheee aaallliiigggnnnmmmeeennnttt ooofff ttteeexxxttt iiinnnsssiiidddeee ccceeellllllsss,,, uuussseee ttthhheee AAALLLIIIGGGNNN aaannnddd VVVAAALLLIIIGGGNNN aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteeesss wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee ssstttaaannndddaaarrrddd cccooommmmmmaaannndddsss,,, sssuuuccchhh aaasss LLLEEEFFFTTT,,, RRRIIIGGGHHHTTT,,, aaannnddd CCCEEENNNTTTEEERRR... YYYooouuu cccaaannn ssseeettt ttthhheee cceellll aalliiggnnmmeenntt ffoorr aann eennttiirree rrooww bbyy ppllaacciinngg tthheessee aattttrriibbuutteess iinn tthhee <<TTRR>> ttaagg.. YYoouu ccaann eeevvveeennn aaallliiigggnnn ttthhheee cccooonnnttteeennntttsss ooofff eeeaaaccchhh ccceeellllll iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaallllllyyy iiifff yyyooouuu'''rrreee sssooo iiinnncccllliiinnneeeddd... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo ccceeennnttteeerrr ttteeexxxttt wwwiiittthhhiiinnn aaannn iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll ccceeellllll bbbooottthhh vvveeerrrtttiiicccaaallllllyyy aaannnddd hhhooorrriiizzzooonnntttaaallllllyyy,,, tttyyypppeee <TD AALLIIGGNN==CCEENNTTEERR VVAALLIIGGNN==CCEENNTTEERR>>.. IInnddiivviidduuaall cceellll aalliiggnnmmeennttss wwill override aannyy sseettttiinnggss ffoorr tthhee rrooww.. 6.
SSSooommmeeetttiiimmmeeesss yyyooouuu'''llllll wwwaaannnttt aaannn iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll ccceeellllll tttooo ssspppaaannn aaacccrrrooossssss mmmuuullltttiiipppllleee cccooollluuummmnnnsss ooorrr rrrooowwwsss... TTThhhiiisss iiisss eeeaaasssyyy tttooo dddooo uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee RRROOOWWWSSSPPPAAANNN aaannnddd CCCOOOLLLSSSPPPAAANNN aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteeesss iiinnnsssiiidddeee ttthhheee ccceeellllll'''sss <<TTDD>> ttaagg.. TToo ffoorrccee aa cceellll ttoo ssppaann vveerrttiiccaallllyy ddoowwnn aaccrroossss tthhrreeee rroowwss,, ttyyppee <TD ROWSPAN=3>... TTTooo fffooorrrccceee aaa ccceeellllll tttooo ssspppaaannn hhhooorrriiizzzooonnntttaaallllllyyy fffrrrooommm llleeefffttt tttooo rrriiiggghhhttt aaacccrrrooossssss ssseeevvveeerrraaalll cccooollluuummmnnnsss,,, uuussseee ttthhheee CCCOOOLLLSSSPPPAAANNN aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee iiinnnsssiiidddeee ttthhheee <<<TTTDDD>>> tttaaaggg... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo ssspppaaannn aaa cceellll aaccrroossss ttwwoo ccoolluummnnss,, ttyyppee <TD COLSPAN=2>.
7.
YYoouu ccaann ggaaiinn eevveenn mmoorree pprreecciissee ccoonnttrrooll oovveerr tthhee ssiizzee aanndd aappppeeaarraannccee ooff yyoouurr ttaabbllee uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee WWWIIIDDDTTTHHH aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee... TTThhheee WWWIIIDDDTTTHHH aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee cccaaannn bbbeee aaappppppllliiieeeddd tttooo bbbooottthhh ttthhheee eeennntttiiirrreee tttaaabbbllleee aaasss wwweeellllll aaasss iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll ccceeellllllsss... YYYooouuu cccaaannn ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy aaannn eeexxxaaacccttt wwwiiidddttthhh fffooorrr ttthhheee tttaaabbbllleee ooorrr ssseeettt ttthhheee wwiiddtthh ttoo bbee aa ppeerrcceennttaaggee ooff the visible screen.
104  Figure 5: TThhee WWIIDDTTHH aattttrriibbuuttee 8.
TTTooo ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy aaannn eeexxxaaacccttt wwwiiidddttthhh fffooorrr yyyooouuurrr tttaaabbbllleee iiinnn pppiiixxxeeelllsss,,, ssseeettt ttthhheee WWWIIIDDDTTTHHH aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee tttooo aaannn aaabbbsssooollluuuttteee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrr... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, tttooo fffooorrrccceee aaa tttaaabbbllleee tttooo bbbeee eeexxxaaaccctttlllyyy 444000000 pppiiixxxeeelllsss wwwiiidddeee,,, tttyyypppeee <<TTAABBLLEE WWIIDDTTHH==440000>>.
9.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn aaalllsssooo ssseeettt ttthhheee tttaaabbbllleee wwwiiidddttthhh tttooo bbbeee rrreeelllaaatttiiivvveee tttooo ttthhheee ssspppaaaccceee bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn ttthe left and right mmmaaarrrgggiiinnnsss ooofff ttthhheee cccuuurrrrrreeennnttt wwwiiinnndddooowww... TTThhhiiisss mmmeeeaaannnsss ttthhheee tttaaabbbllleee wwwiiillllll rrreeesssiiizzzeee aaalllooonnnggg wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee WWWeeebbb bbrroowwsseerr.. TToo sseett tthhee ttaabbllee wwiiddtthh eeqquuaall ttoo ttwwoo-tthhiirrddss ooff tthhee ssccrreeeenn,, ttyyppee <TABLE WIDTH=66%>.
10.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn aaapppppplllyyy wwwiiidddttthhh ssseeettttttiiinnngggsss tttooo cccooollluuummmnnnsss bbbyyy ppplllaaaccciiinnnggg ttthhheee WWWIIIDDDTTTHHH aaattttttribute inside a <<<TTTHHH>>> ooorrr <<<TTTDDD>>> tttaaaggg... TTThhheee wwwiiidddttthhh cccaaannn bbbeee iiinnndddiiicccaaattteeeddd uuusssiiinnnggg aaabbbsssooollluuuttteee ooorrr rrreeelllaaatttiiivvveee nnnuuummmbbbeeerrrsss... WWWhhheeennn yyyooouuu uuussseee aaa pppeeerrrccceeennntttaaagggeee vvvaaallluuueee iiinnn iiinnndddiiivvviiiddduuuaaalll ccceeellllllsss,,, ttthhheee wwwiiidddttthhh iiisss rrreeelllaaatttiiivvveee tttooo ttthhheee tttaaabbbllleee,,, nnoott tthhee ffuullll ssccrreeeenn.. FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ttoo sseett aa ccoolluummnn wwiiddtthh ttoo oonnee-hhaallff tthhe total width of the table, type <<TTDD WWIIDDTTHH==5500%%>>.
Figure 6: TTDD WWIIDDTTHH==5500%% 11.
YYYooouuu cccaaannn aaalllsssooo cccooonnntttrrrooolll hhhooowww ttthhheee iiinnnttteeerrrnnnaaalll ccceeellllll bbbooorrrdddeeerrrsss aaarrreee dddiiisssppplllaaayyyeeeddd uuusssiiinnnggg ttthhheee RRRUUULLLEEESSS attribute.
The possibbbllleee vvvaaallluuueeesss fffooorrr RRRUUULLLEEESSS aaarrreee AAALLLLLL,,, ttthhheee dddeeefffaaauuulllttt,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh dddiiisssppplllaaayyysss aaallllll ooofff ttthhheee iiinnnttteeerrrnnnaaalll bbbooorrrdddeeerrrsss;;; NNNOOONNNEEE,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh dddiiisssaaabbbllleeesss iiinnnttteeerrrnnnaaalll bbbooorrrdddeeerrrsss;;; CCCOOOLLLSSS,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh ppplllaaaccceeesss bbbooorrrdddeeerrrsss ooonnnlllyyy bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn cccooollluuummmnnnsss;;; aaannnddd RRROOOWWWSSS,,, wwwhhhiiiccchhh ppplllaaaccceeesss bbbooorrrdddeeerrrsss ooonnnlllyyy bbbeeetttwwweeeeeennn rrrooowwwsss... 105 FFoorr eexxaammppllee,, ttoo ppllaaccee iinntteerrnnaall cceellll bboorrddeerrss bbeettwweeeenn ccoolluummnnss oonnllyy,, yyoouu wwoouulldd ttyyppee <<TTAABBLLEE RROOWWSS==CCOOLLSS>>.. AAss wwiitthh tthhee FFRRAAMMEE aattttrriibbuuttee,, tthhee RRUULLEESS aattttrriibbuuttee iiss nneeww ttoo HHTTMMLL33 aanndd iiss nnoott wwiiddeellyy ssuuppppoorrtteedd.. 4.0 CONCLUSION: TThhee HHTTMMLL ttaabbllee aalllloowwss yyoouu ttoo aarrrraannggee ddaattaa -- text, preformatted text, iimmaaggeess,, lliinnkkss,, ffoorrmmss,, ffoorrmm ffiieellddss,, ootthheerr ttaabblleess,, eettcc.. -- into rows and columns of cells AA ssiimmppllee HHTTMMLL ttaabbllee ccoonnssiissttss ooff tthhee ttaabbllee eelleemmeenntt aanndd oonnee oorr mmoorree TTRR,, TTHH, and TD elements.
The TR eelleemmeenntt ddeeffiinneess aa ttaabbllee rrooww,, tthhee tthh eelleemmeenntt ddeeffiinneess aa ttaabbllee hheeaaddeerr,, aanndd tthhee ttdd eelleemmeenntt defines a table cell.
The <TTAABBLLEE>> ttaagg iiss ssuuppppoorrtteedd iinn aallll mmaajjoorr bbrroowwsseerrss.. 5.0 SUMMARY: In this unit, you have learnt: • HHooww ttoo CCrreeaattee aa SSiimmppllee TTaabbllee • MMaarrkkuupp TTaaggss ffoorr TTaabblleess • HHooww ttoo FFoorrmmaatt TTaabblleess 6.0 TUTORR MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT • CCrreeaattee aa ssiimmppllee TTaabbllee uussiinngg HHTTMMLL ttaaggss • LLiisstt mmaarrkkuupp ttaaggss ffoorr ffoorrmmaattttiinngg ooff ttaabblleess 7.0 FFUURRTTHHEERR RREEAADDIINNGG AANNDD OOTTHHEERR RREESSOOUURRCCEESS • HTML –DDeeffiinniittiivvee GGuuiiddee- Chuck Musciano &Bill Kennedy • HHooww TToo UUssee HHTTMMLL 33 – Scott Arpajian 106  UNIT FOUR USING FRAMES 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 How to Create Frame Documents 3.2 How to Use Targets in Frames 3.3 How to Create Nested Frames 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the most significant developments that HTML has contributed is the introduction of frames.
Using frames gives you the power to divide the reader's browser window into multiple panes.
You can display different HTML documents in each.
More importantly, you can control the display of one frame from another.
This allows you to create banners, menus, and button bars that don't scroll off the page.
For example, you could create a frame for your company logo at the top of the page and a frame for a button bar for navigation at the bottom.
A third frame in the middle of the page would display the actual contents of the HTML documents.
The top and bottom frames would never disappear from view.
There are a lot of possibilities with frames, and in this unit, you'll learn the basics of using frames with Netscape browsers.
Understanding how to use frames requires some new ways of thinking about HTML documents.
If things start to get a little confusing, be patient and take time to reread each section.
With a little practice, you'll be working wonders with HTML and frames.
2.0 OBJECTIVES In this unit, you should be able to: • Describe the steps involved in creating a frame document • Describe how to Use Targets in creating Frames • Explain Nested Frames 107 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 HHooww ttoo CCrreeaattee FFrraammee DDooccuummeennttss TTThhheee fffiiirrrsssttt ttthhhiiinnnggg tttooo uuunnndddeeerrrssstttaaannnddd aaabbbooouuuttt fffrrraaammmeeesss iiisss ttthhhaaattt ttthhheeeyyy uuussseee aaannn eeennntttiiirrreeelllyyy nnneeewww kkkiiinnnddd ooofff HHHTTTMMMLLL ddooccuummeenntt,, ccaalllleedd aa ffrraammee ddooccuummeenntt.. FFrraammee ddooccuummeennttss ccoonnttrrooll tthhee llaayyoouutt aanndd aappppeeaarraannccee ooff tthhee ffrraammeess.. FFrraammee ddooccuummeennttss ddoonn''tt ccoonnttaaiinn aannyy ootthheerr HHTTMMLL ccoonntteenntt.. OOOnnnccceee yyyooouuu'''vvveee bbbuuuiiilllttt yyyooouuurrr fffrrraaammmeee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn fffiiillllll ttthhheee fffrrraaammmeeesss wwwiiittthhh rrreeeggguuulllaaarrr HHHTTTMMMLLL ddooccuummeennttss.. BBuutt bbeeffoorree wwee ggeett ttoooo ffaarr aahheeaadd ooff oouurrsseellvveess,, lleett''ss ccoonncceennttrraattee oonn ccrreeaattiinngg aa vveerryy simple set of frames.
IIInnn ttthhhiiisss ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn,,, wwweee'''llllll cccrrreeeaaattteee aaannn eeemmmppptttyyy fffrrraaammmeee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt... AAAccctttuuuaaallllllyyy,,, ttthhheee fffrrraaammmeee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt iiisss nnnooottt empty.
It will only appear eeemmmppptttyyy wwwhhheeennn vvviiieeewwweeeddd wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr,,, bbbeeecccaaauuussseee wwweee wwwooonnn'''ttt bbbeee pppuuuttttttiiinnnggg aannyy rreegguullaarr HHTTMMLL ddooccuummeennttss iinnssiiddee.. TThhiiss sseeccttiioonn wwiillll ggiivvee yyoouu aa cchhaannccee ttoo uunnddeerrssttaanndd hhooww frame layout works.
1.
OOppeenn aa nneeww ddooccuummeenntt iinn NNootteeppaadd,, aanndd ttyyppee iinn <HTML>.PPrreessss EEnntteerr,, tthheenn ttyyppee iinn <HEAD>.
PPrreessss EEnntteerr aaggaaiinn.. 2.
Type <<TTIITTLLEE>>MMyy FFiirrsstt FFrraammee DDooccuummeenntt<<//TTIITTLLEE>>,,then pprreessss EEnntteerr.. OOnn tthhee nneexxtt line, type </HEAD>aanndd pprreessss EEnntteerr oonnee mmoorree ttiimmee.. 3.
SSSooo fffaaarrr,,, ttthhhiiisss lllooooookkksss jjjuuusssttt llliiikkkeee aaa nnnooorrrmmmaaalll HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt... HHHeeerrreee'''sss wwwhhheeerrreee ttthhhiiinnngggsss gggeeettt ddiiffffeerreenntt,, tthhoouugghh.. IInnsstteeaadd ooff ttyyppiinngg <<BBOODDYY>>,, ttyyppee <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT>>..
The <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT>> ttaagg iinnssttrruuccttss NNeettssccaappee tthhaatt tthhiiss iiss aa ffrraammee llaayyoouutt ddooccuummeenntt.. 4.
PPllaaccee tthhee ccuurrssoorr iinnssiiddee tthhee <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT>> ttaagg aanndd ttyyppeeRROOWWSS==""**,,**,,**""..
This creates ttthhhrrreeeeee hhhooorrriiizzzooonnntttaaalll fffrrraaammmeeesss ooofff eeeqqquuuaaalll rrreeelllaaatttiiivvveee hhheeeiiiggghhhttt... TTThhheee aaasssttteeerrriiissskkk ccchhhaaarrraaacccttteeerrr iiinnnssstttrrruuuccctttsss ttthhheee bbrroowwsseerr ttoo ggiivvee tthhee ffrraammee aallll tthhee rreemmaaiinniinngg ssppaaccee iinn tthhee wwiinnddooww.. BBeeccaauussee tthheerree aarree tthhrreeee aasstteerriisskkss,, NNeettssccaappee wwiillll ggiivvee eeaacchh ffrraammee oonnee-tthhiirrdd ooff tthhee aavvaaiillaabbllee ssppaaccee.. 5.
On the next line, type <<<FFFRRRAAAMMMEEE NNNAAAMMMEEE===fffrrraaammmeee111 SSSRRRCCC==="""bbblllaaannnkkk...hhhtttmmmlll""">>>...This assigns the name frame1 tttooo ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt fffrrraaammmeee iiinnn yyyooouuurrr dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt... TTThhheee SSSRRRCCC aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee tells the bbbrrrooowwwssseeerrr tttooo dddiiisssppplllaaayyy ttthhheee HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt nnnaaammmeeeddd bbblllaaannnkkk...hhhtttmmmlll iiinnn ttthhhiiisss fffrrraaammmeee... NNNooorrrmmmaaallllllyyy,,, 108 yyyooouuu wwwooouuulllddd ppplllaaaccceee aaa rrreeeaaalll HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt iiinnn ttthhheee SSSRRRCCC aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee... FFFooorrr ttthhhiiisss eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, wwweee'''llllll jjuusstt uussee bbllaannkk..hhttmmll,, aa mmaaddee-uupp ffiillee nnaammee tthhaatt ddooeessnn''tt rreeaallllyy eexxiisstt.. PPrreessss EEnntteerr wwhheen you're finished.
6.
Type <<FFRRAAMMEE NNAAMMEE==ffrraammee22 SSRRCC==""bbllaannkk..hhttmmll"">>aanndd tthheenn pprreessss EEnntteerr.. OOnn tthhee next line, type <<FFRRAAMMEE NNAAMMEE==ffrraammee33 SSRRCC==""bbllaannkk..hhttmmll"">> aanndd pprreessss EEnntteerr aaggaaiinn.. NNooww wwee''vvee ccrreeaatteedd tthhrreeee eemmppttyy nnaammeedd ffrraammeess.. 7.
Type <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT>> and press Enter.
Then type < /HTML>.
8.
SSaavvee yyoouurr ddooccuummeenntt iinn NNootteeppaadd aass mmyyffrraammee..hhttmmll.. 9.
YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee nnnooowww cccrrreeeaaattteeeddd aaa vvveeerrryyy sssiiimmmpppllleee fffrrraaammmeee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt ttthhhaaattt cccooonnntttaaaiiinnnsss ttthhhrrreeeeee eeemmmppptttyyy fffrrraaammmeeesss... IIIfff ttthhhiiisss dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt wwweeerrreee vvviiieeewwweeeddd iiinnn NNNeeetttssscccaaapppeee,,, iiittt wwwooouuulllddd lllooooookkk eeexxxaaaccctttlllyyy llliiikkkeee ttthhheee ddooccuummeenntt sshhoowwnn iinn tthhee mmoonniittoorr iinn tthhee cceenntteerr ooff tthhee ppaaggee.. IItt mmaayy nnoott llooookk lliikkee mmuucchh rrriiiggghhhttt nnnooowww,,, bbbuuuttt iiinnn ttthhheee nnneeexxxttt ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn,,, yyyooouuu'''llllll llleeeaaarrrnnn hhhooowww tttooo mmmaaakkkeee yyyooouuurrr fffrrraaammmeeesss cccooommmeee aaallliiivvveee... 3.2 HHooww ttoo UUssee TTaarrggeettss iinn FFrraammeess NNNooowww ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu'''vvveee cccrrreeeaaattteeeddd aaa fffrrraaammmeee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt,,, yyyooouuu'''rrreee rrreeeaaadddyyy tttooo ssstttaaarrrttt fffiiilllllliiinnnggg ttthhhooossseee fffrrraaammmeeesss wwwiiittthhh HTML content.
In this unit yyyooouuu'''llllll llleeeaaarrrnnn hhhooowww tttooo ppplllaaaccceee HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss iiinnn fffrrraaammmeeesss... MMMooorrreee iiimmmpppooorrrtttaaannntttlllyyy,,, yyyooouuu'''llllll llleeeaaarrrnnn hhhooowww tttooo uuupppdddaaattteee fffrrraaammmeeesss wwwiiittthhh nnneeewww dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss,,, iiinnncccllluuudddiiinnnggg hhhooowww ttto update tthhee ccoonntteennttss ooff oonnee ffrraammee ffrroomm aannootthheerr.. 109  Figure 1: FFrraammeess iinn HHTTMMLL DDooccuummeennttss 1.
FFrraammeess aarree uuppddaatteedd uussiinngg ttaarrggeettss..
Targets aarree ssiimmppllyy hhyyppeerrlliinnkk ttaagg eexxtteennssiioonnss tthhaatt cccooonnntttaaaiiinnn aaa fffrrraaammmeee nnnaaammmeee... TTTaaarrrgggeeetttsss ssspppeeeccciiifffyyy wwwhhhiiiccchhh fffrrraaammmeee ttthhheee hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkk ssshhhooouuulllddd uuupppdddaaattteee... 2.
BBBeeefffooorrreee wwweee gggooo aaannnyyy fffuuurrrttthhheeerrr,,, wwweee'''llllll nnneeeeeeddd tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa fffeeewww HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss ttthhhaaattt cccooonnntttaaaiiinnn hhyyppeerrlliinnkkss uussiinngg ttaarrggeettss.. LLaauunncchh NNootteeppaadd aanndd ooppeenn aa nneeww ddooccuummeenntt.. TThheenn ttyyppee <HTML> aanndd pprreessss EEnntteerr.. 3.
Type <HEAD>> aanndd pprreessss EEnntteerr.. TThheenn ttyyppee <<TTIITTLLEE>>DDooccuummeenntt AA<<//TTIITTLLEE> and pprreessss EEnntteerr.. FFiinnaallllyy,, ttyyppee </HEAD>and press Enter again.
4.
Type <BODY> aanndd pprreessss EEnntteerr.. TThheenn ttyyppee <<HH11>>DDooccuummeenntt AA<<//HH11>> and press Enter.
5.
Type <P> ttoo ssttaarrtt yyoouurr ffiirrsstt ppaarraaggrraapphh.. TThheenn ttyyppee Top Frame: aanndd pprreessss EEnntteerr.. 6.
HHHeeerrreee'''sss wwwhhheeerrreee wwweee'''llllll ssstttaaarrrttt ppplllaaaccciiinnnggg hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkksss wwwiiittthhh tttaaarrrgggeeettt aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteeesss... TTThhheeessseee ttthhhrrreeeeee hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkksss wwwiiillllll aaallllllooowww ttthhheee uuussseeerrr tttooo dddiiisssppplllaaayyy dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss iiinnn ttthhheee tttoooppp fffrrraaammmeee... TTTyyypppeee <A HREF="a.hhttmmll"" TTAARRGGEETT==""ffrraammee11"">>AA<<//AA>>.. TThhiiss lliinnkk wwiillll llooaadd aa..hhttmmll ((tthhee 110 ddooccuummeenntt yyoouu''rree ccrreeaattiinngg rriigghhtt nnooww)) iinnttoo tthhee ffrraammee nnaammeedd frame1.. IInn tthhee ffrraammee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt yyyooouuu cccrrreeeaaattteeeddd iiinnn ttthhheee lllaaasssttt ssseeeccctttiiiooonnn,,, fffrrraaammmeee111 wwwaaasss ttthhheee tttoooppp fffrrraaammmeee... 7.
PPrreessss EEnntteerr,, tthheenn ttyyppee <A HREF="b.html" TTAARRGGEETT==""ffrraammee11"">>BB<<//AA>>..This link wwwiiillllll llloooaaaddd aaa dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt nnnaaammmeeeddd bbb...hhhtttmmmlll iiinnntttooo ttthhheee tttoooppp fffrrraaammmeee... PPPrrreeessssss EEEnnnttteeerrr aaagggaaaiiinnn aaannnddd ttthhheeennn type <<AA HHRREEFF==""cc..hhttmmll"" TTAARRGGEETT==""ffrraammee11"">>CC<<//AA>>.. AAss yyoouu''vvee pprroobbaabbllyy ggguuueeesssssseeeddd bbbyyy nnnooowww,,, ttthhhiiisss hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkk wwwiiillllll llloooaaaddd ccc...hhhtttmmmlll iiinnntttooo ttthhheee tttoooppp fffrrraaammmeee... PPPrrreeessssss EEEnnnttteeerrr again.
8.
Type <BR> ttoo ffoorrccee aa lliinnee bbrreeaakk aanndd pprreessss eenntteerr.. TThheenn ttyyppee MMiiddddllee FFrraammee:: and press Enter again.
9.
TTTyyypppeee iiinnn aaallllll ttthhhrrreeeeee hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkksss aaagggaaaiiinnn,,, ooonnnlllyyy ttthhhiiisss tttiiimmmeee,,, ccchhhaaannngggeee ttthhheee tttaaarrrgggeeettt tttooo frame2.
This wwiillll iinnssttrruucctt tthhee bbrroowwsseerr ttoo llooaadd tthhee ddooccuummeennttss iinnttoo tthhee mmiiddddllee ffrraammee.. 10.
WWhheenn yyoouu''rree ffiinniisshheedd,, ttyyppee <BR> ttoo ffoorrccee aannootthheerr lliinnee bbrreeaakk aanndd pprreessss EEnntteerr.. TThheenn type Bottom Frame: aaannnddd ppprrreeessssss EEEnnnttteeerrr aaagggaaaiiinnn... TTTyyypppeee iiinnn ttthhheee hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkksss aaagggaaaiiinnn,,, wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee target set to frame3.. WWhheenn yyoouu''rree ffiinniisshheedd,, pprreessss EEnntteerr aanndd ttyyppee<<//PP>> to close the ppaarraaggrraapphh.. TThheenn pprreessss EEnntteerr aaggaaiinn.. 11.
Type </BODY> aanndd tthheenn pprreessss EEnntteerr.. TThheenn ttyyppee</HTML>.
111  12.
SSSaaavvveee ttthhhiiisss dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt aaasss aaa...hhhtttmmmlll... MMMaaakkkeee sssuuurrreee ttthhhaaattt yyyooouuu sssaaavvveee iiittt iiinnn ttthhheee sssaaammmeee fffooollldddeeerrr aaasss mmyyffrraammee..hhttmmll,, wwhhiicchh yyoouu ccrreeaatteedd iinn tthhee llaasstt sseeccttiioonn.. 13.
Repeat this processss tttwwwooo mmmooorrreee tttiiimmmeeesss,,, aaannnddd sssaaavvveee ttthhheee fffiiillleeesss aaasss bbb...hhhtttmmmlll aaannnddd ccc...hhhtttmmmlll... TTTooo sssaaavvveee aaa lllooottt ooofff tttyyypppiiinnnggg,,, yyyooouuu cccaaannn sssiiimmmppplllyyy ccchhhaaannngggeee ttthhheee <<<TTTIIITTTLLLEEE>>> aaannnddd <<<HHH111>>> tttaaagggsss aaattt ttthhheee tttoooppp ooofff ttthhheee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt aaannnddd sssaaavvveee ttthhheee eeexxxiiissstttiiinnnggg fffiiillleee uuunnndddeeerrr aaa nnneeewww nnnaaammmeee... JJJuuusssttt ccchhhoooooossseee SSSaaavvveee AAAsss fffrrrooommm ttthhheee FFiillee mmeennuu aanndd ttyyppee iinn tthe new file name.
Figure 2 : SSaavvee AAss iinn Frame Tag OOOpppeeennn mmmyyyfffrrraaammmeee...hhhtttmmmlll iiinnn NNNooottteeepppaaaddd... PPPlllaaaccceee ttthhheee cccuuurrrsssooorrr iiinnnsssiiidddeee ttthhheee SSSRRRCCC aaattttttrrriiibbbuuuttteee ooofff ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt <<FFRRAAMMEE>> ttaagg,, aanndd cchhaannggee tthhee UURRLL ffrroomm bbllaannkk..hhttmmll ttoo aa..hhttmmll.. CChhaannggee tthhee UURRLLss ffoorr tthhee nneexxtt ttwwoo <<FFRRAAMMEE>> ttaaggss ttoo bb..hhttmmll aanndd cc..hhttmmll,, rreessppeeccttiivveellyy.. 112 Figure 3: SSaavvee iinn FFrraammee TTaagg 14.
CChhoooossee SSaavvee ffrroomm tthhee FFiillee mmeennuu ttoo ssaavvee tthhee cchhaannggeess ttoo mmyyffrraammee..hhttmmll.. 15.
LLLaaauuunnnccchhh NNNeeetttssscccaaapppeee aaannnddd ooopppeeennn mmmyyyfffrrraaammmeee...hhhtttmmmlll... TTThhhrrreeeeee fffrrraaammmeeesss wwwiiillllll aaappppppeeeaaarrr... EEEaaaccchhh ooofff yyyooouuurrr ttthhhrrreeeeee HHHTTTMMMLLL dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss,,, AAA,,, BBB,,, aaannnddd CCC,,, wwwiiillllll aaappppppeeeaaarrr iiinnn aaa dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt fffrrraaammmeee... 16.
NNNooowww tttrrryyy cccllliiiccckkkiiinnnggg ooonnn ttthhheee dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnttt hhhyyypppeeerrrllliiinnnkkksss aaannnddd ssseeeeee wwwhhhaaattt hhhaaappppppeeennnsss... YYYooouuu cccaaannn llloooaaaddd AAA, BBB,,, aaannnddd CCC iiinnntttooo aaannnyyy ooofff ttthhheee ttthhhrrreeeeee fffrrraaammmeeesss... YYYooouuu cccaaannn eeevvveeennn fffiiillllll aaallllll ttthhhrrreeeeee fffrrraaammmeeesss wwwiiittthhh ttthhheee sssaaammmeee document.
3.3 HHooww ttoo CCrreeaattee NNeesstteedd FFrraammeess YYYooouuu hhhaaavvveee aaalllrrreeeaaadddyyy llleeeaaarrrnnneeeddd hhhooowww tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee fffrrraaammmeee dddooocccuuummmeeennntttsss,,, fffiiillllll ttthhheeemmm wwwiiittthhh HHHTTTMMMLLL cccooonnnttteeennnttt,,, aaannnddd target them with hyperlinks.
HHHooowwweeevvveeerrr,,, ttthhheeerrreee iiisss ssstttiiillllll ooonnneee cccoooooolll fffrrraaammmeee tttrrriiiccckkk ttthhhaaattt wwweee hhhaaavvveeennn'''ttt covered yet-nnneeessstttiiinnnggg fffrrraaammmeeesss... IIIttt iiisss pppooossssssiiibbbllleee tttooo nnneeesssttt <<<FFFRRRAAAMMMEEESSSEEETTT>>> tttaaaggg pppaaaiiirrrsss tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee fffrrraaammmeeesss wwiitthhiinn ffrraammeess.. IInn tthhiiss sseeccttiioonn,, yyoouu''llll lleeaarrnn hhooww iitt''ss ddoonnee.. 1.
OOppeenn aa nneeww ddooccuummeenntt iinn NNootteeppaadd,, aanndd ttyyppee iinn the lines as shown.
Figure 4: AAnn EExxaammppllee ooff Nested Frames 2.
Type <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT RROOWWSS==""**,,**"">> ttoo ddiivviiddee tthhee ssccrreeeenn iinnttoo ttwwoo ffrraammeess.. TThheenn press Enter.
113  Figure 5: Nested Frames iinn HHTTMMLL 3.
Type <<FFRRAAMMEE SSRRCC==""aa..hhttmmll"" NNAAMMEE==ffrraammee11>>..TThhiiss wwiillll ppllaaccee tthhee ddooccuummeenntt aa..hhttmmll iinn tthhee ttoopp ffrraammee.. NNooww pprreessss EEnntteerr aaggaaiinn.. 4.
IIInnnsssttteeeaaaddd ooofff iiinnnssseeerrrtttiiinnnggg aaannnooottthhheeerrr <<<FFFRRRAAAMMMEEE>>> tttaaaggg,,, wwweee'''llllll nnneeesssttt aaannnooottthhheeerrr <<<FFFRRRAAAMMMEEESSSEEETTT>>> tag pppaaaiiirrr,,, uuusssiiinnnggg CCCOOOLLLSSS iiinnnsssttteeeaaaddd ooofff RRROOOWWWSSS... TTThhhiiisss wwwiiillllll hhhaaavvveee ttthhheee eeeffffffeeecccttt ooofff ssspppllliiittttttiiinnnggg ttthhheee bbbooottttttooommm ffrraammee iinnttoo ttwwoo sseeppaarraattee ffrraammeess.. TTyyppee <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT CCOOLLSS==""**,,**"">>and press Enter.
5.
NNNooowww,,, wwweee'''llllll cccrrreeeaaattteee ttthhheee fffrrraaammmeee dddeeeccclllaaarrraaatttiiiooonnnsss fffooorrr ttthhheee tttwwwooo nnneeesssttteeeddd fffrrraaammmeeesss... TTTyyypppeee <FRAME SRC="b.htmll"" NNAAMMEE==ffrraammee22>>..Then press Enter and type <<FFRRAAMMEE SSRRCC==""cc..hhttmmll"" NNAAMMEE==ffrraammee33>>.. Then press Enter again.
6.
CClloossee tthhee nneesstteedd <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT>> ttaagg bbyy ttyyppiinngg </FRAMESET>,aanndd tthheenn pprreessss EEnntteerr.. TThheenn cclloossee tthhee ffiirrsstt <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT>> ttaagg bbyy ttyyppiinngg <FRAMESET> again and pressing Entteerr.. WWhheenn yyoouu''rree ffiinniisshheedd,, ttyyppee </HTML>.
114  7.
CClloossee tthhee nneesstteedd <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT>> ttaagg bbyy ttyyppiinngg </FRAMESET>,aanndd tthheenn pprreessss EEnntteerr.. TThheenn cclloossee tthhee ffiirrsstt <<FFRRAAMMEESSEETT>> ttaagg bbyy ttyyppiinngg <FRAMESET> again and pressing EEnntteerr.. WWhheenn yyoouu''rree ffiinniisshheedd,, ttyyppee </HTML>.
8.
If you open newfrrraaammmeee...hhhtttmmmlll iiinnn NNNeeetttssscccaaapppeee,,, yyyooouuu'''llllll nnnoootttiiiccceee ttthhhaaattt iiittt lllooooookkksss aaa lllooottt llliiikkkeee ttthhheee fffiiirrrsssttt fffrrraaammmeee dddooocccuuummmeeennnttt yyyooouuu cccrrreeeaaattteeeddd,,, bbbuuuttt wwwiiittthhh ooonnneee mmmaaajjjooorrr dddiiiffffffeeerrreeennnccceee::: TTThhheee bbbooottttttooommm tttwwwooo fffrrraaammmeeesss aarree nnooww aalliiggnneedd ssiiddee bbyy ssiiddee iinnsstteeaadd ooff oonnee oonn ttoopp ooff tthhee ootthheerr.. 4.0 CONCLUSION: Frames allow yyyooouuu tttooo cccrrreeeaaattteee bbbaaannnnnneeerrrsss,,, mmmeeennnuuusss,,, aaannnddd bbbuuuttttttooonnn bbbaaarrrsss ttthhhaaattt dddooonnn'''ttt ssscccrrrooollllll oooffffff ttthhheee pppaaagggeee... FFFooorrr eeexxxaaammmpppllleee,,, yyyooouuu cccooouuulllddd cccrrreeeaaattteee aaa fffrrraaammmeee fffooorrr yyyooouuurrr cccooommmpppaaannnyyy lllooogggooo aaattt ttthhheee tttoooppp ooofff ttthhheee pppaaagggeee aaannnddd aaa fffrrraaammmeee fffooorrr aaa bbuuttttoonn bbaarr ffoorr nnaavviiggaattiioonn aatt tthhee bboottttoomm.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you hhaavvee lleeaarrnntt tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg:: • HHooww ttoo ccrreeaattee ffrraammee ddooccuummeenntt • HHooww ttoo ccrreeaattee nneesstteedd ffrraammee 6.0 TTUUTTOORR MMAARRKKEEDD AASSSSIIGGNNMMEENNTT • DDeessccrriibbee ffrraammee iinn HHTTMMLL • LLiisstt tthhee sstteeppss iinnvvoollvveedd in creating nested frames 7.0 FFUURRTTHHEERR RREEAADDIINNGG AANNDD OOTTHHEERR RREESSOOUURRCCEESS • HTML –Definitiivvee GGuuiiddee- Chuck Musciano &Bill Kennedy • HHooww TToo UUssee HHTTMMLL 33 – Scott Arpajian 115  MODULE FOUR - JAVASCRIPT UNIT ONE - Introduction to Java Script UNIT TWO - Java Script variables and data types UNIT THREE - Statement and operators UNIT FOUR - Control structures object based programming message box in JavaScript UNIT ONE INTRODUCTION TO JAVA SCRIPT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is JavaScript?
3.2 The basic concepts of JavaScript and client-side scripting 3.3 History of JavaScript 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we will discover what makes JavaScript an Object-based scripting language and take a look at the language’s origin ,history and will introduce you to the basic concepts of JavaScript and client-side scripting in general.
JavaScript is the scripting language used on millions of Web pages.
Its main purpose is to add interactivity to the browser and Web pages.
It also complements very popular server-side programming languages and platforms, like ASP.NET (actually, JavaScript is used in many ASP.NET controls).
As it is very easy to learn, you'll soon start writing your first scripts.
It doesn’t matter if you're already an expert or just a beginner in the world of web development – JavaScript will add that "extra something" to your Web pages.
You will be quizzed at the end of the unit, so pay attention!
2.0 OBJECTIVES: At the end of this unit, you should be able to • Explain JavaScript language • Describe the history of JavaScript • Distinguish the difference between Java and JavaScript • List the features of JavaScript 116  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is JavaScript?
JavaScript is the client side scripting language, developed by netscape, used along with HTML to build a efficient web site / webpage.
JavaScript is used in most websites to enrich the interface and enhance the user experience.
In the beginning stages, web pages were developed only using html, which are nothing but static pages.
User interaction and dynamic changes are not possible with html.
With the advent of scripting languages the problem was solved.
There are two types of script languages - server side and client side.
When a page is requested, the request is sent to the server and data is fetched and viewed in the browser.
• If the dynamic changes in the webpage are caused in the client side (the browsers like mozilla / IE).
It is called client side scripting language (E.g.
- JavaScript).
• If the dynamic changes in the web page are caused in the server side (the server checks the request and based on the data it makes changes in the page before sending the data to the browser).
It is called server side scripting language (E.g.
- PHP).
Java script codes are embedded in HTML files.
Whenever a browser requests for a webpage, the HTML file along with script is transferred to the browser.
JavaScript is used to create dynamic changes, validate forms, detect visitor details, create/use cookies, etc.. JavaScript works in all major browsers, such as Internet Explorer, Mozilla, Firefox, Netscape, Opera, Safari and more.
3.2.
The basic concepts of JavaScript and client-side scripting JavaScript is a client side, interpreted, object oriented, high level scripting language, while Java is a client side, compiled, object oriented, high level language.
Now after that mouthful, here's what it means.
Client side Programs are passed to the computer that the browser is on, and that computer runs them.
The alternative is server side, where the program is run on the server and only the results are passed to the computer that the browser is on.
Examples of this would be PHP, Perl, ASP, JSP etc.
Currently the most popular client-side scripting language is JavaScript Interpreted 117 The program is passed as source code with all the programming language visible.
It is then converted into machine code as it is being used.
Compiled languages are converted into machine code first then passed around, so you never get to see the original programming language.
Java is actually dual half compiled, meaning it is half compiled (to 'byte code') before it is passed, then executed in a virtual machine which converts it to fully compiled code just before use, in order to execute it on the computer's processor.
Interpreted languages are generally less fussy about syntax and if you have made mistakes in a part they never use, the mistake usually will not cause you any problems.
Scripting This is a little harder to define.
Scripting languages are often used for performing repetitive tasks.
Although they may be complete programming languages, they do not usually go into the depths of complex programs, such as thread and memory management.
They may use another program to do the work and simply tell it what to do.
They often do not create their own user interfaces, and instead will rely on the other programs to create an interface for them.
This is quite accurate for JavaScript.
We do not have to tell the browser exactly what to put on the screen for every pixel (though there is a relatively new API known as canvas that makes this possible if needed), we just tell it that we want it to change the document, and it does it.
The browser will also take care of the memory management and thread management, leaving JavaScript free to get on with the things it wants to do.
High level Written in words that are as close to English as possible.
The contrast would be with assembly code, where each command can be directly translated into machine code.
What is Object Oriented Programming?
An Object Oriented Programming is a set of tools and methods that enable software Engineers to build reliable, user friendly, maintainable, well documented, reusable software systems that fulfils the requirements of its users.
It is claimed that object-orientation provides software developers with new mind tools to use in solving a wide variety of problems.
Object-orientation provides a new view of computation.
A software system is seen as a community of objects that cooperate with each other by passing messages in solving a problem.
Not all programming languages can be ‘‘object oriented’’.
Yet claims have been made to the effect that APL, Ada, Clu, C++, LOOPS, and Smalltalk are object oriented programming languages An object-oriented programming language provides support for the following object oriented concepts: • Objects and Classes • Inheritance 118 • Polymorphism and Dynamic binding What Is an Object?
An object is a software bundle of related state and behavior.
Software objects are often used to model the real-world objects that you find in everyday life.
This lesson explains how state and behavior are represented within an object, introduces the concept of data encapsulation, and explains the benefits of designing your software in this manner.
What Is a Class?
A class is a blueprint or prototype from which objects are created.
This section defines a class that models the state and behavior of a real-world object.
It intentionally focuses on the basics, showing how a simple class can cleanly model state and behavior.
What Is an Inheritance?
Inheritance provides a powerful and natural mechanism for organizing and structuring your software.
This section explains how classes inherit state and behavior from their super classes, and explains how to derive one class from another using the simple syntax provided by the Java programming language.
What is polymorphism?
In object-oriented programming, polymorphism (from the Greek meaning "having multiple forms") is the characteristic of being able to assign a different meaning or usage to something in different contexts - specifically, to allow an entity such as a variable, a function, or an object to have more than one form.
There are several different kinds of polymorphism.
What is Dynamic Binding The property of object-oriented programming languages where the code executed to perform a given operation is determined at run time from the class of the operand(s).
There may be several different classes of objects which can receive a given message.
An expression may denote an object which may have more than one possible class and that class can only be determined at run time.
New classes may be created that can receive a particular message, without changing (or recompiling) the code which sends the message.
A class may be created that can receive any set of existing messages.
Java and JavaScript Never confuse JavaScript with Java.
Java is an application development language developed by SUN Microsystems and has no links with J avaScript.
JavaScript was created long before 119 java was developed.
JavaScript is many times denoted as Java Script.
Table 1.
JavaScript compared to Java JavaScript Java Interpreted (not compiled) by client Compiled byte codes down loaded from server, executed on client Object-based.
No distinction between types Object-oriented.
Objects are divided into of objects.
Inheritance is through the classes and instances with all inheritance prototype mechanism and through the class hierarchy.
Classes and properties and methods can be added to any instances cannot have properties or methods object dynamically.
added dynamically.
Code integrated with, and embedded in, Applets distinct from HTML HTML (accessed from HTML pages).
Variable data types not declared (loose Variable data types must be declared (strong typing).
typing).
Dynamic binding.
Object references checked Static binding.
Object references must at runtime exist at compile-time Cannot automatically write to hard disk.
Cannot automatically write to hard disk (in Java Applets).
3.3.
History of JavaScript It's useful to start with an idea of the language's history.
JavaScript was created in 1995 by Brendan Eich, an engineer at Netscape, and first released with Netscape 2 early in 1996.
It was originally going to be called LiveScript, but was renamed in an ill-fated marketing decision to try to capitalize on the popularity of Sun Microsystem's Java language — despite the two having very little in common.
This has been a source of confusion ever since.
Microsoft released a mostly-compatible version of the language called JScript with IE 3 several months later.
Netscape submitted the language to Ecma International, a European standards organization, which resulted in the first edition of the ECMAScript standard in 1997.
The standard received a significant update as ECMAScript edition 3 in 1999, and has stayed pretty much stable ever since.
The fourth edition was abandoned, due to political differences concerning language complexity.
Many parts of the fourth edition forming a basis of the new ECMAScript edition 5, published in December of 2009.
This stability is great news for developers, as it's given the various implementations plenty of time to catch up.
I'm going to focus almost exclusively on the edition 3 dialect.
For familiarity, I will stick with the term JavaScript throughout.
Unlike most programming languages, the JavaScript language has no concept of input or output.
It is designed to run as a scripting language in a host environment, and it is up to the host environment to provide mechanisms for communicating with the outside world.
The most common host environment is the browser, but JavaScript interpreters can also be found in Adobe Acrobat, Photoshop, Yahoo!
's Widget engine, and even server side environments.
120 4.0 CONCLUSION: JavaScript is NOT the same as Java.
Java was developed at Sun Micro Systems.
The two languages are related, but yet are very different and have different purposes.
Java is a full- featured Object-Oriented Programming language that creates separate applets (mini- applications) that do not interrelate with HTML like JavaScript does.
JavaScript is much simpler to program than Java.
JavaScript was designed for a more specific purpose exposing useful properties of the Web client and server to a script programmer.
5.0 SUMMARY: In this unit, you have learnt: • The difference between Java and JavaScript • The History of JavaScript • Explanation of JavaScript 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT • Distinguish between Java and JavaScript • What is client-side scripting?
• Describe the history of JavaScripting 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES • Nigel McFarlane: Rapid Application Development with Mozilla, Prentice Hall Professional Technical References, ISBN 0131423436 • Danny Goodman, Scott Markel: JavaScript and DHTML Cookbook, O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 0596004672 • Danny Goodman, Brendan Eich: JavaScript Bible, Wiley, John & Sons, ISBN 0764533428 • Andrew H. Watt, Jinjer L. Simon, Jonathan Watt: Teach Yourself JavaScript in 21 Days, Pearson Education, ISBN 0672322978 • Andy Harris, Andrew Harris: JavaScript Programming, Premier Press, ISBN 0761534105 • Gary B. Shelly, Thomas J. Cashman, William J. Dorin, Jeffrey Quasney: JavaScript: Complete Concepts and Techniques, Course Technology, ISBN 0789562332 • Nick Heinle, Richard Koman: Designing with JavaScript, O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 1565923006 121 UNIT TWO: JAVA SCRIPT VARIABLES AND DATA TYPES 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 JavaScript Variables 3.2 Java Script Data type 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION JavaScript is an object language; it has data types and variables.
Its syntax comes from the Java and C languages, so many structures from those languages apply to JavaScript as well.
One of the key differences is that JavaScript does not have classes; instead, the class functionality is accomplished by object prototypes.
The other main difference is that functions are objects, giving functions the capacity to hold executable code and be passed around like any other object.
This unit covers the JavaScript Variables and primitive data types of string, boolean, and number, as well as the built-in functions for modifying values of these types.
In addition, we’ll look at two special data types in JavaScript, null and undefined, toward the end of the unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Explain JavaScript Variables • List JavaScript Data types • Describe Global Scope Variables 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 JavaScript Variables Every piece of data is known as a value.
When a value is referred in a statement, it is called a literal value.
For the same reason people are identified by names as opposed to "human" or "person", literal values can be named in order to make repeated reference to them practical, efficient and readable.
These names are called variables.
Declaring and Initializing the Variables 122 var num; // declare variable, has null value num = 20; // assign a value, null value is replaced //OR var num=20; // declare AND assign value (initialize) var a,b,c,d; //multiple variables may be declared simultaneously var a = 5, b = 6, c = 7,d=8; //multiple variables may be initialized simultaneously Variable Names Variable names cannot contain spaces, begin with a number but can see the underscore (_) .
JavaScript Variable name can not use any reserved keywords.
Two words can either be separated by an underscore (my_variable) or (myVariable).
Variable Scope There are two types of Variable scope:- 1.
Globle scope Variable, 2 .
Local scope Variable.
1.Globle scope Variable:- A variable declared or initialized outside a function body has a global scope, making it accessible to all other statements within the same document.
2.
Local scope Variable:- A variable declared or initialized within a function body has a local scope, making it accessible only to statements within the same function body.
[NOTE:- If a variable is initialized inside a function body but the var keyword is left off, the variable has a global scope and is only accessible after the function containing it is invoked.
It is better to always use the var keyword ] 3.2 Java Script Data type Data Type:- A data type is defined by the value assigned to it .
A variable could be a number on one line, then assigned a string value and later be assigned an object reference.
JavaScript would change its data type dynamically .It also represent the data's nature.
Data is directly treated on those data types and calculate up on the works.
There are two types of the data types, namely:- • .Primitive data types • Compositive data types Primitive data types:- Primitive data types are the simplest building blocks of a program.
The types are the following:- • Numeric:-JavaScript supports both integers and floating point numbers .Integers are whole numbers and it does not support the decimal numbers such as : 145 .
Floating point numbers are fractional numbers or decimal numbers.
Such as : 12.50 • String:- String is a collection of characters enclosed in either single quotes or double quotes .If the string starts with a single quotes it must end with single quotes .If the string starts with a double quotes, it must end with double quotes .
Such as: 'Welcome to JavaScript' or "Welcome to JavaScript".
• Boolean:-Boolean literals are logical values that have only one of two values, true or false.
It is used in conditional statements.
Our statements are checked true or false then we use the Boolean variables.
123 • Null:-The null value represents no value that means strings are empty .
• Undefined:- A variables to be declared but given no any initial value then it runtime error display Example: This example is represent the sum of two floating numbers and print the messages in single quotes and double quotes.
<html> <head> <script language="javascript"> function showAlert() { var a=200.40; var b=10.50; var sum=0; sum=a+b; document.write(" sum= "+sum); document.write("\t\tHello\nworld!\n"); document.write('\nWelcome to JavaScript'); } </script> </head> <body> <script language="javascript"> showAlert(); </script> </body> </html> 4.0 CONCLUSION: JavaScript uses two special values to define variable states.
The value null indicates a variable which does not have value.
Any operation or expression with a variable containing the null value will result in null.
The <undefined> value is assigned by JavaScript to any variable which has not been initialized.
The <undefined> value is actually a string which can be manipulated as a string literal.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • Primitive data types • Types of Variables 124 • Definition of a Variable 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT • Distinguish between Globe Scope and Local Scope Variable • Define Variable 7.0 FURTHER READING AND OTHER RESOURCES • Danny Goodman, Brendan Eich: JavaScript Bible, Wiley, John & Sons, ISBN 0764533428 • Andrew H. Watt, Jinjer L. Simon, Jonathan Watt: Teach Yourself JavaScript in 21 Days, Pearson Education, ISBN 0672322978 • Thomas A. Powell, Fritz Schneider: JavaScript: The Complete Reference, McGraw-Hill Companies, ISBN 0072191279 • Scott Duffy: How to do Everything with JavaScript, Osborne, ISBN 0072228873 • Andy Harris, Andrew Harris: JavaScript Programming, Premier Press, ISBN 0761534105 • Gary B. Shelly, Thomas J. Cashman, William J. Dorin, Jeffrey Quasney: JavaScript: Complete Concepts and Techniques, Course Technology, ISBN 0789562332 • Nick Heinle, Richard Koman: Designing with JavaScript, O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 1565923006 125  UNIT THREE STATEMENT AND OPERATORS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 JavaScript Statement 3.2 JavaScript Operators 3.3 Control structures 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 Further Reading and Other Resources 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn the JavaScript Statement, Operators and Control Structures.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Explain two types of statement in JavaScript • List types of Operators in JavaScript • List types of Control Structures 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 JavaScript Statement The JavaScript language supported Two type Condition.
(cid:1) .if statement (cid:1) Function if Statement if statements execute a set of commands if a specified condition is true.
If the condition is false, another set of statements can be executed through the use of the else keyword.
The main idea behind if statement is embodied by the sentence: "If the weather's good tomorrow, we'll go out and have a picnic and Lisa will do cartwheels -- else, we'll stay in and Catherine will watch TV."
As you can see, the idea is quite intuitive and, surprisingly enough, so is the syntax: if (condition) { 126  statements1 } -or- if (condition) { statements1 } else { statements2 } (An if statement does not require an else statement following it, but an else statement must be preceded by an if statement.)
condition can be any JavaScript expression that evaluates to true or false.
Parentheses are required around the condition.
If condition evaluates to true, the statements in statements1 are executed.
statements1 and statements2 can be any JavaScript statements, including further nested if statements.
Multiple statements must be enclosed in braces.
Here's an example: if (weather == 'good') { go_out(we); have_a_picnic(we); do_cartwheels(Lisa); } else { stay_in(we); watch_TV(Catherine); } The if statement is used to make decisions in JavaScript.
Boolean operators are also used in along with the if statement.
The if statement is the most used features of JavaScript.
It is basically the same in JavaScript as it is in other programming languages.
Example <HTML> <HEAD> </HEAD> <SCRIPT language="JavaScript"> <!-- var num = 10, if(num == 10) { document.write("<B>Statement!</B><BR>") } //--></SCRIPT> my program successfully completed 127 </BODY> </HTML> Function The function keyword identifies as a function.
The parameters in the parenthesis ( ) provide a means of passing values to the function.
There can be as many parameters separated by commas as you need.
This is perfectly ok to have a function with no parameters.
These parameters are variables which are used by the JavaScript statements inside the curly braces { }.
The variable keyword is not needed to declare the parameters in a function as variables because they are automatically declared and initialized when the function is called.
The function can return a value by using the return keyword.
Example <HTML> <HEAD> </HEAD> <script language="JavaScript"> function prod(a,b) { var x=a*b return x; } var mul=prod(2,5); document.write("multipication:"+mul); </script> </BODY> </HTML> Conditional JavaScript if-else Statement The JavaScript Conditional Statement used to different actions and used to based on different conditions,you want to execute some code if a condition is true and another code the condition is not true, use the if....else statement.
Example <HTML> <HEAD> </HEAD> <script type="text/javascript"> var a = new Date(); var time = a.getHours(); if (time < 20) { document.write("Good morning!
"); } else { document.write("Good day!
"); 128 } </script> </BODY> </HTML> 3.2 JavaScript Operators Operators determine what is done to variables and functions.
JavaScript has many operators namely: Arithmetic, Assignment,Bitwise,Comparison, logical, Conditionnal, Operator Precedence and String Operators.
Operators "operate" on values.
We deal with operators every day, you have probably just never heard them called that.
For example, in a statement such as 1+1=2, the + sign is the operator.
JavaScript offers many operators beyond the basic ones used in arithmetic.
Syntax Though specific rules of syntax vary with some operators, the typical syntax is variable = value operator value where variable is the name of a variable used to store a value, value is a number, string, value, expression, or property of an object, and operator is one of the operators described here.
Description The sections that follow group JavaScript into classes based on the type of operation performed.
Arithmetic Operators Arithmetic operators act on numbers.
Table 1 lists the arithmetic operators offered in JavaScript and provides examples of each.
Table 1: JavaScript's Arithmetic Operators.
Operator Used For Example Equals + Addition 1+2 3 - Subtraction 12-10 2 * Multiplication 2*3 6 / Division 10/3 3.3333333333 % Modulus 10%3 1 x=5 ++ Increment x=6 x++ x=5 -- Decrement x=4 x-- 129 - Unary negation -20 negative 20 The modulus of a number is the remainder after the first division.
For example, 10/3 results in 3, remainder 1.
The modulo (%) operator returns that remainder, 1.
The increment operator, ++, is just a shortcut way of saying variable + 1.
For example, the two statements that follow mean exactly the same thing.
The latter one is just shorter and quicker to type: x = x + 1 as x++ The same holds true for the decrement (--) operator.
With the negation operator, if the minus sign is used in front of a value without being part of a larger expression, then JavaScript assumes it indicates a negative number, just as in day-to- day arithmetic.
For example, x= 5; y= -x results in x being equal to 5 and y being equal to - 5.
Assignment Operators Assignment operators are used to assign a value to a variable by using the simple equal symbol (=) operator with the syntax variablename = value For example: x=15; y=20; z=x+y; After all three lines have been executed, the variable x contains the number 15, the variable y contains 20, and the variable z contains 35 (the sum of 15+20).
Some shorthand operators exist that you can use to do some arithmetic and assign the result to a value in one fell swoop.
Those operators are shown in Table 2.
Table 2: JavaScript's Assignment Operators.
Operator Example Meaning += x+=y x=x+y -= x-=y x=x-y *= x*=y x=x*y /= x/=y x=x/y % x%=y x=x%y Bitwise Operators Bitwise operators treat their values as binary numbers (1's and 0's) rather than as numeric values.
You may never need to use these so don't waste too much energy trying to memorize them.
But just in case you do come across a bitwise operator, Table 3 shows what each one does.
130 Table 3: JavaScript's Bitwise Operators.
Operator Action Example & bitwise AND 10&3=2 | bitwise OR 10|3=11 ^ bitwise exclusive OR 10^3=9 << left shift 10<<3=80 Sign-propagating right >> 10>>3=1 shift >>> Zero-fill right shift 10>>>3=1 Some shortcut operators also exist for bitwise assignments, as listed in Table 4.
Table 4: JavaScript's Bitwise Assignment Operators.
Operator Example Meaning <<= x<<=y x=x<<y >>= x>>=y x=x>>y >>>= x>>>=y x=x>>>y &= x&=y x=x&y ^= x^=y x=x^y |= x|=y x=x|y Comparison and Logical Operators Comparison and logical operators compare two values and return either true or false.
Table 5 lists the comparison operators and Table 6 lists the logical operators.
Table 5 JavaScript's Comparison Operators.
Operator Meaning Example == is equal to 10==3 is false != does not equal 10!=3 is true > is greater than 10>3 is true is greater than or equal >= 10>=3 is true to < is less than 10<3 is false <= is less than or equal to 10<=3 is false Table 6: JavaScript's Logical Operators.
Operator Meaning If x=10 and y= 5 then && AND (x = 10) && (y < 10) is true || OR (x=10) || (y=10) is true !
NOT x !=y is true Conditional Operator JavaScript also contains a conditional operator that assigns a value to a variable based on some conditions.
The operators for a conditional expression are?
and : using this syntax: 131 myvar = (condition) ?
value1 : value2; For example, the conditional expression that follows is a shorthand way of saying "If the variable named gender contains F, then put the string 'Ms.'
in the variable named salutation.
If the variable named gender does not contain F, then put the string 'Mr.'
into the variable named salutation": salutation = (gender=="F") ?
"Ms." : "Mr." Operator Precedence JavaScript operators follow the standard order of precedence or operator precedence.
But you can override natural precedence with parentheses.
For example 5+3*10 equals 35 because the multiplication is naturally carried out first (according to the rules of precedence).
That is, the machine first evaluates 10*3, which equals 30, and then adds 5 to that to get 35.
This expression has a different result: (5+3)*10 This expression results in 80 because the parentheses force the addition to be carried out first (5+3 equals 8).
That result then is multiplied by 10 to result in 80.
Table 7 shows the order of precedence of the operators, from highest to lowest, when you do not use parentheses in an expression.
Operators at the same level of precedence within an expression are carried out in left-to-right order.
Table 7: JavaScript Operators Order of Precedence.
Action Operator(s) call, member (),[] negation/increment !
~- ++ -- multiply/divide * / % addition/subtraction + - bitwise shift << >> >>> Comparison < <= > >= Equality == != bitwiseAND & bitwise XOR ^ bitwise OR | logical AND && logical OR || Conditional ?
: = += -= *= /= %= <<= >>= Assignment >>>= &= ^= |= Comma , 132 string Operators String operators are chunks of text, such as Hello (rather than a number such as 10).
Unlike numbers, you cannot add, subtract, multiply, and divide strings.
Example: 2*3 = 6 is fine.
But what is "Hello" * "There"?
The question makes no sense.
You can, however, concatenate strings, which is a fancy name for "stick them together."
You use the + operator to concatenate strings.
Here is an example where we create three variable, x, y, and z, all of which contains strings: x="Hello"; y="There"; z=x+y; The result is that z now contains HelloThere.
Why is there no space between the words?
Because to a computer, strings are just meaningless strings of characters.
To a computer, the string hello in no more meaningful than the string bvhdsz.
They are both just strings.
If you want to add a space between the words, you can pop a space into the expression.
A literal space would be a space enclosed in quotation marks (" ").
Hence, this series of commands x="Hello"; y="There"; z=x+" "+y; results in z containing Hello There.
A shortcut operator also exists for string concatenation +=.
For example x="Hello" y="There" x+=" "+y in which case x equals itself with a space and y tacked on, x then contains Hello There.
3.3 Control structures If ... else if (condition) { statements } else { statements } Loops 133 Loops are an incredibly useful programming tool.
Loops handle repetitive tasks extremely well, especially in the context of consecutive elements.
Arrays immediately spring too mind here, since array elements are numbered consecutively.
It would be quite intuitive (and equally practical), for instance, to write a loop that added 1 to each element within an array.
The two most common types of loops are for and while loops: • for Loops A for loop constitutes a statement which consists of three expressions, enclosed in parentheses and separated by semicolons, followed by a block of statements executed in the loop.
This definition may, at first, sound confusing.
Indeed, it is hard to understand for loops without seeing them in action.
A for loop resembles the following: for (initial-expression; condition; increment-expression) { statements } The initial-expression is a statement or variable declaration.
It is typically used to initialize a counter variable.
This expression may optionally declare new variables with the var keyword.
The condition is evaluated on each pass through the loop.
If this condition evaluates to true, the statements in statements are performed.
When the condition evaluates to false, the execution of the for loop stops.
This conditional test is optional.
If omitted, the condition always evaluates to true.
The increment-expression is generally used to update or increment the counter variable.
The statements constitute a block of statements that are executed as long as condition evaluates to true.
This can be a single statement or multiple statements.
Although not required, it is good practice to indent these statements from the beginning of the for statement to make your code more readable.
Check out the following for statement.
It starts by declaring the variable i and initializing it to zero.
It checks whether i is less than nine, performs the two successive statements, and increments i by one after each pass through the loop: var n = 0; for (var i = 0; i < 3; i++) { n += i; 134  alert("The value of n is now " + n); } While Loops The while loop, although most people would not recognize it as such, is for's twin.
The two can fill in for one another - using either one is only a matter of convenience or preference according to context.
while creates a loop that evaluates an expression, and if it is true, executes a block of statements.
The loop then repeats, as long as the specified condition is true.
The syntax of while differs slightly from that of for: while (condition) { statements } condition is evaluated before each pass through the loop.
If this condition evaluates to true, the statements in the succeeding block are performed.
When condition evaluates to false, execution continues with the statement following statements.
statements is a block of statements that are executed as long as the condition evaluates to true.
Although not required, it is good practice to indent these statements from the beginning of the statement.
The following while loop iterates as long as n is less than three.
var n = 0; var x = 0; while(n < 3) { n++; x += n; alert("The value of n is " + n + ".
The value of x is " + x); } Switch statement switch (expression) { case label1 : statements; break; case label2 : statements; 135  break; default : statements; } Functions A function is a block with a (possibly empty) argument list that is normally given a name.
A function may give back a return value.
function function-name(arg1, arg2, arg3) { statements; return expression; } Example: Euclid's original algorithm of finding the greatest common divisor.
(This is a geometrical solution which subtracts the shorter segment from the longer): function gcd(segmentA, segmentB) { while(segmentA!=segmentB) if(segmentA>segmentB) segmentA -= segmentB; else segmentB -= segmentA; return(segmentA); } The number of arguments given when calling a function must not necessarily accord to the number of arguments in the function definition.
Within the function the arguments may as well be accessed through the arguments array.
Every function is an instance of Function, a type of base object.
Functions can be created and assigned like any other objects, and passed as arguments to other functions.
Thus JavaScript supports higher-order functions.
For example: Array.prototype.fold = function (value, functor) { var result = value; for (var i = 0; i < this.length; i++) { result = functor(result, this[i]); } return result; 136  } var sum = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10].fold(0, function (a, b) { return a + b }) results in the value: 55 User interaction Most interaction with the user is done by using HTML forms which can be accessed through the HTML DOM.
However there are as well some very simple means of communicating with the user: Alert dialog box Confirm dialog box Prompt dialog box Status bar Console 4.0 CONCLUSION: Operators determine what is done to variables and functions.
JavaScript has many operators namely: Arithmetic, Assignment,Bitwise,Comparison, logical, Conditionnal, Operator Precedence and String Operators.
There is only one String Operator: concatenation (+).
It’s funny that a language that uses = and == to give the programmer greater flexibility would also use the + to add numbers and concatenate strings.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt : • Definition of Loop • Types of Operators • Types of Statement in JavaScript 6.0 TUTOR MARK ASSIGNMENT • Define a Loop?
• Distinguish between any two types of Loops • List types of Operators • List types of Control Structure you know.
137  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING • Andy Harris, Andrew Harris: JavaScript Programming, Premier Press, ISBN 0761534105 • Danny Goodman, Brendan Eich: JavaScript Bible, Wiley, John & Sons, ISBN 0764533428 • Gary B. Shelly, Thomas J. Cashman, William J. Dorin, Jeffrey Quasney: JavaScript: Complete Concepts and Techniques, Course Technology, ISBN 0789562332 • Nick Heinle, Richard Koman: Designing with JavaScript, O'Reilly & Associates, ISBN 1565923006 • Nigel McFarlane: Rapid Application Development with Mozilla, Prentice Hall Professional Technical References, ISBN 0131423436 • Scott Duffy: How to do Everything with JavaScript, Osborne, ISBN 0072228873 • Thomas A. Powell, Fritz Schneider: JavaScript: The Complete Reference, McGraw-Hill Companies, ISBN 0072191279 138
