 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: AEM736 COURSE TITLE: EXTENSIO N ORGANISA TION AND MANAGEM ENT  AEM 736 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Course Team Dr. F.O.
Oladipo (Developer/Writer) - UNILORIN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii  AEM736 COURSE GUIDE National Open Universit y of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open Universit y of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-920-1 All Rights Reserved iii  AEM 736 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction ……………………………………………..………… 1 What you will Learn in the Course ………………………………... 1 Course Aims ………………………………………………… …….. 1 Course Objectives…………………………………………………... 1 Working through this Course……………………………………….
2 Course Materials…………………………………………………… 3 Study Units …………………………………………… …………... 3 Presentation Schedule …………………………………………….. 4 Assessment……………………………………………………….… 4 Tutor-Marked Assignment ………………………………………… 5 Final Examination and Grading…………………………………….
5 Course Marking Scheme……………………………………….…… 5 Facilitators/ Tutors and Tutorials ……………………………….….. 6 Summary……………………………………… …..……………….
6 iv  Introduction Extension Organisation and Management is a two-credit unit course available to all students offering Agricultural Extension and Management (AEM).
It is a special field of Agricultural Extension, with particular emphasis on management and administration.
The practitioner is an administrator and therefore must be trained in the same way and work with the same methods as his counterparts who specialise in other areas of Agricultural Extension.
The concept of management has various meanings to people in different fields.
The prime concern of the course is with the extension managers; the functions, procedures for carrying out their functions and their attainment of extension organisational objectives easily and economically.
The purpose of the course is however to develop greater comprehension of the process of managing extension organisation.
What You Will Learn in this Course The course consists of fifteen units.
The Course Guide tells you what the course is about, the course materials you will be using as well as how you can work with these materials.
It also specifies for you the period of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course.
The Course Guide also gives you proper guidance in respect of your Tutor-Marked Assignment which will be made available in the assignment file.
There will be regular tutorial classes for the course and you are advised to attend these tutorial classes.
The course will equip you with the skills for effective management towards the achievement of institutional or organisational objectives.
Course Aims The course aims at providing you with an understanding of extension organisation and management.
It also aims at providing you with the techniques that aid effective management of extension.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out, the course has a set of specific objectives.
Each unit has specific objectives which are included at the beginning of the unit.
You are however expected to note these objectives before you study the unit.
You may also have to refer to them in the course of studying so as to check on your progress.
AEM 736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT In addition to these aims, this course sets to achieve more other objectives.
Therefore, after going through the course, you should be able to:  explain the concepts of extension organisation and management  identify the main management or administrative theories and explain the implications of each to extension management  identify the principles inherent in effective extension management  discuss the organisation structure and the uses of the structure to effective extension management  list and explain the basic functions or processes of management/administration  explain the concept of personnel management and identify the basic functions of personnel management  discuss the management of extension systems in Nigeria.
Working through this Course You are required to read each study unit and other textbooks/materials that may be provided by the National Open University of Nigeria.
Module 1, unit 1 discusses the meaning, concept and principles of extension organisation and management.
The second unit deals with the themes of management.
It identifies the main theories in support of management and discusses fully the functional theory.
Unit 3 focuses on decision making theory while unit 4 focuses on social process and human relations theory.
Unit 5 deals with the fusion theory and theories X, Y and Z. Module 2, unit 1 focuses on extension organisational structure while unit 2 discusses the basic process of management in extension organisation.
Unit 3 discusses the meaning and concept of personnel management, highlights the basic personnel management and discusses fully, staffing in extension organisation.
Unit 4 deals with training and development of staff in extension organisation while unit 5 deals with supervision in extension organisation.
Module 3, units 1, 2, 3, focus on motivation, coordination and delegation in extension organisation respectively while unit 4 focuses on staff appraisal, budgeting and fiscal control in extension organisation.
Unit 5 describes the management of agricultu ral extension in Nigeria.
Each of the 15 units contains Self Assessment Exercises and at certain point in the course you will be required to submit assignments for the purpose of continuous assessment.
At the end of the course, there is a vi  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT final examination.
The course should take you about 15 weeks to complete.
Find below the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit so as to complete the course on time and successfully too.
You need to spend reasonable time to read in addition to attending the tutorial sessions where you will compare your knowledge with your counterparts.
Course Materials The main components of this course are: 1.
The Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References/Further Reading 4.
Assignments 5.
Presentation schedules Study Units The study units for this course are as follows: Module 1 Basic Concepts, Principles and Theories of Extension Organisation and Management Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Extension Organisation and Management Unit 2 Theories of Management: Functional Theory Unit 3 Decision-Making Theory Unit 4 Social Process Theory and Human Relations Theory Unit 5 The Fusion Theory and Theories X, Y and Z Module Extension Organisational Structure and Management Processes Unit 1 Extension Organisational Structure Unit 2 Basic Process of Management in Extension Unit 3 Personnel Management – Staffing in Extension Organisation Unit 4 Training and Development of Staff in Extension Organisation Unit 5 Supervision in Extension Organisation vii  AEM 736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Module 3 Personnel Management Unit 1 Motivation in Extension Organisation Unit 2 Coordination in Extension Organisation Unit 3 Delegation of Tasks and Authority in Extension Organisation Unit 4 Staff Appraisal and Budget and Fiscal Control in Agricultural Extension Unit 5 Management of Agricultural Extension Services in Nigeria Each unit consists of one to two weeks work and include an introduction, objectives, ,exercises, conclusion, summary, Tutor - Marked Assignment (TMA), References and Further Reading..
The unit directs you to work on exercises related to the required reading.
In general, these exercises test you on the materials you have just covered.
They assist you to evaluate your progress and to reinforce your comprehension of the material.
Together with TMAs, these exercises will help you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course as a whole.
Presentation Schedule The course material has component dates for the early and timely completion and submission of your TMAs and attending tutorials.
You should remember that you are required to submit all your assignments by the stipu lated time and date.
Assessment There are three aspects to the assessment of the course.
The first is made up of Self Assessment Exercises; the second consists of the Tutor- marked Assignments and third is the written examination/end-of -course examination.
You are advised to do the exercises.
In t ackling the assignments, you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and techniques you gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your facilitator for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course work.
At the end of the course you will need to sit for a final or end of course examination of about 3-hour duration.
This examination will count for 70% of your total course mark.
viii  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Tutor-Marked Assignment The TMA is a continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You will be given four (4) TMAs to answer.
All four must be answered before you are allowed to sit for the end of course examination.
The TMAs would be given to you by your facilitator and returned after you have done the assignment.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the assignment file.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and material contained in your reading, references and study units.
However, it is desirable in all degree level of education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more into your references, which will give you a wider view point and may provide you with a deeper understanding of the subject.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your facilitator on or before the deadline given in the presentation schedule and assignment file.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on time, contact your facilitator before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The end of course examination will be for about three (3) hours and it has a value of 70% of the total course work.
The examination will consist of questions, which will reflect the type of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked assignment problems you have previousl y encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the whole course.
You might find it useful to review your self-test, TMAs and the comments on them before the examination.
The end of course examination covers information from all parts of the course.
Course Marking Scheme Assignment Marks Assignment 1 – 4 Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 10% each – 30% of course marks.
End of course examination 70% of overall course marks.
Total 100% of course materials.
ix  AEM 736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Facilitators/ Tutors and Tutorials There are 16 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location o f these tutorials as well as the name and phone number of your facilitators, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your facilitator will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and any difficulties you might face and provide assistance to you during the course.
You are expected to mail your Tutor-Marked Assignment to your facilitator before the schedule date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tu tor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not delay to contact your facilitator by telephone or e-mail if you need assistance.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find assistance necessary:  If you do not understand any part of the study or the assigned readings.
 If you have difficulty with the self-tests.
 If you have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should endeavour to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your course facilitator and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain much benefit from course tutorials prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating actively in discussions.
Summary Extension Organisation and Management is a course that is concerned with the processes of managing extension services.
The course will equip you with the basic knowledge of the themes, techniques and processes of managing extension as an institutional framework for agricultural d evelopment.
With the knowledge in this course, you should be able to provide answers to questions like:  What is extension organisation and management?
 What are the principles inherent in effective extension management?
x  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  What are the purposes of organisation structure in extension organisation?
 Explain any theory of administration/management and draw the implication of the theory on extension management.
 Define personnel management.
Identify the main functions of personnel management and explain any one fully.
 List and explain the motivational factors that can aid employees’ productivity in agriculture extension organisation.
 Trace the development of extension systems in Nigeria.
 Present the management systems of extension in Nigeria using ADP approach.
Note that the questions you can answer are not limited to the above list.
You will gain more by applying the principles you have learnt in the course to your understanding of Extension Organisation and Management.
xi  AEM 736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Course Code AEM736 Course Title Extension Organisation and Management Course Team Dr. F.O.
Oladipo (Developer/Writer) - UNILORIN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xii  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT National Open Universit y of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open Universit y of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-920-1 All Rights Reserved xiii  Module 1 Basic Concepts, Principles and Theories of Extension Organisation and Management ……… .. 1 Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Extension Organisation and Management …………..……………………………… 1 Unit 2 Theories of Management: Functional Theory……… 10 Unit 3 Decision-Making Theory………………………….….
16 Unit 4 Social Process Theory and Human Relations Theory... 24 Unit 5 The Fusion Theory and Theories X, Y and Z ……….. 30 Module Extension Organisational Structure and Management Processes………………… ……….….
36 Unit 1 Extension Organisational Structure …………..…….. 36 Unit 2 Basic Process of Management in Extension………… 48 Unit 3 Personnel Management – Staffing in Extension Organisation ………………………………………….
57 Unit 4 Training and Development of Staff in Extension Organisation ……………………………………….….
66 Unit 5 Supervision in Extension Organisation …………..….
78 Module 3 Personnel Management ………… ……………… ….
87 Unit 1 Motivation in Extension Organisation …………..….
87 Unit 2 Coordination in Extension Organisation …………... 97 Unit 3 Delegation of Tasks and Authority in Extension Organisation ……………………………………….. 103 Unit 4 Staff Appraisal and Budget and Fiscal Control in Agricultural Extension……………………………… 114 Unit 5 Management of Agricultural Extension Services in Nigeria……………………………………………… 123  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT MODULE 1 BASIC CONCEPTS, PRINCIPLES AND THEORIES OF EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Basic Concepts of Extension Organisation and Management Unit 2 Theories of Management: Functional Theory Unit 3 Decision-Making Theory Unit 4 Social Process Theory and Human Relations Theory Unit 5 The Fusion Theory and Theories X, Y and Z UNIT 1 BASIC CONCEPTS OF EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Extension 3.2 The Concept of Organisation 3.3 Functions of Organisation 3.4 Management 3.5 Extension Organisation and Management 3.6 Principles of Extension Organisation Management 3.7 Factors Influencing Effective Extension Management 3.8 Qualities of Extension Manager (Administrator) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit explains the basic concepts of extension organisation and management.
The implications in relation to agricultural extension activities, approaches and principles are also explained with a view to enabling better understanding of subsequent issues in the management of extension organisation.
1  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concepts of extension organisation and management  state at least 5 functions of an organisation  give 5 types of extension organisation  explain the basic principles of extension management  discuss ways of improving the effectiveness of extension management.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Extension Extension management is regarded as one of such wide educational inputs designed for farmers to help themselves.
The term extension is most frequently associated with agriculture, especially in less developed economies still operating largely at the primary production level.
However, the conception of extension made it to be an educational process that is applicable to diverse areas of human endeavours.
Extension education can be defined as a process of getting useful information to people and assisting them to acquire the necessary knowledge, skill and attitude to utilise effectively the advantages of information technology in agriculture.
Extension education is therefore an informal education process geared towards assisting farmers to identify and analyse their production problems and to become aware of the opportunities for improvement, all with a view to improving their standard of living.
Extension work is therefore an educational process that involves the following: - working with rural people along the lines of their immediate and felt needs and interest, which frequently involve making a living, enhancing their level of living and improving their physical surroundings.
- conducting worthwhile and acceptable activities in the spirit of cooperation and respect between the extension workers and the rural people.
- utilising support activities to bring both extension works and extension staff up-to-date through the use of subject matter specialists, resource persons, in-service training, conferences and the like.
- utilising certain teaching techniques in attaining the educational objectives of extension programmes.
2  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.2 The Concept of Organisation An organisation is the formal structure of authority, through which works of sub-division are arranged, defined, coordinated and executed to achieve their objectives.
It is an arrangement of relationship of persons, materials and ideas that is necessary for the performance of a function.
It is the pattern of ways in which large number of people too many to have intimate face-to-face contact with each other and engage in complexity of task relate to each other towards the accomplishment of mutually agreed purpose.
From these definitions, an organisation could be considered to entail establishment consisting of people of different cadres, where each carries out his or her own activities in order to achieve the desired group’s objectives.
3.3 Functions of an Organisation Characteristicall y, every organisation is charged with established functions, some of which include the following: 1.
Organisation permits stable exception to be formed by each member of the group as to the behaviour of other members of the organisation.
2.
It provides general stimulus that controls the behaviour of members of an organised group.
3.
It divides work among its members by giving each individual a particular work or task to accomplish thereby limiting his focus to a set of work.
4.
It establishes standard of practice.
Establishment of minimum individual standard acceptable for the performance of particular job.
5.
It helps in transmitting decision downwards, through its rank by establishing system of authority as well as in fluence.
6.
It trains and indoctrinates its members thereby making members to acquire knowledge, skills and loyalities to make decision, as organisation wants them to do.
7.
It provides channels with formal and informal way of communication through which information flows.
3  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.4 Management Management is defined in various ways as; getting things done through others; efficient utilisation of resources; or a process that involves guidance or direction of a group of people towards organisational goals or objectives.
The term management or administration means setting objectives and making decisions for effective planning and control of finance, personnel, production and marketing.
Management or administration could be used interchangeably and as in this text; construed the creation and maintenance of an environment where individuals work together in groups with a view to achieving common organisational goals.
3.5 Extension Organisation and Management From the definitions of organisation and management (Administration) above, we can to extension organisation as a formal structure of authority through which sub-divisions are arranged, defined, coordinated and executed to achieve agricultural objectives.
An extension organisation is made up of the following types:  Cooperative Extension Service (e.g.
as practised in USA)  Ministry Extension Service  Communit y Development Extension Service  Integrated Rural Development Extension Service  Commodit y Extension Type.
Consequently, the term extension organisation management can be defined as a process involving guidance or direction of a group of agricultural extension workers (organisation) towards the accomplishment of agricultural goals or objectives.
Extension organisation management in this regard is an effort and, as such, should be seen as an effort to direct, guide and integrate the activities of members of staff of an agricultural extension organisation with a view to achieving the objectives of extension service.
(To bring about changes in what people know, how to react to situation and changes in what they can do with their hands so as to improve their standard of living).
Thus defined, the agricultural extension manager (Administrator) be it in State Agricultural Development Project, State 4  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Ministry of Agriculture, Federal Ministry of Agriculture etc., is essentially an organiser of plans, policies and programmes meant for specific agricultural objectives SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 Briefly explain the following terms: Extension, Organisation, and Management.
3.6 Principles of Extension Organisation Management The principles of agricultural extension management (Administration) are the basic guidelines or tenets which enable extension managers (administrators) as in every other organisation to work with precision in carrying out extension functions.
These principles are: 1.
Responsibility This holds that at all times and at all levels of the extension organisation, each person in his area and capacity must act responsibly.
That is, each person recognises his sphere of influence and acts within it, performing dutifully and seriously the tasks demanded by the position and responsibility.
2.
Communication Easy and quick flow of information is essential to every mother organisation.
People must know the what, why, how, when, who and where of their functions.
The information must be vertical and horizontal as well as being continuous.
3.
Delegation of Authority Departmental or sectional functions are entrusted to a person or group of persons on the basis of geographical location, expertise, position or roles.
Delegation of authority is essential to extension management because nobody can do everything in any comp lex or simple organisation.
4.
Human Relations The principle of human relations implies such terms as respect, courtesy, kindness, consideration, confidence, trust, open mindedness and sincerity in dealing with people especially farmers and researchers that Extensionists deal with daily.
5  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 5.
Democracy The democratic principle demands that those that will be affected by a decision must have a say in the formulation and development of such a decision.
6.
Adaptability This principle reminds the Extension manager to be adaptable to change if it must ensure its utility or relevan ce to the society.
7.
Stability This principle emphasises the need to conserve the good in the past.
8.
Flexibility Extension manager must be flexible so as to be capable of accommodating necessary change and innovation.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention three types of extension organisation.
2.
Highlight the basic process of extension management.
3.7 Factors Influencing Effective Extension Management The essence of management (administration) is the ability of the manager (administrator) to plan large project, “wield together”, keep the organisation functioning smoothly and efficiently towards the achievement of desired goals within the allotted time and resources (human and materials) and without unnecessarily keeping all works to himself.
The following would therefore assist in increasing the effectiveness of management:  Following consultation procedure to mobilise the best ideas of the staff;  Effective management hinges on responsibility and authority as basic ingredients;  Noting significantly that responsibility is accountability that can be assigned but not to be delegated as responsibility cannot exists except there is backup of authority/power; 6  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  Authority is given to make decisions, and adjust whatever necessary.
This follows that a person without authority does not have power to make decisions and as such should not be held responsible for whatever goes wrong;  Conflicts do occur when responsibilities are giving to so many authorities.
To curb this, individuals should identify ‘who’ is responsible for ‘what’ and to ‘whom’.
3.8 Qualities of an Extension Manager (Administrator) To achieve the agricultural organisational goals besides the academic qualifications, agricultural managers (that is programme managers, administrators, managing directors and zonal managers) must in addition possess the following qualities:  integrity  fairness and sound judgement  good health  decisiveness  faithfulness  courage  initiative  versatility  sense of humour  credibility  ability to cooperate and work with others  ability to listen  ability to communicate and  willingness to identify with the needs, problems and aspiration of the staff and farmers (empathy).
7  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT These attributes show that management is the art and science of getting results through people.
In other words, it is marshalling effective utilisation of all the four ‘MS’ of administration (men, money, motives and methods) so as to achieve the goals and objectives of an organisation.
Extension management is therefore an activity involving effective and efficient harnessing resources under the auspices or control of the manager.
The management of agricultural extension organisation is therefore challenging and highly rewarding considering the following: - many people must be supervised; - offices and personnel are located over wide areas across districts, cells, blocs, zones, local government areas, state and the nation; - a variety of functions are performed; and - several strata of management are involved and relationship must be marked with other branches, departments and with external organisations and agencies.
4.0 CONCLUSION Extension organisation and management involves some inherent basic concepts, process, principles/guidelines that a manager has to be conversant with to achieve the agricultural goals and objectives.
5.0 SUMMARY Better results that could be evolved from sound agricultural development policies and government efforts are b eing hindered by poor management incapability.
And to this fact that many of the problems which beset agricultural extension are related to management, the place of Extension management is therefore indispensable.
Some basic concepts, process, principles of Extension organisation and management were explained.
Ways of improving the Extension management and attributes expected of a good manager were highlighted.
8  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define briefly the following: (a) Extension (b) Organisation (c) Management 2.
Highlight the basic functions of organisation.
3.
What is Extension organisation and management?
4.
Discuss the basic principles of extension management.
5.
Enumerate the attributes expected of a good extension manager.
6.
Suggest some ways of improving the effectiveness of extension management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, M.E.
(1992).
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
Intermediate Tropical Agriculture Series.
Adebayo, A.
(1981).
Principles and Practice of Public Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Limited.
Madukwe, M.C.
(2005).
‘Agricultural Extension Administration’.
Adedoyin, S.F.
[ed].
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
AESON.
9  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 THEORIES OF MANAGEMENT: FUNCTIONAL THEORY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Theories of Management /Administration 3.2 Functions of Management/Administrative Theories 3.3 Concept of Functional Theory 3.4 Basic Sub-concepts of Functional Theory 3.5 Basic Principles Underlining the Functional Theory 3.6 General Implications of the Functional Theory 3.7 Implication of Functional Theory to Agricultural Extension Management/Adm inistration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assessment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, the definition and importance of theory to administration/management are provided.
The six major types of theories commonly used in management are also mentioned.
Functional theory credited to Fredrick Taylor which explains administrative behaviour, the basic elements and assumptions as well as its implication to extension manager or administrator is treated.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define what theory is  state the functions of administrative/management theories  explain functional theory  explain the basic principles inherent in functional theory  highlight the assumptions underlining the functional theory  discuss the implications of functional theory to extension managers.
10  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Theories of Administration/Management A theory is an explicit and objective statement integrating isolated body of data or knowledge into a coherent and consistent framework, permitting the specification of relationship between various empirical data and providing logical essentials for the explanation of observed phenomenon.
3.2 Functions of Management/Administrative Theories The following are the principal roles theories serve in management/administration: - basis for research - guide to the administration and organisation of action - guide to the application of new knowledge - basis for decision making operation and action in organisation - help to understand prediction and adjust to administrative behaviour more objectively and systematicall y.
It should be noted that in reality no single theory can achieve all the aforementioned objectives of administrative theories.
Each theory complements the other in making the framework for proper and sound understanding of the operation of administrative theory.
Some of the theories to be considered for Extension Management are as follows: 1.
Functional theory 2.
Decision-making theory 3.
Human relation theory 4.
Fusion theory 5.
Social process theory; and 6.
Theory X, Y, Z.
11  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.3 Concept of Functional Theory This is sometimes referred to as traditional theory or administrative theory.
The theory is credited to Fredrick Taylor and explains administrative behaviour in terms of administrative processes and formal functions with which the administrator deals or operates.
This theory rests on the assumptions that functionalism adds simplicity, consistency and contributes proficiency to the smooth working conditions of the organisation.
3.4 Basic Sub-concepts of Functional Theory Some basic sub-concepts emanating from the functional theory are: i. division of labour; ii.
specialisation; and iii.
line and staff relationship.
Division of Labour Division of labour provides specific responsibilities and functions and makes administrators accountable for it.
Specialisation This is a situation where individuals tend to do one thing, acquire proficiency, attain expertise and get used to doing it easily.
Line-Staff Relationship Usually, in any organisation the professionals work hand in hand with the administrators.
The two must work together in a harmonious mann er in order to prevent lapses, rancour or bitterness, all with a view to ensuring efficiency and productivity of the organisation.
Technicall y, the professionals are regarded as the staff men while the administrators or supporting staff are the linemen.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE State 3 functions of administrative theories.
12  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.5 Basic Principles Underlining the Functional Theory Below are the main principles/guidelines used to justify the value and significance of functional theory: - Specialisation Leads to Efficiency This holds that employees hand le tasks which they are trained for very easily, efficiently and economically.
Good organogram and hierarchy leads to efficienc y.
This follows that if categorisation of the organisation into units and arrangement of staff that are to perform roles in a hierarchical order is done, it will facilitate supervision, communication and budgeting.
- Scope of People to Supervise The largest possible number of persons one supervisor can oversee is around 15.
The concept behind it is that if an individual oversees man y people he may become inefficient.
Conversely, if the number is smaller, it may be uneconomical.
Adequate delegation of authority should be commensurate with the responsibility so that the subordinates can act on behalf of the administrator or manager.
- Job Evaluation Job evaluations are based on pre-determined criteria of performance.
Here, management by objective (MBO) principle is applied.
3.6 General Implications of the Functional Theory Functionalist suggests that on the basis of the principles above, employee’s behaviour can be predicted.
The theory shares certain semblance with the bureaucratic process in that it is an administrative system, especially in a government that divides work into specific categories carried out by special departments of non-elected officials.
The only difference is that bureaucratic process involves complex roles and regulations applied are rigid.
To another school of thought, the more an employee is supervised, the more mistakes he makes.
The reason here is that he will not be encouraged to work at his own pace and use his own initiatives.
Also, functionalism appears to be more expensive as resources may not be adequate to execute it.
The functional theory also fails to take 13  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT cognisance that human beings are not machines because machines do not give room for flexibility.
3.7 Implication of Functional Theory to Agricultural Extension Management/Administration It implies that agricultural Extension personnel should be made to do only and exactly jobs/tasks they are trained for.
Supervisors should not surprise too large number of workers.
The field and office staff should cooperate and compliment each other’s efforts so as to achieve the goals of the organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION The theory of administration helps in predicting behaviour and as such is a guide in effective admin istration.
Functionalism theory therefore gives insight into effective adm inistration as a function of making personnel to do exactly what he has been trained for with less supervision and coping with the supervision of a manageable size of subordinates.
5.0 SUMMARY A theory is seen as a speculative idea/plan as to how something might be done.
Functions of theories to management/administration and some selected theories applicable to Extension management were highlighted in this unit.
The basic assumptions and implications of functional theories to managers/administrators were also discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the term theory.
2.
State the uses of administration theories in Extension Management.
3.
Explain the concept of functional theory.
4.
What are the basic principles underlining the functional theory?
5.
Discuss the assumptions underlining functional theory.
6.
Highlight 3 implications of fundamental theory to Extension managers/administrators.
14  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Adereti, F.O., Torimiro, D.O., Ojo, T.F.
and Okorie, V.O.
(2008).
‘Administration and supervision in Extension’.
Akinyemiju, O.A.
and Torimiro, D.O.
[eds].
Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treatise.
Lagos: ABC Agricultural System Limited.
Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Limited.
Aromolaran, E.A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech.
Ogunbameru, O.B.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 15  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 DECISION-MAKING THEORY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Decision Making Theory 3.2 Values to be Considered when Making Decision 3.3 Steps in Decision Making 3.4 Types of Decision Making 3.5 Factors Affecting Decision -making Process 3.6 Basic Phases in Decision Making 3.7 Some Useful Processes Aiding Effective Decision Making in Extension Organisation 3.8 Implication of Decision Making Theory to the Extension Manager 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses the decision-making theory, an important management of administrative theory that explains basic steps to be taken before carrying out any good decision.
Types of decisions and values to be considered in making good decision, factors influencing the decision making process and the implications on extension management are also explained.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of decision making theory  state the values to be considered in making decision  highlight the steps involved in decision m aking  discuss the types of decision making system  explain the factors influencing/affecting decision making process  discuss the implication of decision making theory on Extension management.
16  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Decision Making Theory Decision making theory can be defined as being the complex of human association events or words leading to or including any conclusion for a programme of policy or operations.
As a process, it suggests that no single individual takes decision alone in any organisation.
Decision making is always influenced by other persons, events or the environment.
It could also be a system solution process requiring solution-seeking approach system that would involve creativity and scientific considerations.
As a theory, decision making is concerned with a second thought approach.
It advocated that a set of series of steps is necessary for good decision making.
However it is worth noting that it identifies the best of so many alternatives that are available.
3.2 Values to be Considered when Making Decision As suggested by Frinzi and Savini (1997), the following values are to be considered when making decision.
They essenti ally provide benchmark ethical decision making:  Caring means treating people as ends in themselves not as means to an end.
As an administrator or manager/supervisor imbued with power, self-restraint and discipline are necessary to treat employees with compassion / courtesy and dignity.
 Honesty means being trustful and not deceiving as accountability means accepting the consequence of one’s actions.
 Promise keeping means honouring your commitments and standing up to promises made to employees, clients and local communities.
 Pursuit of excellence means striving to do the best work you can.
 Loyalty means being faithful to those with whom one has dealings scrupulously avoiding undue influence and conflicts of interest.
 Fairness means being open-minded willing to admit error, and not taking advantage of author’s adversities.
It means avoiding arbitrary or capricious favouritism.
 Integrity means being faithful to your deepest beliefs and acting on them.
17  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  Respect for others means treating people with dignity.
Be courteous and prompt and provide others with the information they need to make informed decisions.
 Responsible citizenship means the action should be in accord with the societal values.
3.3 Steps in Decision Making The following constitutes the basic steps in making decision: 1.
There must be a state of nature or decision making environment.
2.
A decision maker must exist.
3.
The goal or end to be served must be comprehended e.g.
where are you going?
4.
The relevant alternative and the set of actions from which a choice will have to be made.
Simply you must have alternatives.
5.
There must be relations which produce an ordering of alternatives, where you can rank alternative.
6.
The choice itself: This is the selection of one or combination of alternatives.
7.
The goals have to be set.
8.
Identify the problem.
9.
Selection of one course of action from the alternatives.
10.
The decision m aker must be ready to accept responsibility for his action.
3.4 Types of Decision Making Decision making processes may not follow all the steps listed above.
While some steps could be combined some could be omitted, depending on the circumstances surrounding the decision making, the decision- maker as well as the environment.
18  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT The decision-making process can either be: (i) closed (ii) open (iii) happy medium 1.
The closed type involves basically what to do and how to do it, but not why?
It does not involve many people or any elaborate participatory activity.
2.
Open type on the other hand is more participatory and the inputs of several people are considered with reasons and even involve research in some cases before taking final decision.
3.
The third type, happy medium is between the closed and open systems.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 Highlight 4 values that need to be considered as benchmark for ethical decision making.
3.5 Factors Affecting Decision-making Process Decisions should result from staff discussions and recommendations.
Decision making depends on the following factors: - confidence in the subordinates - competence of the subordinates - power and authority given to the decision maker - ability to accept responsibility.
Confidence in the subordinates To make a rational decision, one has to ensure the workability of that decision as being fair, realistic and related to the condition o f concerned subordinates the decision will affect/directs.
This will make the deci sion to be operational and functional as to achieving the organisational goals/objectives.
19  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Competence of the subordinate The subordinates to work with need to be versed or competent in the needed areas which the superior/administrator will decide upon.
This is very necessary to ensure that works which will be assigned to different positions are such that the personnel (subordinates) have expertise in.
Power and authority given to the decision maker Decisions make work and helps in the realisation of organisational objectives, especially if adequate or commensurate power and authority back them.
Ability to accept responsibility The receptivit y or ability to accept res ponsibility affects to a great extent the decision making system and the types of decision to be made.
One of the causes of weakness to accept authority is passing unrealistic instruction.
Decision on issues need to be realistic, attainable and worthwhile such that will be accepted by subordinate all things being equal, with a commensurate authority and power.
3.6 Basic Phases in Decision Making The basic phases in making decision are: 1. proper diagnosis of problem 2. conceiving one or more solution(s) 3. projecting and comparing the consequences of different alternatives 4. selecting the most beneficial of these alternatives 3 implementing the selected alternatives 4 evaluating the different sets of consequences and selecting a course of action.
It is worth noting however, that it is not easy to make a final choice even when the problem has been defined and identified.
To make a sound group decision, vis-à-vis complex organisation is quite a formidable challenge.
20  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.7 Some Useful Processes Aiding Effective Decision Making in Extension Organisation The processes below are useful to assisting groups, particularly extension organisation to meet the challenge of making decision.
1.
Brainstorming: This is a group decision making process where negative feedback on any suggested alternative by any group member is forbidden until all members are, in-equivocal language, found valuable.
At this interactive session, views and opinion while an appointed member serving as secretary records all ideas for general discussion.
They are to weigh or evaluate the recorded ideas and finally choose the most promising alternative.
2.
Nominal group technique: In this approach, each group member has equal participation to make group decision.
The approach involves these four major steps: - each member writes down individual ideas on the problem or decision at stake; - each m ember oral ly presents his ideas.
The idea presented will be written on a board for every other member to see and refer to; - general discussion which is unstructured and spontaneous indeed with fellow individual presentation; - on the completion of general discussion, secret ballot will be taken as to allow members to support their ideas without any fear.
The idea that will be adopted and implemented will eventually be the one that receives the most votes; and 3.
Delphi technique: This approach involves the use of circulated questionnaire meant to elicit responses, which will be analysed.
The result of the circulated questionnaire will be re-circulated until a consensus concerning the problem is reached.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 List the basic phases in decision making process.
21  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.8 Implication of Decision Making Theory to the Extension Manager/Administrator Effectiveness of organisation rests on the judicious utilisation of available resources.
The parameters for setting priorities hinge on the rational decision making in the extension organisation.
It therefore follows that a kind of decision an administrator/manager makes determines his level of performance and the general effectiveness.
Open system approach, where decisions result from staff decision is recommended.
Extension administrators should therefore confine themselves in most cases, to making decisions on the open type process rather than the irrational closed type.
Decisions on the open type pro cess are not usually widely accepted but highly sustainable.
4.0 CONCLUSION The performance of an organisation is usuall y measured by effectiveness which invariably depends on the extent at which a rational decision is made.
To therefore make a wise, rational, and widely accepted decision which is sustainable indeed, extension managers/administrators are charged with the responsibility of making decisions that result from staff discussion (Open System).
5.0 SUMMARY Decision making theory is constru ed to mean a process of identifying the best course of action among different alternatives before taking a decision for organisational operation.
The unit discussed some major steps for making organisation decision, such as problems identification, consideration of alternatives, weighing and highlighting in order of importance the values of alternatives before the final choice is made.
Three types of decision m aking processes; open / closed and in between the open and closed (Happy medium) were identified.
This theory holds that the decision making process that could bring success to the organisational goals/objectives is collective and democratic approach (open system).
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is decision making theory?
2.
Discuss briefly three types of decision making approach.
3.
Highlight the stages involved in decision making process.
4.
What values are to be considered in making ethical decision in extension management?
22  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 5.
Explain the factors affecting decision making process in extension management.
6.
What are the implications of decision making theory to extension management?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adereti, F.O.
; Torimiro, D.O.
; Ojo, T.F.
and Okorie, V.O.
(2008).
‘Administration and supervision in Extension’.
Akinyemiju, O.A.
and Torimiro, D.O.
[eds].
Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treatise.
Lagos: ABC Agricultural System Limited.
Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Limited.
Aromolaran, E.A.
(2000).
Fundamental of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech.
Ogunbameru, O.B.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 23  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 SOCIAL PROCESS THEORY AND HUMAN RELATIONS THEORY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Social Process Theory 3.2 Implication of the Social Process Theory for Extension Management 3.3 Concept of Human Relations Theory 3.4 Package of Effective Human Relation 3.4.1 Hygiene Factors 3.4.2 Motivational Factors 3.5 Characteristics of the Human Relations Theory 3.6 Principles Emerged from Human Relations Theory 3.7 Implications of the Human Relations Theory for Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The social process theory as a theory of administration is based on the concept that the focal system consists of several sub-units in the environment and that all these units are inter-related.
Human relations theory is another contribution of human behavioural attitude towards the realisation of organisational objectives.
It is considered important in respect of its view to take cognisance of individual differences.
What some people see as being simple, trivial or unimportant may have far reaching impacts on the achievement of organisational goal.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of social process theory  state the implication of social process theory to Extension  explain human relations theory  state the characteristics or features of human relations theory  state the principles emerged from human relation theory  discuss the implications of human relation theory to Extension management/administration.
24  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Social Process Theory The concept of this theory is based on the concept of social system.
The proponents conceded that as the social system is made up of social different elements, so is organisation made of several units or departments.
An organisation is a set of articulated sub-units linked together to obtain the wherewithal and each sub-unit cannot act in complete isolation.
Many years ago, Hawtherne conducted experiments with administrators and supervisors and came up with the social process theory.
He established the concept of organisation as a social system.
The theory is based on the philosophy which accepts organisational behaviour as a variable.
In management or administration, this theory takes the position that an organisation is a complex of mutually dependent variable forming in and related to a social field.
These variables are persons, their motives, attitudes, beliefs, sentiments, job activities, the physical work setting, facilities, and the organisation itself.
All these factors and more are related in a complex whole.
In this regard, both formal and informal organisations lose their distinctiveness and thus find exact meaning in terms of human behaviour and operational system in totality.
Emphasis was therefore laid on units in isolation of each other.
The theory therefore emphasises the interrelationship among the parts rather than the component part in isolation of each other stressing on position, roles, functions and activities as well as the articulation of all these to achieve the objective of the organisation.
3.2 Implication of the Social Process Theory for Extension Management It is to be noted that one organisation consists of several sections that jointly work towards the attainment of the set objectives.
It therefore follows that a good manager or administrator must identify the units and the forces binding the units together with a view to protecting, supporting, encouraging, shaping, sharpening, repairing and amending these forces to ensure the realisation of organisational objectives.
Extension agents therefore need to be conscious of this theory in order to discharge satisfactorily the duties expected of them.
3.3 Human Relations Theory This theory tells us that any organisation will try to get the best from its employee and vice-versa.
It suggests the ability of the individual to fit into another man’s shoes and be able to see things in another’s point of view.
This calls for being broad in mind.
The theory connotes the interaction of people in terms of endeavour and th e integration of people 25  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT to work cooperatively and satisfactorily.
In another angle, the theory suggests that the primary role of the administrator is to motivate them to be efficient in their work.
3.4 Package of Effective Human Relation Mayol and Taylor proposed that there are other things aside wages that can increase workers satisfaction.
They refer to these two things into “package of effective human relations”.
They are: (1) hygiene factors; and (2) motivational factors 3.4.1 Hygiene Factors These factors are intrinsic and not the physical aspects of the job that will make workers happy and be more productive.
Examples are job situation, job enrichment programme, job satisfiers and others.
3.4.2 Motivational Factors These are things that can force you to stick to the job.
They are things that compel one to stay on the job.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Discuss briefly the implication of social process theory for extension management.
3.5 Characteristics of the Human Relations Theory The human relations theory is concerned with the following features: 1.
Work is determined by social capacity as well as ph ysical and mental capability of employee.
2.
Non-economical merits: for instance complimentary words are important because they bring happiness.
Self esteem, certificates of merit and service awards, etc.
are other examples in this regard.
3.
High specialisation is not always the most efficient reason for division of labour.
This is contrary to functional theory position.
26  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 4.
Workers do not react as individuals to management but as informal groups, exerting pressures and control through group bargaining.
5.
In any organisation, emphasis is placed on roles of common participation in decision making and shared democratic leadership.
3.6 Principles Emerging from the Human Relations Theory From the human relation theory, the following principles have emerged: 1.
Supervisors should be employee conscious (supervision should be employer oriented).
This is opposite to the functional theory even when individual objective should be satisfied.
2.
Supervisors should delegate responsibility and accomplish it with power and authority.
3.
Supervisors should give freedom in the way the employees do their job noting significantly that two people will not approach a problem the same way.
4.
Individuals are different and should therefore be considered as such when motivating them to work.
Managers or administrators should not over-drive people to work and should not treat all persons in the sense manner.
3.7 Implications of the Human Relations Theory for Extension Management 1.
Following the major concept or assumption that in a typical extension work situation, most especially at the management level, employees are skilled, have salaries above subsistence and are more in need of ego gratification, p ersonal recognition should be emphasised in supervision and administration.
2.
Extension workers, being change agents need to have good knowledge of human relations (empathy), and should be client- oriented.
They should give adequate reason for any action taken and give room for clientele participation.
As they are purpose- riented they must equally be client oriented.
27  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION To achieve substantial success in any organisation, administrations have to appreciate, coordinate and articulate units that make up the organisation.
And more importantly, following the idea of human relations theory, a good manager has to combine various aspects of management in his activities such as human, economic, technological and legal aspects for him to succeed.
5.0 SUMMARY The social process theory was construed as a social system consisting several different units or variables.
The organisation as well is made up of several different units or departments.
Identified variables in the organisation include, persons, their motives, attitudes, beliefs, sentiments, job activities, etc.
which are to be effectively coordinated and articulated in order to achieve the organisation goals.
Human relation on the other hand is seen as a guide of human activity in relationship with their efforts on many people.
It emphasises employee consciousness, delegation of authority, freedom in the way emplo yees do their job and recognition of individual differences.
The unit also noted that hygiene and motivational factors have to be put in place in order to achieve substantial success in any organisation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is social process theory?
2.
State the implication of social process theory to Extension management.
3.
Explain the concept of human relation theory.
4.
Discuss briefly the characteristics of human relation theory.
5.
Explain the basic principles involved in Human Relations Theory.
6.
What are the implications of human relation theory to Extension?
28  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adereti, F.O.
; Torimiro, D.O.
; Ojo, T.F.
and Okorie, V.O.
(2008).
‘Administration and supervision in Extension’.
Akinyemiju, O.A.
and Torimiro, D.O[eds]..
Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treatise.
Lagos: ABC Agricultural System Limited.
Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Limited.
Aromolaran, E.A.
(2000).
Fundamental of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech.
Eldred, Eric (1999).
Nathaniel Hawthorne’s Best Known Works.
(804 – 1864).
Eldrick Press/ http://www.eldritch press.or/nh/hawthorne.
htm/.
Ogunbameru, O.B.
(2004).
Organisational Dynamics.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 29  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 FUSION THEORY AND THEORIES X, Y AND Z CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Fusion Theory 3.2 Some Basic Concepts of Fusion Theory 3.3 Implication of Fusion Theory 3.4 Theory of X and Y 3.5 Characteristics of Individuals Belonging to X and Y Groups 3.6 Theory Z 3.7 Basic Assumptions of Theory Z 3.8 Implications of these Theories in Extension Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/ Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, we shall be discussing another important theory which explains how organisation socialises individuals and how individuals on the other hand personalises the organisation.
This is treated under the theory X, Y and Z which are the scientific management factors used in predicting human behaviour.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of fusion theory  state the implication of fusion theory to extension management  explain the concepts of theories X, Y and Z  highlight the basic assumptions of theory Z  discuss the implication of theory Y and Z on extension management.
30  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Fusion Theory The Fusion Theory as proposed by Max Weber is based on simultaneous socialisation and personalisation going on between emplo yees and employers.
The theory postulates that organisation (employers) tries to socialise the individuals (emplo yees) while the individuals try to personalise the organisation.
Below is a diagrammatic representation of the process.
Employee Intercept Organisation/Employers Fig.
5.1: Simultaneous Socialisation and Personalisation between Employers and Employees Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
An organisation tends to maintain and express the uniqueness and wholeness that characterises it and will try to impress its pattern upon the individual and make him an agent for the realisation of its organisational goals.
This process has been referred to as the socialising process.
Certain attitudes are inbuilt in the mentors of the organisation to ensure cognisance which will assist in the achievement o f organisational goal regardless of what it takes and how.
3.2 Sub-basic Concepts of Fusion Theory Given the tradition of the human relations theorists, the broad view of fusion theory focuses on the problem of the individual goals and organisational concepts such as:  Socialisation This is the process by which all organisation attempts to restructure the individual as an agent for the accomplishment of its goals.
 Personalisation This is the process by which the individual tries to use the organisation as a medium through which to achieve personal objectives.
31  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT The two tents are pitched together against each other.
One is always trying to gain the upper hand.
Management/administration should always make sure no one is on top, thus no winners, no losers.
Each continues to benefit in an effort to achi eve its own objective.
There is a suggestion as regards the theory that the process is not a “zero-sum game”.
That the greatest benefit accrues to both parties when fusion is accomplished.
In reality, this point can never be achieved completely due to the fact that either side will never agree to be completely satisfied.
1 2 3 4 1 = Initial Position of Individual and Organisation 2 and 3 = Fusion in Progress 4 = Fusion almost completed, i.e.
the final stage.
Fig.
5.2: Diagrammatic Representation of the Fusion Process Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
3.3 Implication of the Fusion Theory The struggle for supremacy and optimum satisfaction of organisational objectives and individual goals is a necessity for internal harmony and progress.
However, the satisfaction of the employees as well as employers should be improving, dynamic (not static or deteriorating).
3.4 Theory of X and Y This theory as explained by McGregor (1960) connotes that scientific management and administration can predict and control human behaviour.
He developed some basic assumptions about the nature of men especially in the work environment.
In other words, human behaviour in any working environment depends on the type of administrative management employed on the individual.
Theory X involves negative assumptions about people that McGregor believes managers often use as the basis for dealing with their subordinates (for example the average person has an inherent dislike of work and will avoid it whenever he or she can).
Theory Y represents positive assumptions about people that McGregor believes managers should 32  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT strive to use (for example people will exercise self-discretion and self- control in meeting their objectives).
3.5 Characteristics of Individuals Belonging to X and Y Groups X group Y group 1.
The average man hates work.
1.
The average man has positive attitude towards work.
2.
The average man has to be 2.
The average man achieves forced, coerced, controlled or highest level of performance even threatened to perform at through integration, initiative desired level.
and inherent interest.
3.
The average man avoids 3.
The average man has self- responsibilit y and therefore control and sense of prefers to be controlled.
responsibility.
4.
The average man has 4.
The average man has basic commitment to objectives as needs and he works through function of expected rewards or motivation, commitment, punishment, i.e.
he can only satisfaction and self-direction work if he is going to be to meet these needs.
rewarded for doing so or not.
5.
In an industrial setting, less 5.
Self-actualisation through self- than the full potential of the initiative and personal individuals is actually utilised.
development.
Principles Derived from X Principles Derived from Y Control and direction through the Integration, creating a situation in exercise of power and authority.
which an individual can achieve his goal (through self-ambition, desire, initiative) while meeting organisational objectives.
Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
These theories (X and Y) are operationalised depending on the kind of organisation on e is working.
It should be noted that human behaviour in any working environment can be moulded depending on the type of administrative management approach employed on the individual.
33  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.6 Theory Z Theory Z states that there is no situation where you have either of both X and Y to be completel y in operation.
In other words, regardless of the proportion, both types of characteristic behaviour will occur among any group of people.
Hence, it is referred to as “reconciliatory theory” between individuals (producers) and the employers (consumers).
The position of theory Y is that the individual and the organisation are always in conflict because of the dual role as consumer and producer.
The role of the administrator in any organisation is therefore to collate the aggregate potential of individual consumers and producers to meet the demand of the organisation.
3.7 Basic Assumptions of Theory Z 1.
The management is responsible for organising all the elements for production in a free enterprise society of producers and consumers.
2.
That the process involves network of decision and communication through which management facilitates production and satisfaction of consumer needs.
3.
That man as consumer insists that technology and its results be made available to him.
4.
That man does not resist change unless he is threatened by it through the loss of his job, change of work pattern or limitation of his liberty.
5.
That th e administrative process which theory Z possess overcome its difficulties by discipline and confidence through a precise system of communication and assurance that the organisation is out to secure the worker’s welfare.
3.8 Implications of these Theories in Extension The value of this theory emerges from its main principle which suggests that in any group of people, there are some that would not naturally like to be protective unless they are forced to the situation.
Similarly, there are some that are protective and dedicated inherently.
It therefore follows that a manager or superior should be charged with the responsibility of detecting members of both groups and encourage them through motivation, training and remuneration for efficiency.
34  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION Fusion theory rests principally on the premise of increasing satisfaction of employees as that of employers too is increasing.
Theory X denotes that payee can only work through the exercise of power and authority but Y can achieve their goals with self ambition without force while theory Z disagreed with the two stating that none of the two is operational rather what we have is a mixture.
5.0 SUMMARY The fusion theory entails that in any organisation, the employer tries to socialise employees and equally, the employees tries to personalise the employers.
The management should ensure no one is completely on top in the two.
The satisfaction of the employees should increase while that of employers should also be increasing.
The theory XY however opined that scientific management can predict and control human behaviour.
The emerging principle from X is that people work well only when there is power and authority.
For Y emerges the fact that some are inherently productive.
With theory Z, the position is that there is no group of people where you have either complete X or Y cases.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the concept of fusion theory.
2.
State the implication of fusion theory to Extension management.
3.
Explain the concepts of theory X, Y and Z.
4.
What are the basic assumptions of theory Z?
5.
Discuss the implications of theory Z to Extension management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adereti, F.O.
; Torimiro, D.O.
; Ojo, T.F.
and Okorie, V.O.
(2008).
‘Administration and Supervision in Extension’.
Akinyemiju, O.A.
and Torimiro, D.O.[eds].
Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treatise.
Lagos: ABC Agricultural System Limited.
Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Limited.
Aromolaran, E.A.
(2000).
Fundamental of Management.
Lagos: BLV Print Tech.
Eldred, Eric (1999).
Nathaniel Hawthorne’s Best known Works.
(804 – 1864).
Eldrick Press.
35  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT MODULE 2 EXTENSION ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE AND MANAGEMENT PROCESSES Unit 1 Extension Organisational Structure Unit 2 Basic Process of Management in Extension Unit 3 Personnel Management – Staffing in Extension Organisation Unit 4 Training and Development of Staff in Extension Organisation Unit 5 Supervision in Extension Organisation UNIT 1 EXTENSION ORGANISATIONAL STRUC TURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Organisational Structure 3.2 Determinants of the Organisation 3.3 Features of Organisational Structure 3.4 Departmentalisation 3.4.1 Criteria for Departmentation 3.5 Types of Organisation Structure 3.6 Various Forms of Representing Organisational Structure 3.7 Uses of Organisational Structure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Organisational structure deals with organisational assignments in an enterprise.
At a glance, the structure of an organisation will show the relationships existing between personnel of an organisation, with emphasis on the positions existing within the organisation.
Among the factors to consider in developing an organisational structure include departmentalisation, types of organisational structure, forms of representing organisational setup and the uses of organisational structure.
36  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define organisational structure  explain briefly the determinants of organisational structure  define departmentalisation and discuss the criteria for departmentalisation  discuss the types of organisational structure in Extension management  highlight forms of representing organisational structure  discuss the uses of organisational structure.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Organisational Structure The structure of an organisation otherwise known as its organogram is defined as the pattern of authority, the division of labour as well as the channels of communication among participants.
Organisational structure is the structure of relationships, responsibilities and authorities through which an organisation achieve its objectives.
The organisational structure comprises the formal communication channels through which decisions and instruction flow downwards, and reports flow upwards informing administrators how well the objectives formulated are being achieved.
3.2 Determinants of the Organisation In the management process, activities are classified into bund les or units of duties that can be assigned to individuals or groups in the organisation, all streamlined towards attainment of goals.
This process determines the organisational structure.
In designing an organogram, managers (administrators) need to take into account the following: - specialisation; - limitation of functional authority; and - problems of communication and a variety of other specialised aspects of organisations.
37  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Organisational structure can be developed by considering the following: - Division into major operating units.
That is, primary departmentalisation.
- Focus of operating authority.
That is, focusing on units most especially the levels at which decisions for operation are made.
- Facilitating units that are needed to guide and assist those charged with primary operating tasks.
- Provision for top management functions.
- Arrangement of the structure that aids simplicity and consistency in the smooth running of the organisation.
3.3 Features of Organisational Structure The administrative functions of organising include delineating b y showing or describing or portraying and grouping of task or works for individuals.
It defines the established relationship between individuals filling different position and performing different tasks.
Questions from the above generalisation include: i.
How should activities be divided and grouped for easy performance and administration e.g.
easy supervision, control and coordination?
ii.
What should guide the creation of department, sections and units and how should activities be assigned?
iii.
What sub-divisions and units should be created?
iv.
What relationship between individual and groups should be used or exist e.g.
formal and informal?
v. What duties and authority should be delegated since there should be delegation of duty?
vi.
How much decentralisation is necessary?
vii.
What special positions are necessary to be created and scraped to place the agency into workable units e.g.
by setting up committees or introducing evaluation system or audit department etc.?
38  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE State 4 factors to be considered in developing an organisational structure.
3.4 Departmentalisation Departmentalisation is defined as a process of grouping similar activities together to form a unit or department.
3.4.1 Criteria for Departmentalisation Grouping of activities into a unit can be done acco rding to the following criteria:  Activities: Kind of activities to be performed in an organisation such as information, engineering, secretariat, maintenance, etc.
can be used to departmentalise organisations.
 Specifiying of Function: Skilled job requiring specific function(s) can be used to classify departments.
Examples are establishment, security, accounts, etc.
 Customs of the Organisation: This involves using age or gend er factors to delineate the organisation.
For instance, we may have children, men, women sections as it operates in hos pital, and men or women extension group as in extension organisation for purposive issues in extension services.
 Time/Duty Roster: In some cases, units may be classified on the basis of running shifts such as morning, afternoon or night workers.
 Location: Grouping may at times be done based on the geographical location as we may have branches in different parts of the country, state or locality.
In describing the units, the use of cardinal points, such as South, East, North or West or combination of these can be used.
 Product handling: In some large organisations different types of products can be used for the classification.
For instance at National Cereals Research Institute, Badefigi, Niger State, there exist units/sections of rice; maize; cowpea and sugar cane.
It is very important to note, however, that each department cannot exist or function in isolation.
All departments are meant to jointly coordinate, 39  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT supplement and contribute towards the realisation of organisational goals, objectives and aspirations.
There is the need for constant receiving and re-examination of primary departmentalisation taking into account the change in development, policy and other important source.
Most extension organisations are run by government ministries along departmental lines, divided geographically by area.
They have three or more levels: a director in headquarters; assistant directors at the regional or state level.
As staff members grow in number, other layers are added at the lower levels.
T his type of “tall structure is shown in fig.
1.
1 below showing the classical hierarchical form by which man has directed and enrolled his fellow in secretes as diverse as traditional Nigerian kingdoms and modern industrial states.
National Director of Agriculture Provincial Director District DEO DEO DEO DEO District Extension Officer Subdivision Subdivision SEO SEO SEO Extension Officer Locality Area AEO AEO AEO AEO Area Extension Officer Village Village VEW VEW VEW VEW VEW Extension Worker Farmers’ FG FG FG FG FG FG FG Group Fig.
1.1: A Tall Organisational Structure Source: Adams, M.E.
(1982).
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
40  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT To prevent impediment in the flow of information from the field to headquarters, new departments often have to be created to have a flat organisational structure as shown in fig 1.2 below.
General Manager Project Project Project Manager Manager Manager Extension EW EW EW EW EW EW EW Worker Fig.
1.2: A Flat Organisational Structure Source: Adams, M.E.
(1982).
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
3.5 Types of Organisational Structure 1.
Line Organisation Here, direct line authorities are clearly indicated illustrating the principle of unit of command.
The lines of authority flow vertically from top to bottom in an organisation’s structure.
manager (line manager) subordinate messenger The direct line of authority also indicates f ormal communication channel in an organisation.
It is a non-specialist type of organisation i.e.
various functions as opposed to a single line function are allocated to each line manager.
A line organisation is usually suitable for a smaller establishment.
2.
Staff Organisation The term staff could be used to describe the activities of personnel who are either acting in the capacity of assistance to an executive or in an advisory capacity, for example, specialist in personnel and legal matter.
41  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT It is important to note that an organisation can not be built on the basis of staff structure alone.
3.
Functional Organisation In practice, it is not possible to have such an organisation because the term “functional” relates to the organisation of work on the basis of specialisation.
A purely functional organisational structure implies that each specialist conveys his instruction directly to personnel rather than through the chains of command.
In this type of structure the personnel have too many specialists giving orders to them thereb y causing confusion.
But if the duties of each speci alist are well defined, there will be no conflicting orders.
4.
Line and Staff Organisation This involves a line organisation with specialist advisers.
These specialist advisers are functional managers who assist line managers in the performance of their responsibilities.
These line managers are free to concentrate on their works or tasks but are aided by functional managers in some areas which include personnel, accounting and technical services.
5.
Committee Organisation A committee consists of a group of persons formed for a specific purpose.
Some committees make decisions which are carried out by executives, for instance, Board of Directors.
In some cases, committees are formed for the purpose of making recommendations on the type of actions to follow.
Therefore, decision making responsibility is not that of one person but of the group which is facilitated by the pulling of ideas and judgement.
And as such, decisions may be the result of compromise.
However, it is worth noting that committee decision may impede the development of managers as decision may be delayed by too many deliberations.
42  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.6 Various Forms of Representing Organisational Structure Organisational structure may be represented in any of the following forms: 1.
Conical Type Members of Director Management Senior Staff Intermediate Staff Junior Staff Fig.
1.3: Conical Type Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration This type is like a cone divided into horizontal segments, where each segment represents a particular department and the hierarchy is from top to bottom.
2.
Pie-Chart Type Directors Junior Staff Management Senior Staff Intermediate Staff Fig.
1.4: Pie-chart Type Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration 43  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Here, the whole circle represents the entire organisation where each segment proportionally represents the department or unit in the organisation.
Seniority is determ ined from the labels.
3.
Pyramid or Ladder Type Most Senior Officer Most Junior Officer Fig.
1.5: Pyramid or Ladder Type Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration With this shape seniority is from top to bottom.
It is the most popular shape of representing an organogram.
4.
Hydra Type DD D D = Director DD = Deputy Director M = Messenger or lowest staff member DD M Fig.
1.6 Hydra Type Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration 44  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT This type is similar to the pyramid type as it shows the hierarchical position of the entire staff with the exception of the most senior at the extreme left and the most junior at the extreme right.
5.
Spore Type Management Directorate Senior Staff Intermediate Staff Junior Staff Fig.
1.7: SporeTtype Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration This type emphasises the proportions of the different departments or units and the labels show the seniority.
3.7 Uses of Organisational Structure The uses of organisational structure cannot be undermined.
It helps to define and clarify lines of responsibility and authority to facilitate full mobilisation of talents, and to maintain efficient reporting system.
This significance is feasible and dependable with flexibility, modifiability explicitly, and constant reception of the underlining principles.
Other significance of organogram are: i. serving as a useful tool for presenting or representing the overall setup of the organisation to people at a glance ii.
describing positions, roles, functions and activities of the staff and shows their inter-relationship in the organisation 45  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT iii.
facilitating control, coordination, delegation, motivation, staff appraisal, preparation and execution of budget as well as general supervisory functions iv.
laying out vertical and horizontal communication channels v. enhancing healthy rivalry among units/departments through comparison and aspiration for increased production and remuneration vi.
preventing overlaps or gaps in functioning vii.
enhancing rapid growth as some un its can expand rapidly thereb y become autonomous.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit has discussed organisational structure as a pattern of arrangement of employees in an organisation where the responsibility of each employee is spelt out.
5.0 SUMMARY Organisational structure is construed to explain how each sub -unit of the organisation is classified and arranged, and how they work jointly to achieve the desired goals/objectives.
The benefits and factors to be considered in designing organisational structure, criteria for departmentation, types of organisational structure, and forms of representing organisational structure as well as the uses of organisational structure are also explained in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is organisational structure?
2.
Explain the determinants of organisational structure in extension services.
3.
Define departmentalisation and discuss the criteria for departmentalisation.
4.
Discuss the main types of organisational structure in extension.
5.
Highlight and present the forms of representing organisational structure in extension management.
6.
What are the uses of organisational structure in Extension services?
46  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING Adams, M.E.
(1982).
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
Burnt Mill, Harlow, Essex: Longman.
Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press.
Griffin, R.W.
(1992).
Management (4th ed).
Texas: Houghton Miffin Compan y, A.M. Universit y. Madkwe, M.C.
(2005).
‘Agricultural Extension Administration.’ Adedoyin S. (ed) Agriculture Extension in Nigeria.
Ilorin: AESON Ogungbemeru, B.O.
(2001) Practical Agricultural Administration.
Lagos: Kuntel Publishing House.
47  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 BASIC PROCESS OF MANAGEMENT IN EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Basic Process or Functions of Management in Extension 3.2 Planning 3.2.1 Types of Planning Exercises 3.2.2 Activities under Planning 3.3 Organising 3.3.1 Phases of Organising 3.3.2 Assembling Resources (Staffing) 3.3.3 Activities of Assembling Resources (Staffing) 3.4 Supervising 3.4.1 Activities Involved in Supervising 3.4.2 Controlling 3.4.3 Activities Involved in Controlling 3.5 Key Performance Areas for Categories of Extension Personnel 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit intends to discuss the basic elements or functions involved in administrative process.
The d efinitions, activities involved as well as the sequential steps for carrying out major functions are treated.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define and explain the types of planning  state the activities involved in planning  explain the concept of organising and highlight the activities involved  discuss the concept of assembling resources and state the activities involved in the process  identify the core Extension area and state the job performance of each level  define controlling and state in sequential order the activity involved in it.
48  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Process or Functions of Management in Extension The processes of administration are the major functions performed by administrators/managers.
To therefore analyse what an administrator does is to know the what and how of administration.
This is involved in the following basic processes such as; planning, organising, assembling recourses, supervising and controlling.
3.2 Planning This is a key management function of any extension administrator.
It entails determining in advance what should be done, when, by whom, how and at what cost.
Planning is the process of determining the organisational goal and objectives and making the provisions for their achievement.
3.2.1 Types of Planning Exercises There are four major types of planning exercises.
These include: 1. strategic planning; 2. tactical planning; 3. contingenc y planning; 4. managerial planning.
Strategic Planning This involves determining the basic objectives of an extension organisation and allocating resources for their accomplishment.
When doing strategic planning, the organisation should emphasise team planning b y involvin g those to be affected by the plan.
Through this, the administrator will be able to build an organisation with understanding and commitment to the strategic plan.
Strategic planning involves the following: - organisation’s mission statement – what strategic analysis – wh y strategic formulation – where – long-term objectives implementation – when – and operational plans (when) 49  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Tactical Planning This is concerned with implementing the strategic plans and involves middle and lower management.
Contingency Planning This anticipates possible problems or changes that may occur in the future and prepares to deal with them effectively as they arise.
Managerial Planning This is usually consid ered as micro-level planning.
It is the implementation of the strategic plan; the pooling of resources to fulfill the overall objectives and missions of the extension organisation.
3.2.2 Activities under Planning The major activities under planning are therefore in this logical sequence: 1. classifying of objectives 2. establishing of policies 3. mapping of programmes and campaigns 4. determining specific methods and procedures 5. fixing day-to-day schedules 6. surveying the environment 7. forecasting future situation 8. evaluating proposed actions 9. revising and adjusting the plan in the light of control of results and changing conditions 10. communicating throughout the planning period.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 Distinguish between strategic planning and managerial planning.
50  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.3 Organising Organising emerges from planning.
It is the process of establishing formal relationships among people and resources “in order to reach specific goals and objectives.
It is the setting out of the formal structure of authorit y and work flow in such a way that the work in the various sub-units, sections and branches are carefully arranged, clearly defined and effectively coord inated with a view to achieving the Extension organisational objectives.
Organising is extremely important to the Extension organisation because it is the primary mechanism used by administrators to activate plans.
In any organisation’s plan, extension administrators must choose an appropriate structure.
The organising stage provides directions for achieving the plan.
The process of organisation according to Marshall (1992) is based on these five principles: 1. unity of command 2. span of control 3. delegation of control 4. homogenous assignment 5. flexibility.
3.3.1 Phases of Organising The five components or principles above can best be managed or followed through in six sequential phases: Phase 1: Identify all activities necessary to accomplish organisational objectives Phase 2: Divide activities into homogeneous sub-groups Phase 3: Assign activities to organisation personnel Phase 4: Indicate job responsibilities in writing Phase 5: Assign adequate authority Phase 6: Ensure effective coordination of departments and personnel 51  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Phase 7: Revise and adjust the organisation in the light of control, result and changing conditions.
Phase 8: Communicate throughout the organisation process.
3.3.2 Assembling Resources (Staffing) Assembling resources involves recruiting and selecting personnel, and assigning personnel to jobs necessary for goal achievement.
A ke y aspect of an extension administrator’s success is to find the right people for the right jobs.
It is important to note that much of one’s success as an administrator is related to appropriate human resource planning.
3.3.3 Activities of Assembling Resources (Staffing) To provide appropriate human resources to fill both managerial and non- managerial openings in an extension organisation, the following activities should be followed sequentially: (1) Determine the human resources required (2) Recruit potential employees (3) Select from the recruits (4) Train and develop the human resources assembled (5) Revise and adjust both the quantity and quality (6) Communicate throughout the staffing process.
3.4 Supervising This is the process of assisting subordinate staff to do their job more satisfactorily.
It is concerned with the growth and improvement of extension personnel as individuals and as professional leaders.
A supervisor is therefore anyone responsible for the effective performance of a group of workers junior to his position.
3.4.1 Activities Involved in Supervising Supervising includes motivating, directing, coordinating, evaluating, etc.
through the spatial activities below:  giving directions that will produce desired results 52  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  issuing good instructions  following up instructions  explaining reasons for actions taken  motivating personnel  harmonising and coordinating programmes and policies  devising effective means of communication  instilling dominant objectives  encouraging informal contacts  coordinating via supervision.
3.4.2 Controlling Controlling is a systematic effort by management to compare performance to predetermined standards, plans or objectives in order to determine whether performance is in line with these standards and presumably to take any remedial action required to see that human and other corporate resources are being utilised in the most effective and efficient way.
It completes the administrative process and allows the manager to answer the questions such as “are goals being accomplished?” 3.4.3 Activities Involved in Controlling The sequence of activities in controlling is in this order: 1. set standards at strategic points 2. set standards for individual responsibility and note divisions 3. concentrate on important activities 4. use integrated budgets 5. concentrate on exceptions 6. observe personally 7. design reports for action 53  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 8. take corrective action 9. balance control structure.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 List 5 principles upon which organising is based.
3.5 Key Performance Areas for Categories of Extension Personnel A job description consists of many details but does not specify key areas which need attention.
It gives details of what is expected from the current job holder.
On the other hand, key performance areas are specific and show the critical functions relevant at present and for the future to achieve the objectives.
The core extension personnel of developing countries consist of the following: (1) village Extension workers (2) subject matter specialists (3) supervisory staff.
 Village Extension Workers People in this categor y do the following: 1. make regular and systematic visits to villages and farms to develop rapport with the clientele and to understand their problems 2. undertake educational activities in the form of meetings, campaigns, demonstrations, field days, training sessions and exhibitions 3. provide advisory services to the farmers and solve their production problems.
 Subject Matter Specialists The roles of these categories are to: 1. keep abreast of current recommendations and findings related to farm production by maintaining continuous contact with agricultural research stations; 54  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 2. provide feedback to the research system about farmers’ problems which need solutions; 3. train village extension workers on the latest farm technology and help them in solving field problems  Supervisory Staff or Extension Officers People holding these positions are to: 1. plan, organise, coordinate and implement extension programmes and activities 2. supervise and monitor the work of field staff, providing guidance, motivation, and evalu ation of performance 3. coordinate the programme with inter-and interdepartmental agencies.
4.0 CONCLUSION Individuals have distinguished roles to perform at managerial or administrative levels, irrespective of services rendered, products handling, location or time.
The operationalisation of elements- planning, organising, assembling of resources, supervising and controlling are indispensable.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the elements or functions of management which are generally referred to as management of administrative processes: planning, organising, assembly, resources, supervising and controlling are explained.
Peculiar functions/roles of core extension areas such as village extension workers, subject matter specialists and supervisory staff or extension officers were briefly highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is planning?
List and discuss the types of planning in extension management.
2.
State in sequential order the activities involved in extension management.
3.
Define organising and state the activi ties involved in the process.
4.
Explain the supervision process in extension administration.
List the order of the activities involved.
55  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 5.
What is controlling?
Itemise the major activities involved in the process.
6.
Identify the core categories of extension personnel and give two roles expected of personnel in each category.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akanni, J.A.
(1987).
Management: Concepts, Techniques and Cases.
Ibadan: Julab Publishers Ltd. Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press.
Adams, M.E.
(1982).
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
Burnt Mill, Harlow, Essex: Longman.
56  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT–STAFFING IN EXTENSION ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Personnel Management 3.2 Elements of Personnel Management in Extension Organisation 3.2.1 Staffing 3.3 Functions of Staffing 3.4 Manpower Planning 3.4.1 Why Organisational Manpower Planning?
3.4.2 Stages of Manpower Planning 3.5 Recruitment 3.5.1 When do We Recruit?
3.5.2 Types of Staff and Process of Identification of Staff on Extension Organisation 3.5.3 Key Performance Areas and Critical Attributes of Extension Personnel 3.5.4 Staff Selection 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In any organisation, be it private or public sector, personnel management is one of the most significant aspects of management, considering the fact that human beings constitute one of the major factors in the production process.
The success or failure in achieving organisational goals hinges on the effectiveness with which human resources are managed, harnessed and coordinated.
This unit however intends to discuss personnel management in extension organisation with particular emphasis on staffing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define personnel management  identify the main functions of management  define staffing and state the conditions when staffing are needed 57  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  discuss the concept of manpower planning as a fact in staffing  highlight the critical attributes of extension personnel to be considered for recruitment of staff  list and discuss the basic procedures in staff selection.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Personnel Management Personnel management like many other social science concepts is a phenomenon which scholars are yet to agree on a common definition.
It has been defined in various ways as: i.
How to get and keep workers – Here, the primary task of a personnel manager is to recruit employees of suitable caliber required to meet his organisation’s needs.
Having got this done, he is concerned with how to keep them happy so that they will want to stay; ii.
The process concerned with obtaining the best possible staff for an organisation and having got that, looking after them so that they will want to stay and do their best in the job.
However, in the modern approach, a more adequate definition has been advanced by Flippo (1965).
According to him, personnel management is the planning, organising, directing and controlling of the procurement, development, compensation, integration, maintenance and separation of human resources to the end that individual, organisational and societal objectives are accomplished.
From the foregoing scholar’s definition it could be conceived to mean the integration and coordination of human resources in order to move effectively towards the desired organisational goals (Ogungbameru, 2001) i.e.
a process of managing people and their activities towards the achievement of organisational objectives.
3.2 Elements of Personnel Management in Extension Organisation The functions or elements of personnel management include staffing, training and supervision.
3.2.1 Staffing Personnel management helps the organisation obtain suitably qualified and experienced personnel to perform the required job for the 58  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT organisation.
This area covers manpower planning, job descriptions, recruitment, selection, placement, personnel appraisal, transfer and promotions, termination and dismissal.
3.3 Functions of Staffing The staffing function consists of several elements such as manpower planning, recruitment and staff selection.
3.4 Manpower Planning Manpower planning is a process for determining and assuring that the organisation will have an adequate number of qualified persons, available at proper times, performing jobs which meet the needs of the enterprise and which provide satisfaction for the individuals involved.
Also, it could be seen as a process by which the firm ensures that it has the right kind of people in the right places, at the right time, doing things for which they are economicall y most useful.
3.4.1 Why Organisational Manpower Planning There are various reason s an organisation should have a manpower plan.
The most important is that the very environment in which an organisation operates is a very dynamic one, involving situations to which the organisations must adjust and adapt.
Also, there are constant shifts in technologies creating job openings in some industries.
A good example is the current wave of computerisation in many organisations in Nigeria, which requires the employment of computer literate staff.
Adequate manpower planning, the extent to which th e effect of changes can be anticipated and p lanned for can bring about better way of reducing possible adverse effects.
Changes should be anticipated and adequate planning towards recruitment, training and replacement of old and new staff must be made so as to have smooth and continued functioning of the organisation.
In every aspect of running an organisation, forward looking should be the role and this is even more important when talking about adequate manpower and the right type of manpower in a country like Nigeria where we have few technical and managerial skills.
3.4.2 Stages of Manpower Planning There are a number of stages in manpower planning.
They involve five sets of activities: 59  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 1.
Identification of the corporate objectives of the organisation.
2.
Evaluation of current manpower resources in the organisation.
3.
Forecasting manpower requirement within a given time (plan period).
4.
Implementation – bridging the gap between existing manpower resources and those required within the plan period.
5.
Auditing and adjustment.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 Give 3 reasons for manpower/human resource planning.
3.5 Recruitment This is the next phase to manpower or human resource planning in staffing.
It involves the creation of a pool of available labour from which the organisation can draw and then screen out those considered unfit for employment.
The prime aim here is to get the best available person in terms of qualification, experience, competence and suitability for the existing vacanc y.
3.5.1 When Do We Recruit?
Situations warranting staffing vary from time to time and conditions.
The following are such conditions under which personel are needed: 1.
Setting up an organisation right from the scratch needs people to work in it.
2.
When there is an expansion in the existing organisation, additional staff is needed to cope with additional scope and responsibility.
3.
When there is replacement of lost staff either through deaths, resignations, transfers, etc.
4.
Staffing is also expected to be done when there is a new innovation or when there is a creation of an entirely new uni t. 60  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.5.2 Types of Staff and Process of Identification of Staff on Extension Organisation The expected job to be performed in the organisation determines the staff to be employed.
Management therefore needs to put together detail of the types of tasks and quality of staff capable of performing them on a package.
This package is called job description.
Prior job description and job analysis has to be done.
Job analysis requires a systematic collection, evaluation, and organisation of information about the job.
This information is collected through interviews, mailed questionnaires, observation, study of records, and similar methods.
The collected information becomes a basis for preparing job descriptions and specifications Extension organisation in developing countries does not have clearly defined job specifications for extension personnel.
Thus, the training and visit system of extension considerably improves the preparation of job charts, work plans, and time-band work for different categories of extension personnel.
However, the actual utility of job descriptions in extension organisation is complicated by factors such as work overload, seasonality of extension, the range of cropping systems, and distribution of extension service over a large area.
Researches, by Hayward (1990) and Jihamtani and Singh (1989) reveal that extension agents are faced with work-related problems such as role ambiguity and lack of authority, expertise, and accountability.
This therefore implies that job analysis is needed to improve the performance and effectiveness of extension employees.
In essence, job analysis can more effectively contribute towards the development of extension personnel by identifying their key performance areas and critical attributes.
3.5.3 Key Performance Areas and Critical Attributes of Extension Personnel The key performance areas indicating the important roles and contributions of different categories of Extension personnel have been discussed in the previous unit.
Once the roles are delineated they can be analysed to indicate the attributes which can distinguish an effective from an ineffective role occupant.
These critical attributes consist of the following: 61  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT i.
Educational qualifications ii.
Skills iii.
Experience iv.
Physical characteristics v. Mental abilities vi.
Values vii.
Attitudes needed for Extension For the field-level and supervisory extension staff the critical attributes are: i.
Necessary formal training in agriculture ii.
Practical skills iii.
Experience in farming iv.
Knowledge of modern farm practices v. Abilities in group dynamics vi.
Human relations vii.
Communication skills For the extension supervisor basic skills related to management and leadership are needed.
However, values and attitudes such as: (i) faith in rural people (ii) commitment to agricultural developm ent and (iii) concern for the whole community are important for extension personnel.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 List 3 means for collecting information for job description 62  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.5.4 Staff Selection Having got the job description with notably required key performance areas and attributes of staff to be employed, the following procedures then follow: i. Advertisement This involves putting in newspaper, newsletters or even notice boar ds or in some cases relaying electronically the vacant positions to be filled.
ii.
Short listing Process This process starts after the last day of the entry for the job application by collating all the entries.
In some cases the unsolicited entries, if any, that is, those pending entries from the casual application in the office are collated.
All these applications are carefully scrutinized in line with the stipulated requirements in the advertisement.
Sequel to this is the invitation of successful applicants for interview.
iii.
Interview Process This is a process for screening the candidates so as to ascertain whether they are suitable for the position or otherwise, usually with the pre- agreed standard or parameters.
Here, areas such as family background, educational background, work experience, emotional stability, attitudes, health, physical appearance, integrity, anticipated remuneration are covered.
In some cases, written or oral tests could be employed to examine the smartness and or intelligence of the candidate.
At this level, a candidate must be briefed on the job contents expected of him/her if employed; allow to ask question(s) if any.
Each of the panelists has to grade each candidate from excellent, good, poor, very poor.
Appointment letters are then sent to the selected good performers.
It is to be noted that it may not be all good performers that can be selected and given appointment letters.
Some of the good performers who are not selected may be graded appointable and could later be contacted to replace some selected candidate who ma y not report for the job.
iv.
Induction This is another important phase of staff selection where the selected candidates report for duty in the organisation and made to undergo 63  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT organisational orientations.
This may last for a period of time, usually between two to three weeks.
At this period, the newly appointed staff are giving adequate information / briefing about the organisation; vis-à- vis the various sections / units, dos and don’ts of the organisation, with a view to preventing them from making costly mistakes on posting.
Close monitoring and watching is done on the newly appointed staffs to determine their potentiality and hence making appropriate placement or posting.
v. Placement Placement or posting is a process of putting staff on schedules of responsibility which they are most fitted.
To place the newly recruited staff appropriately, factors such as organisation objectives or needs, specialities and capacity of individual, job description capability, qualification, degree of temperament, technical competency, and desires of the individual are necessary to be considered.
The consideration of these factors would ensure both staff effectiveness and efficiency in the organisation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Considering the significance of staffing as a necessary tool for the effective performance of organisation, all necessary procedures have to be carefully and adequately followed in order to get qualified and suitable personnel towards the achievement of organisational goals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, personnel management is defined as the integration and coordination of human resources in order to move effectively towards defined organisational goals.
It is the management of people and their activities towards the achievement of the organisational objectives.
This consists of staffing, training and development as well as supervision of staff.
Staffing basically involves manpower planning (Human resources planning) where the needs of staff are looked into.
Also, recruitment exercise as per identifying the staff needed and job specifications in the organisation and selection pro cedures involving advertisement, shortlist, interview, induction and placement of staff are d iscussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is personnel management?
2.
Identify the m ain functions of personnel management.
3.
What is staffing?
64  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 4.
Discuss briefly the concept of manpower planning (human resources planning).
5.
Explain the process of recruitment of staff in an Extension organization.
6.
List and discuss briefly the p rocesses of staff selection.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, M.E.
(1982).
Agriculture Extension in Many Countries.
London: Bount Mill Harlow.
Aromolaran, E.A.
(2000).
Fundamentals of Management.
Lagos: BVL Printers.
French, W.L.
(1982).
The Personnel Management Process (5th ed.)
Boston: Houghton Miffin.
Hayward, J.A.
(1990).
‘Agriculture Extension: The World’s Bank’s Experiences and Approaches.’ B.E.
Swason (ed.)
Reporting the Global Consultation on Agriculture Extension.
Rome: FAO.
Jhamtani, A. and Singh, Y.P.
(1989).
‘Perceptual Variations of Individuals on Organisational Enhancement Dimension of a Development Department’.
India Journal of Extension Education.
B.O.
(2001).
Practical Agricultural Administration.
Lagos: Kuntel Publishing House.
Stoner, J.A.R and Freeman, R.E.
(1992).
Management (5th ed.)
New Delhi: Practice.
65  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT OF STAFF IN EXTENSION ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concepts of Training and Development in Extension Organisation 3.1.1 Training Procedure 3.1.2 Identification of Training Needs in Extension Organisation 3.1.3 Training Needs Anal ysis (TNA) 3.1.4 Selection of Staff 3.1.5 Conducting Training 3.1.6 On-the-job Evaluation 3.2 Methods of Training in Extension 3.2.1 Information Methods 3.2.2 Experimental Method 3.3 Types of Training 3.3.1 Pre-service Training 3.3.2 Induction Training 3.3.3 In-service Training 3.3.4 On- the- Job Training 3.4 Benefits of Training in Extension Organisation 3.5 Problems of Extension Training in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In every organisation the place of sound and effective staff is indispensable.
An organisation is as good as the people working in it.
This implies that if the staff of an organisation is good, that organisation must also be good.
It is therefore pertinent that the staff is well trained and developed to make them perform efficiently.
This unit discusses the concept of training and development, procedures and benefits involved.
66  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of training and development  list the steps involved in training procedures of staffs  mention and discuss the methods of training of staffs in Extension organisation  identify and discuss the two main types of training  highlight the benefits of training in Extension organisation  discuss the problems of effective training in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concepts of Training and Development in Extension Organisation Training, according to Ogunbameru (2004) means preparation for a specific task or role by ordered instruction.
It is a process whereb y people acquire capabilities to aid in the achievement of organisational goals.
Often times, training is being contrasted with education.
In simple terms, education is defined as the development of the mind, and it promotes an increase in the power of observation, analysis, integration, understudy and decision-making.
Training is however concerned with those activities which are designed to improve the performance of individuals on the job they are hired to do or being prepared for either as a job or new procedure or process.
Training therefore means to educate a person so as to be fit, qualified and efficient in doing his job.
It is a means or process of applying appropriate educational methodology to those situations in which improved performance can result from effective learnin g. Development on the other hand focuses on new capabilities useful for both present and future jobs.
It can be defined as a planned process of modifying attitude, knowledge or skill behaviour through learning experience to achieve effective performance in an activity or range of activities.
Simply put, it is a broader concept than training as training constitutes part of staff development.
Training and development of extension workers would therefore entail educational process of workers to b ring about a desirable change in th eir knowledge, skills, attitudes, values, belief or understanding for their continuous suitability into extension works.
This therefore calls for adequate mastery of technical subject matter and communication techniques on the part of extension agents.
67  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.1.1 Training Procedure To mount effective training in extension organisation, the following steps are essential viz.
: (1) assessment of training needs, identification of training needs and analysing training needs (2) designing relevant means to meet the needs (3) selection of staff (4) conducting the actual training; and (5) on-the-job evaluation of those who receive the training to determine its effectiveness 3.1.2 Identification of Training Needs in Extension Organisation Determination of training needs is the first step in training.
Needs analysis should be conducted in the context of a human resource planning programme and timely with relevant performance information.
The term ‘needs’ itself connotes the difference between the conditions of what is (what exists) and what should be (what is defined).
In this regard, needs imp lies a state of want; which exists as a desire to meet up with a targeted goal of effective achievement in the performance of job.
It therefore follows that when training needs is identified they would enhance a solid foundation for extension training.
The need assessment however connotes a systematic and objective determination of training needs that involves conducting three primary types of analyses which include job analysis, organisation and critical incident approach.
(a) Job Analysis – This entails breaking the activities of extension agents into different parts in order to reveal expected job, job doing as well as observing the areas needs to be improved upon.
(b) Organisation, Operations and Human Analysis: Organisation analysis shows the objectives, resources and the allocation of the resources in order to identify where training emphasis is placed in the organisation.
Operation analysis lays emphasis on what an employee must do in order to perform his job effectively while Human analysis on the other hand lays emphasis on the individual employee, determining the skills, knowledge and attitudes which he needs to develop.
These three are inseparable as they go hand in hand.
68  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT (c) Critical Incident Approach: This technique entails collection of direct observations of behaviour so as to solve practical problems and develop psychological principles for designing means to meet the needs.
3.1.3 Training Needs Analysis (TNA) Training Needs Analysis is conducted as a conclusion of the training needs identification through the analytical phases of job analysis, task analysis and knowledge and skill gap analysis.
(a) Job Analysis – Here, the various components of a job is clearly described (It involves identification of tasks of a particular job) using job questionnaire, observation, work sampling, group discussion and job audit techniques.
Below is a worksheet of a typical job analysis in extension organisation.
Sample Task Analysis Worksheet Job: Agriculture Extension Officer Task: Conducting training Components/steps Frequency Importance Difficulty Total Focus Performance b Learning score a Score c Establishing 5 3 1 9 - rapport Introducing the - - - - - topic Presenting the 5 3 1 9 - subject Maintaining - - - - - sequence Using A/V aids 5 3 4 12 Yes in lecture Summarising the 5 3 3 11 Yes lecture 1 = Seldom b 1 = Marginally important c 1 = Easy 2 = Moderately important 2 = Moderately important 2=Moderately difficult 3 = Weekly to monthly 3 = Extremely important 3 = Very difficult 4 = Daily to weekl y 4 = Extremely difficult 3 = Daily Source: Adapted and modified from Halim and Ali (1997) “Training and Professional Development” (b) Task Analysis – This step explores into finding the frequency, importance and learning difficulty for each step of the task.
The 69  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT score obtained in each component is put in the total column and the findings are explained with Extension personnel in the organisation.
Below is a sample of task analysis worksheet Sample Task Analysis Worksheet Job: Agriculture Extension Officer Task: Conducting training Components/steps Frequency Importance Difficulty Total Focus Performance b Learning score a Score c Establishing 5 3 1 9 - rapport Introducing the - - - - - topic Presenting the 5 3 1 9 - subject Maintaining - - - - - sequence Using A/V aids 5 3 4 12 Yes in lecture Summarising the 5 3 3 11 Yes lecture 1 = Seldom b 1 = Marginally important c1 = Easy 2 = Moderately important 2=Moderatelyimportant 2=Moderately difficult 3 = Weekly to monthly 3 = Extremely important 3 = Very difficult 4 = Daily to weekl y 4=Extremely difficult 3=Daily Source: Adapted and modified from Halim and Ali (1997) “Training and Professional Development” (c) Knowledge and Skill Gap Analysis – Here, the skillful and proficiency of individual employee in performing tasks in relation to the desired or expected level of performance is determined.
This will enable the organisation to ascertain whether the staff needs training or otherwise to avoid futile effort of duplicating training on the aspect trainees are already proficient in.
What is developmental therefore is to train staff on where they have low proficiency.
Having got a base, a review exercise is necessary to really be sure and establish categorically if it is the training that could solve the problem identified.
70  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Worksheet below shows a t ypical Skill-Gap analysis Skill-Gap Analysis Worksheet Job: Agriculture Extension Officer Task: Delivering lecture in VEWs Training Steps-components Level of Is Can problem be proficiencya proficiency solved by a trainingb problem?b Establishing rapport 1 2 3 (4) 5 ( ) ( ) Introducing the topic 1 2 (3) 4 5 (Y) (Y) Presenting the subject 1 2 3 (4) 5 ( ) ( ) Maintaining sequence 1 (2) 3 4 5 ( ) ( ) Maintaining eyes contact 1 2 3 (4) 5 (Y) (Y) Using audio-visual aids in 1 (2) 3 (4) ( ) ( ) times 5 Supply handout 1 2 (3) 4 5 (Y) (N) Summarising the lecture (1) 2 3 4 5 (Y) (Y) Key to the rating.
a1 = Cannot do at all 2 = Can do less than half of the task 3 = Can do more than half but less than total 4 = Can do total but cannot maintain time schedule 5 = Can do within time schedule bY = Yes.
Source: Adapted and modified from Halim and Ali (1997) “Training and Professional Development” Data used in conducting training needs assessment of Extension agents and even farmers could either be from records or from fresh or just- conducted training needs assessment.
The table below adopted from Bemad (2003) gives a summary of sources of data for training needs assessment.
71  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT A Summary of Data Sources Used in Training Needs Assessment Organisational Job/Task Analysis Job Person Analysis Organisational goal and description Performance objectives Performance standards appraisal data Skill inventories Performing the job Interviews Organisational climate Work sampling Questionnaires indexes Asking question about Tests (KASOCs)1 Efficiency indexes the job Training progress Management request Training committees Assessment centers Exit interviews Analysis of operating Critical incidents Management-by- problem objectives or work planning systems KASOCs Knowledge, Abil ities, Skills, and other Characteristics.
Source Adapted from Bemadin J.H.
(2003).
3.1.4 Selection of Staff This is the implementation phase of training, a process whereby having got the outcome of new assessment could lead to selection of proper staff and appropriate technique of training from available options.
However, in choosing appropriate methods for the training, the learning objectives, the content, the trainee and the practical requirements are essential guidelines.
Similarly, such methods should be based on the following principles: (i) Active participation of all learners (ii) Transfer of learning experiences from training to the job situation (iii) Learners are to be provided with adequate knowledge of results about their attempts to improve (iv) Means of reinforcement for expected appropriate balance (v) Ample opportunity to adopt (practice) and to re-practice as needed (vi) Adequate and constant motivation for improved performance.
72  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.1.5 Conducting Training This is the actual phase of carrying out the training exercises.
Firstly, the publicity is done through invitation letters to prospective trainees.
All necessary facilities and materials procured are to be tested in the venue for the training prior to the actual commencement of the exercise.
3.1.6 On-the-job Evaluation This is the collection of information as per the relevance and effectiveness of the training programme.
Evaluation is a pertinent step as it ensures accountability in ascertaining the realisation of objectives in a cost effective manner.
In assessing Extension training programme, reactions, (trainees’ attitude), learning (changes in knowledge level) behaviour (change in job) performance and organisational results and returns (productivity and monetary returns) are indispensable parameters.
SELF ASSESM ENT EXERCISE Enumerate the 5 main steps in monitoring effective training in Extension organisation 3.2 Methods of Training in Extension We have two broad categories of methods used in training of staff.
Viz.
: 3.2.1 Information Methods In this category, messages are passed to trainees.
Examples of training methods under this category are lecture, audio and video media and self directed learning.
3.2.2 Experimental Methods Here, the learners are opportune to interact with the instructor to put in to practice the skills they are expected to learn.
Examples of training methods in this category are on the job training, distance learning programme, role playing, behavioural modelling and sensitivit y trainin g. 3.3 Types of Training There are four main types of training.
Th ey include: pre-service training, induction training, in-service training and on- the- job- training.
73  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.3.1 Pre-service Training This is the type of professional training given to extension agents before the appointments.
This includes training that culminates in the award of diploma certificates and higher degree certificates such as M.Sc., M.Ph.
Ph.D. in special problem areas of agriculture.
3.3.2 Induction Training This is the type of training that is given to newly-appointed extension staff immediatel y they are employed.
This is normally given to the staff to enable them understand their responsibilities, required skills, general objectives and policies of the organisation and detailed organogram.
This is sometimes referred to as orientation exercise which invariably helps the staff from making costly mistakes.
3.3.3 In-service Training This is the type of training undertaken by the staff while they are still in the employment.
The purpose of this type of training is to update staff (extension agents) at all levels.
It should be seen as a complement to, rather than a substitute for the formal study programme.
This is important more so that extension management is dynamic and the new methods and procedures introduced to address certain problems must be taught to extension agents that are still serving the organisation.
Types of in-service training courses involving extension staff Type of course Length of Main features course Induction training 2 – 4 weeks For new staff.
Covers all basic Extension concepts Annual senior staff 2 – 3 days Meeting of senior staff on a conference national, state of provincial basis to discuss plans.
May include some training.
Annual local staff 4 – 5 days Meetings of all field staff to conference discuss detailed plans for a district or division.
Training of staff on new reporting procedures or methods often an important element.
Technical courses 1 – 6 weeks For specialised Extension staff, designed staff additional training in particular Extension methods or organisation.
74  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Non-residential short ½ - 1 day Staff from a lim ited area may be course or conference called in to learn a new technique or reporting procedure, or to discuss the implementation of the programme.
Source: Adams, M.E.
1982 Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
3.3.4 On-the-Job Training This is conducted at the work site and in the context of the job so as to acquire specific skills while the individual still is on the job.
This is regarded as training within the organisational policy and is aimed at improvement in the staff cadre who may have inadequate qualification for his job performance when he was employed.
This happens most especially during acute shortage of manpower.
3.4 Benefits of Training in Extension Organisation The outcome of a well-conducted training could be useful in the following ways: (1) Increasing productive capability of extension staff.
(2) Reducing errors that could affect performance.
(3) Reducing staff turnover.
(4) Lessening supervision and associated stress thereby ensurin g confidence and good atmosphere of working.
(5) Enhancing the ability of staff to advance in skillful performance of job.
(6) Giving new capabilities to staff.
(7) Bringing about attitudinal changes which of course lead to improvement in the job performance.
3.4.1 Problems of Extension Training in Nigeria Extension training in Nigeria has not been met with substantial success, despite the aforementioned benefits.
The following are some of the impediments affecting the success.
75  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT (1) Extension agents, farmers and specialists have been trained in areas where they do not really indicate any needs (Actual needs are not properly assessed).
(2) Training programmes are planned from top down instead of bottom up.
In most cases, trainees are not given opportunity to participate in the planning of training need.
(3) Training programmes are not always subjected to proper evaluation as they are subjected to inappropriate criteria.
(4) There is gross inadequacy in the funding of training programmes.
(5) Subject matter specialists in training programme design implementation and evaluation technique are not well used.
(6) Also, refresher course in training institute such as universities, school of agriculture and Agricultural Training Institutes are not easily available.
4.0 CONCLUSION For increased performance in any organisation constant training and development programmes are indispensable so as to avail the opportunity of utilising up-to- date methods.
Training benefits can, however, be realised if exact area of needs is addressed using appropriate method and adequate materials/facilities.
5.0 SUMMARY Training is conceptualised as a process whereby people acquire improved capabilities to make them achieve the goals of the organisation.
Development on the other hand is viewed as a broader concept than training as training is observed to be part of staff development.
Procedures for staff training, methods of training, types of training, benefits of training as well as the constraints to training programmes of Extension staff are discussed in this unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain briefly the concepts of training and development.
2.
Highlight the essential steps involved in training extension staff.
3.
List and discuss briefly the methods of training in extension management.
4.
Discuss the main types of training inherent in extension programmes.
76  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 5.
State 5 benefits of training in extension organisation.
6.
Discuss the major constraints to effective Extension training programme in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd. Bernadin, A.J.
(2003).
Human Resources Management: An Experimental Approach.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Flippo, E.W.
(1965).
Principles of Personnel Manag ement.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc. Laogun, E.A.
(1987).
‘Perception of Farmers Training Needs: A Case Study of Isoya Rural Development Pr oject in Oyo State Nigeria’.
Nigerian Journal of Agricultural Extension.
3 (2) Ogunbameru, B.O.
(2001).
Practical Agricultural Administration.
Lagos: Kuntel Publishing House Williams S.K.T, Fenley, J.M.
and William C.E.
(1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria.
Les Sh yraden: Ibadan.
77  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 SUPERVISION IN EXTENSION ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Supervision in Extension Organisation 3.2 Elements and Processes of Supervision 3.3 Functions of Supervisors in Extension 3.4 Conditions Necessary for Effective Supervision 3.5 Essential Leadership Characteristics for Effective Supervision in Extension Organisation 3.6 Principles Inherent in Extension Supervision 3.7 Administrative Organisation that Aids Effective Supervision in Extension 3.8 Factors Over which Supervisor has Control and which Affect Morale of Extension Workers 3.9 Supervisor’s Checklist 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Supervision constitutes one of the important administrative functions in any organisation .
There must be designated officers who should be overseeing and directing the affairs of other staff in their activities.
Supervision is very important in that without it there will be no orderliness, delegation, coordination, motivation and evaluation.
Everybody will be doing what he or she likes with nobody to be held responsible for wrongs done.
Organisational goals would be impeded without effective supervision.
This unit therefore treats issues pertaining to supervision and its usefulness in extension organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define supervision  state the functions of supervision in extension organisation  highlight the principles of supervision in extension organisation  explain the necessary cond itions for effective supervision in extension organisation 78  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  enumerate the leadership qualities that aid effective supervision  discuss the factors over which supervisors have control and which affect morale of extension workers.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Supervision in Extension Organisation Supervision is the act of working with a group of people over whom authority is exercised in such a way as to achieve the greatest combined effectiveness in getting work done.
It involves provision of leadership, guidance, control and delegation of authority, which are all necessary for the satisfactory attainment of the organisational goals.
Supervision in agricultural extension organisation is thus defined as the coordinated approach to a subordinate staff in his work performance.
Supervision is a dynamic enabling process by which individual workers who have a direct responsibility for carrying out parts of an agencies’ programme and plan by a designated staff member make the best use of their knowledge and skills and improve the ability to do a more effective job and satisfy the objectives of the employing agenc y.
The function of a supervisor is therefore both educative and consultative.
There are several components of supervision among which are motivation, control or direction, coordination, delegation, staff appraisal, etc.
A supervisor is therefore anyone responsible for the effective performance of the work of others.
He is a memb er of a team, a part of a whole and serves as one who represents the eyes, ears, legs, nose, arms and the hand of his superior.
3.2 Elements and Processes of Supervision The concept of supervision is associated with middle level management task.
The essential processes in enacting their role include the following: (i) Planning: Planning for self development and development for subordinate; (ii) Organising: Proper utilisation of the time and the understanding of responsibilities; (iii) Controlling to ensure that the job is done according to the plan; (iv) Communicating; (v) Assigning responsibilities and delegating duties; (vi) Staff appraisal and acceptance of responsibilities for work done.
79  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.3 Functions of Extension Supervisors The functions of extension supervisors in extension services include the following: 1.
Induction of new workers into the service.
2.
Training of extension workers on the job particularly on the normal routine operation and standards on the what, how and when to do things etc.
3.
Training of extension workers on how to secure and develop leaders, contact extension officers, training the trainers which results into a multiplier effects etc.
4.
Assigning extension workers in modifying and improving known extension teaching methods.
5.
Assisting extension workers and farmers to achieve better programme and planning.
6.
Coordinating the duties of extension workers with those of subject matter specialists and other extension staff.
7.
Supervisors assist extension workers to determine progress and accomplishment through evaluation.
8.
Supervisors motivate and arrange opportunities for professional improvement of extension agents very often because the formal in-service training is no longer in usual practice.
9.
Supervisors assist in coordination of planned relevant research on extension problems.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 1. Who is a supervisor 2.
Mention 5 components of supervision?
3.4 Conditions Necessary for Effective Supervision For effective supervision to take place the followin g conditions are essential: 1.
A clear understanding of the objectives and the roles of a supervisor in the organisation.
80  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 2.
A supervisor should have the authority to carry out his responsibilities or functions.
3.
Cooperative shared experiences and efforts between supervisor and supervisee is essential.
4.
A supervisor and his team must have a common insight, understand the objectives and goals and willingly accept the team work pattern to supervision.
5.
There must be the existence of vertical and horizontal communication between the supervisor and his supervisees.
6.
There must be opportunities for creative thinking and self- expression by those being supervised.
7.
Supervision is more effective when it provides for a comprehensive and systematic evaluation of the organisation programme and personnel.
3.5 Essential Leadership Characteristics for Effective Supervision in Extension Organisation An adequately trained supervisor should be aware and endeavour to inculcate and apply many qualities of functional leadership.
Some of these are: 1.
Vitality and soundness.
These include en ergy, alertness, and good health.
2.
Intellectual capacity is the ability to think clearly or deeply to analyse and tackle problems as they emerge.
3.
Decisiveness i.e.
ability to lead his group to make quality decision.
He must possess self-confidence, a sense of purpose and a balanced sense of humour.
4.
Responsible i.e.
he must have a sense of justice and fairness to all in the accomplishment of tasks.
5.
Persuasiveness – essentially this is the ability to convince others to see your point of view without imposing your own idea as being the best.
6.
Objectivity – judgment based on merit and demerit of his supervisee rather than on subjective judgment.
81  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 7.
Recognition of individual differences.
Supervisor shouldn not expect supervisees to be balanced in identical manner.
8.
Avoid giving or imposing orders.
Supervision and not inspection; coordination and not control.
Consequently, a supervisor should develop a habit of involving those he is working with in making decisions.
3.6 Principles Inherent in Extension Supervision The following principles as applicable to extension management are pertinent as guidelines in the supervision of staff:  Supervision is an essential part of administration.
It is integral to it but not identical with it.
 Supervision is a cooperative activity.
It takes place through the shared ideas, efforts and experiences of all staff members.
Cooperation provides opportunity for growth of the supervisor as well as for the growth of the employee.
 Supervision is concerned with the cooperative improvement of the setting in which learning takes place.
It seeks improved methods of teaching and creates a physical, social and psychological climate favourable to learning.
 Planning is fundamental to supervision.
It is cooperative in nature and orderly in procedure from the inception of an idea to the execution of a series of activities.
 Supervision is creative, not prescriptive.
It determines procedures in the light of the needs of each situation.
It provides opportunity for originality and self expression.
 Supervision substitutes leadership for authority.
It is based on the democratic philosophy that respects individual differences and assumes that people are capable of growth.
 There is an art to be learned for the successful practice of supervision.
It is primarily the art of building creative human relationship.
 Successful supervision is measured in terms of those being supervised.
 Supervision provides for the establishment of extension objectives, goals and means for comprehensive and systematic evaluation of extension programme.
82  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.7 Administrative Organisation that Aids Effective Supervision in Extension Effective supervision in extension could be facilitated by a kind of administrative organisation of the following features.
1.
The people under a supervisor should be limited to a number he can effectively supervise.
2.
For efficiency in coordination, activities closely related to each other should be grouped together under common direction.
3.
Keep to a minimum number of supervisory levels.
4.
Each supervisor should have only one superior to whom he reports.
5.
The quality of supervision given by a supervisor tends to reflect the quality of supervision to which the supervisor in turn, has been subjected to.
6.
Any system which does not afford the immediate supervisor an opportunity to have the final say in selecting his own subordinates does not make adequate use of the unique relationship that must exist between this key man and those whom he supervises.
Supervision in the Nigerian extension system follows the laid down features in training and visit (T & V) extension strategy adopted by the ADPs.
Amongst the frontline extension workers it is the Block Extension Supervisors (BES) that carries out the supervisory roles required in the system.
Other supervisory roles are performed in personnel, finance, public relations and other Extension sub- programmes.
Finally, the extent to which we can give supervision its rightful place in the Nigerian extension service depends on those who carry out the supervisory work.
Who they are,what they are doing and how well they are doing that among many other factors require proper documentation.
3.8 Factors over which a Supervisor has Control and which Affect the Morale of Extension Workers There are a number of factors which a supervisor has to take into consideration and which are known for boosting extension workers morale.
These include the following: 83  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 1.
Supervisors should let each extension worker under him know how he is doing.
2.
He should give credit for work well done and achievements.
3.
He should utilise each worker to his full capacity.
4.
He should give the workers chance of self-realisation.
5.
He should tell his assistants in advance changes affecting him or the group.
6.
He should be fair and avoid favouritism.
7.
He should treat each employee with respect, gi ve credit when due and take prompt sympathetic action on grievances.
8.
He needs to infuse in the staff the spirit of enthusiasm, the code of conduct which is behind the programme with which they are expected to act accordingly.
3.9 Supervisor’s Checklist To be a good supervisor, one needs to give candid and objective answers to the following questions which invariably serve as a summary of essential qualities or attributes: 1.
Are my personal habits above reproach?
2.
Do I have a good knowledge of the work to be done?
3.
Am I dependable?
4.
Do I keep my word ?
5.
Am I sincere?
6.
Do I accept responsibility?
7.
Is my personal appearance exemplary?
8.
Do I assume authority when necessary?
9.
Am I a good teacher?
10.
Am I a good listener?
84  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 11.
Do I express myself well?
12.
Do I accept criticism?
13.
Do I use common sense?
14.
Am I loyal to constituted authority?
15.
Do I know the organisational goals, policies and plans?
16.
Do I make decisions when necessary?
17.
Do I try to improve myself from tim e to time?
18.
Am I adaptable to change?
19.
Am I courteous?
20.
Am I approachable?
Ogunbameru, 2001: Fundamentals of Management.
p154 4.0 CONCLUSION An organisation will have seasoned success as per effectiveness and achievement of its goal with a sound knowledge and responsible supervisor in charge of management/administration.
Organisational features commensurate with fair functioning can allow for effective supervision of staff and their achievement of expected institutional goals.
5.0 SUMMARY In the unit, supervision was defined as the coordinated approach to provide guidance, direction and support to a subordinate staff in his work performance.
It is a process by which workers are guided to carry out duties with increasing satisfaction to themselves, to the people with whom they work and to the agency for which they work.
Planning, organising guidance, coordination, motivation, delegation and evaluating constituted supervisors’ roles.
The principles of supervision and factors which affect morale of staff were also discussed.
The essential qualities of good supervisors were also touched.
85  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is supervision in extension management?
2.
Discuss the main elements of supervision.
3.
What are the functions of a supervisor in extension management?
4.
Explain the conditions necessary for effective supervision.
5.
Discuss the basic principles of supervision.
6.
Highlight 5 leadership qualities that aid effective supervision in extension management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akintemiju, O.A.
and Torimiro, D.O.
(2008).
Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treat.
Nigeria: ABC Agricultural Systems Ltd. Akinsorotan, M.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd. Certo, S.C. (2000).
Modern Management.
New Jersey: Practice Hall Inc. Franzi, G.L.
and Savingi, P.E.
(1997).
Supervision: The Art of Management.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc. Madkwe, M.C.
(2005).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ilorin: AESON.
Ogunbameru, B.O.
(2001).
Practical Agricultural Administration.
Lagos: Kintel Publishing House.
Owuamanam, D.O.
and Owuamanam (2002).
Fundamentals of Educational Psychology.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
86  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT MODULE 3 PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (CONTINUED) Unit 1 Motivation in Extension Organisation Unit 2 Coordination in Extension Organisation Unit 3 Delegation of Tasks and Authority in Extension Organisation Unit 4 Staff Appraisal and Budget and Fiscal Control in Agricultural Extension Unit 5 Management of Agricultural Extension Services in Nigeria UNIT 1 MOTIVATION IN EXTENSION ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Motivation 3.1.1 Maslow’s Theory of Human Needs and Motives 3.1.2 Physiological Needs 3.1.3 The Safety or Securit y Needs 3.1.4 Love and Belongingness Needs 3.1.5 The Self-Esteem Needs 3.1.6 Self Actualisation Needs 3.2 Implications of Maslow’s Theory to Extension Managers 3.3 Types of Motivation 3.3.1 Intrinsic Motivation (Motivation from Within) 3.3.2 Extrinsic Motivation (Mo tivation from Outside) 3.4 Assumptions Underlying Motivation 3.5 Factors Motivating Emplo yees in Extension Organisation 3.5.1 Hygiene Factors 3.5.2 Motivational Factors 3.6 Guidelines for Motivating Subordinates 3.7 Ways of Improving Rewards and Incentives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The previous unit treats supervision as one of the major functions of extension management/administration.
Elements of supervision such as 87  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT motivation, delegation, coordination, direction and control and staff evaluation were also considered.
The first to be discussed is motivation which this unit is addressing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define what motivation is  list and discuss briefly the two types of motivation  discuss the Maslow’s theory of motivation and explain the implication to extension management  identify and discuss briefly factors motivating employees in Extension organisation  highlight the guides for motivating subordinates  enumerate ways of improving rewards and incentives in extension organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Motivation Goals may represent wants, needs, and desires which spur or urge individuals to action.
Whether or not goals are different, people perceive goals differently and apply themselves differently to the achievement of the goals.
Individuals show different levels of commitment, urge and strive towards the achievement of organisational goal.
The need or desire to achieve a goal and commitment to strike or to engage in activities aimed at achieving a goal represent the main dimensions of motivation.
Motivation can therefore be defined as an individual’s urge, desire, and tendency to achieve a goal or fulfill certain needs.
I n general, motivation serves as a directing force which determines the level of activity toward goal attainment or satisfaction of wants, needs or desires.
It can also be defined as the use of various incentives which get people to do very well and willingly those things that are necessary to get done.
Incentives here, does not specifically mean money or even material resources as such.
However, satisfaction of the human needs at work is perhaps the greatest single incentives.
Motivation can also be defined as the creation of a situation in which actions that provide net satisfaction to individuals and which are at the same time actions that make appropriate contributions towards the objectives of the organisation.
Generally speaking, motivation increases 88  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT individual satisfaction or reduces individual’s dissatisfaction.
The point now is that it is difficult to do this as people’s needs and wants are difficult to detect and satisfy.
To this, Abraham Maslow i n 1934 postulated his theory on human needs and motives around the concept of self-actualisation.
3.1.2 Maslow’s Theory of Human Needs and Motives Maslow conceptualised a hierarch y of needs arranged in order of preparatory such that the lowest in the hierarchy are the most important and tend to be satisfied first.
It is only when the lower needs are satisfied that higher needs can appear and seek satisfaction.
Unless the lower needs are partially fulfilled it is difficult for higher needs to be satisfied.
Starting from the lowest to the highest, he specifically mentioned the following five levels.
(a) Physiological needs (b) The security/safety needs (c) Social needs (love and belongingness needs) (d) Self esteem needs (e) Self-realisation (actualisation) needs These needs are represented in a hierarchical order as shown below: Needs for self actualisation Esteem needs Affiliation or Acceptance needs Safety needs Physiological needs 89  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.1.3 Physiological Needs These are the needs for foods, air, water, sex and other needs necessary for the maintenance of life.
They constitute the starting point and the most potent of all needs.
If they are unfulfilled, all other higher needs would be forced to the background and cannot come up for satisfaction.
When the biological needs are satisfied, other higher needs come up to be satisfied.
3.1.4 The Safety or Security Needs Once the physiological needs are relatively well met, a new set of needs emerges termed the security or safety needs and becomes an important determinant of behaviour.
These needs are concerned with protection against danger, psychological threat, deprivation, safety, stability, freedom from fear, anxiety and chaos.
3.1.5 Love and Belongingness Needs When the safety needs are fairly well met, the love, affection and belongingness needs emerge and become the motivators of behaviour.
These needs are concerned with interpersonal relationship.
The person needs the company of friends, sweetheart, wife or children.
He will seek affectionate relations hip with people in his family, group , workplace and community.
3.1.6 The Self-Esteem Needs These are needs or desires for a stable, high evaluation on oneself, for self-respect and self confidence.
Self-esteem needs consist of two sub- needs.
The first is achievement needs which consist of the need for strength, for achievement, for adequacy, for mastery and competence and for independence and freedom.
The second sub-need is the desire for reputation or prestige, status, recognition, attention, importance, respect and dignity.
Satisfaction of esteem needs leads to feelings of self confidence, worth, strength and adequacy.
Frustration of the needs produces feelings of inferiority, of weakness and helpless.
3.1.7 Self Actualisation Needs These are the highest in the hierarchy.
They are the needs for self- fulfillment, for realising one’s potentials and for continued self development, for growth and for the use of one’s talents and capacities.
90  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT According to Maslow (1954) self actualised individuals seem to be fulfilling themselves by doing best in what they are capab le of doing.
Maslow has been able to list some basic personal characteristics that distinguish self-actualised persons from ordinary people.
1.
They pay strict attention to tasks, duties, or missions they consider important and work hard on such tasks.
2.
They are concerned with the welfare of humanity.
3.
They are autonomous, independent, and true to themselves, resisting total conformity to culture.
4.
They are realistic and have reduced idealistic perceptions of the world.
They accept themselves, other people and their environment as they are.
5.
They take delight in creativeness, flexibility, openness and courage.
6.
They have respect for ethics and behave in accordance with ethical principles.
3.2 Implications of Maslow’s Theory to Extension Managers Extension managers or administrators should be aware of the hierarchy of need satisfaction and address them in more or less the same order.
Attempt to address higher order needs before lower order needs would not motivate the learners appropriately.
A more profitable strategy is to first help the workers fulfil the basic needs.
Workers have to feel secure, loved and confident in themselves before attempt on self actualisation can be made.
Extension managers should realise that unsatisfied lower needs (physiological needs) would interfere with activity and may cause workers to withdraw from the organisation.
Insecurity due to lack of love experienced by workers in the organisation can interfere with performances.
Inconsistent demand within the organisation would be inimical to the fulfillment of security/safety needs and therefore affect independent behaviour.
Maslow recommended that administrators or supervisors should help workers to understand their strengths and potentialities in order to help them to meet their needs.
Understanding their strengths will help workers to be successful or effective in their performance.
91  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 List in order the five levels of needs as explained by Maslow 3.3 Types of Motivation We have two types of motivation: intrinsic motivation and extrinsic motivation.
3.3.1 Intrinsic Motivation (Motivation from Within) This originates from rewards inherent in the learning tasks.
Intrinsically motivated individuals enjoy task because of the nature of the task itself.
Successful completion of these tasks gives the individual personal satisfaction, feeling of success, achievement or accomplishment.
3.3.2 Extrinsic Motivation (Motivation from Outside) This on the other hand, originates from rewards that are not derived from the task itself.
Individuals enjoy task because of external rewards that go with it.
Such rewards are controlled externally by someone other than the worker and include prizes, money, promotion, commendation and others.
3.4 Assumptions Underlying Motivation Early ideas about motivation were based on these three assumptions: (1) That people are motivated by a desire for money, security and good working conditions.
(2) That provision of these rewards would have a positive effect on morale.
(3) That there is a positive correlation between morale and performance.
3.5 Factors Motivating Employees in Extension Organisation Herzberg’s study of motivation grouped the factors which motivate workers into two main categories: (a) Hygiene factors; and (b) Motivational factors.
92  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.5.1 Hygiene Factors Herzberg referred factors here as hygiene because they are environmental, and in the same way as public hygiene measures do not make people healthy, but prevent them from being unhealthy.
Also, these factors do not make people happy as such or satisfied at work, but they prevent them from being unhappy and dissatisfied.
The factors include the following: 1.
Organisational policies and administration 2.
Type of supervision 3.
Working condition 4.
Interpersonal relations 5.
Status and security 6.
Fringe benefits e.g.
midday meals, awards, etc.
3.5.2 Motivational Factors These refer to those factors centered on the job or task to be performed and may provide real job satisfaction and the right motivation.
Factors here are: (1) Opportunities for achievements (2) Recognition (3) Interest in the work These aforementioned set of factors are considered to have a part to play in motivating employees.
It is argued that there are limitation s to the effect of the hygiene factors and that more effective and lasting motivation is obtained through the application and implementation of motivational factors.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 List the 3 assumptions underlining motivation in an organisation.
93  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.6 Guidelines for Motivating Subordinates Manager or supervisors are to use these guides for motivation to be effective: 1.
Try to identify and understand the needs and personal goals of your staff.
Beware of your assumptions which may be false and misleading.
2.
Remember that money is not the only motivator.
There are man y other rewards that may be more effective than money in getting your staff to work harder e.g.
recognition and in-service training.
3.
Set your staff targets which are realistic and achievable, but also stretch their ability.
If possible, involve subordinates in setting their own targets.
4.
Always recognise achievement by praise or some other rewards.
5.
Do not alter target without consulting with the staff concerned.
If changes are necessary, they should be agreed jointly.
6.
Harness the strength of the group.
Group pressures can affect motivation positively and negatively.
Involving your staff as a group in making decisions will strengthen their commitment.
7.
Keep your staff informed about what is going on in the organisation.
3.7 Ways of Improving Rewards and Incentives Rewards and incentives system can be improved in several ways such as: 1.
Rewarding Superior Performance Extension personnel may be encouraged to form professional societies to develop and communicate high standards, as well as to recognise superior performance.
A professional monthly journal or newsletter can help extension agents to communicate innovative ideas and reinforce superior performance.
2.
Improved Working Conditions at the Field Level The reward system must also be internally equitable.
The relative importance of field-level extension functionaries has to be realised in 94  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT terms of pay compensation and o ther amenities.
The livin g conditions of field extension workers must be improved by providing adequate facilities for housing, transport and medical and educational allowances for children.
3.
Career Planning and Development for Extension Personnel As part of improving the reward and incentive system, extension organisations have to develop suitable career paths and advancement for different categories of extension personnel on a systematic basis.
4.
Improvement on the Quality of Work Factors such as the nature of job or the role and involvement of employees in work decisions are important for improving the quality of work life.
This can be done through (i) job enrichment (detailed analysis of the work to know the factors which make it a satisfying experience); (ii) job design (emphasise the use of extrinsic and intrinsic job factors, adaptivity and variety); and (iii) role interventions (expectations of significant persons and the individuals occupying the positions).
4.0 CONCLUSION Extension workers like all other workers in every organisation needs incentives in their work life in order to be satisfied.
This satisfaction is a great force for high performance which all management has to ensure in order to bring about effective performance and hence achieving organisational goal.
5.0 SUMMARY Motivation was defined in the unit as the use of various incentives that get people to do very well and willingly those things that are necessary to get done.
Maslow’s theory and the implication to extension administrators were discussed.
Also touched are types of motivation, assumption underl ying motivation, factors motivating employees in extension organisation, guidelines motivating subordinates and ways of improving rewards and incentives in extension organisation.
95  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the concept of motivation.
2.
Identify and discuss briefly the two types of motivation.
3.
Discuss Maslow’s theory of motivation and explain the implication to extension management.
4.
What are the factors motivating employees in extension organisation?
5.
State the guides necessary for motivating subordinates in extension organisation.
6.
Discuss various ways by which rewards and incentives can be improved in extension organisation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akintemiju, O.A.
and Torimiro, D.O.
Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treat.
Nigeria: ABC Agricultural Systems Ltd .
Akinsorotan, M.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd. Certo, S.C. (2000).
Modern Management.
New Jersey: Practice Hall Inc. Franzi, G.L.
and Savingi, P.E.
(1997).
Supervision: The Art of Management.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc. Madkwe, M.C.
(2005).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ilorin: AESON Ogunbameru, B.O.
(2001).
Practical Agricultural Administration.
Lagos: Kintel Publishing House.
Owuamanam, D.O.
and Owuamanam (2002).
Fundamentals of Educational Psychology.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
96  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 COORDINATION IN EXTENSION ORGANISATION CONTENTS 2.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Coordination in Extension Organisation 3.1.1 Types of Coordination 3.1.2 Polled Inter-dependent Coordination 3.1.3 Coordination by Plan or Sequential Coordination 3.1.4 Reciprocal Coordination 3.2 Principles of Coordination 3.3 Methods of Achieving Coo rdination 3.4 Roles of Coordination in Extension Organisation 3.5 Barriers to Effective Coordination 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Coordination is one of the basic elements of supervision.
It is that function of supervision that ensures uniformity and consistency as well as entailing fair and better treatment of all employees.
Effective coordination prevents wastage and duplications, enhances smooth running of the organisation and as such brings about the realisation of organisation goals.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain briefly the concept of coordination in extension organisation  list and discuss the types of coordination  highlight the principles governing effective coordination in extension organisation  discuss the method of achieving coordination  state the purpose of effective coordination in extension organisation  discuss the barriers to effective coordination in extension organisation.
97  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Coordination in Extension Coordination is the process of synchronising the effect of a group to achieve a desired goal.
It involves the harmonisation of the activities of all the employees in an organisation towards the achievement of a recognised purpose.
Coordination in extension therefore involves the harmonising of the activities of all employees in Extension organisation towards the achievement of a recognised extension purposes.
It is the unification of the people’s activities, materials and other resources towards the achievement of their collective goal.
Similarly, it can be defined as the drawing together of a number of conflicting issues for resolution.
3.1.2 Types of Coordination Harmonisation of the activities of employees in organisation can take any of the following forms: 3.1.3 Polled Inter-Dependent Coordination This is coordination by standardisation.
In this type of coordination, people are involved in playing their own part towards a unified goal in the organisation.
3.1.4 Coordination by Plan or Sequential Coordination Here, the activity of one unit affects what happens to the next unit or stage.
3.1.5 Reciprocal Coordination Here, input and output of one is for the other and vice versa.
What extension needs to perform is output of research and the input of research comes from extension.
3.2 Principles of Coordination The following principles are necessary for effective coordination: 1.
Professionally competent staff must be provided.
2.
Staff in key positions, particularly administrative staff, must be cooperative and enjoy mutual respect for each other.
98  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.
Organisational objectives must be clearly defined and understood.
4.
There must be two-way channel of communication which must be kept open both verticall y and horizontally.
5.
To have status commensurate with responsibility, authority to solve organisational problem and safe time of coordination, the location of responsibility for coordination should be placed within the administrative structure.
SELF ASSESSM EN EXERCISE 1 Distinguish between the pooled interdependent and material replaced 3.3 Methods of Achieving Coordination We can secure coordination under varying methods, means and situations.
Some of the possible methods are as follows:  Simplified organisation: under this situation, programmes, policies, and activities are clear-cut, easily understood by most members and thus easily harmonised, dove-tailed and unified.
 Proper timing is important in coordination, so also is synchronisation.
 Good information flow should be put in place to ensure proper coordination.
Communication through the length and breadth of the organisation will make everyone to be aware of what is happening.
 Dominant objectives must be identified, highlighted and preserved.
Objectives that cut across all the units are paramount importance in this case.
Understanding the widely accepted customs of the units is very necessary (e.g.
language, norms and beliefs) before coordination can be easily achieved.
 Formal and informal contact strategies are very necessary.
 The use of liaison men and women (representatives) whenever and wherever needed to effect coordination is essential.
 Use of committees for bringing together the main activities to effect coordination is highly essential.
99  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  Coordination requires constant watchfulness on the part of those entrusted with it and it is a continuous function of the administration.
 Conferences should be organised between inter and intra- departments, representatives of units should meet to discuss issues of policy matters, etc.
Here, freedom of discussion and putting forward suggestions for improvement helps to secure effective coordination.
 Aids to voluntary coordination – here most of the coordination in an enterprise should take place voluntarily by the cooperation of members.
Dominant objectives should be emphasised and imposed.
 Coordination through personal guidance of the executive.
It follows from the fact that, if.
 all the possible methods of securing coordination had been put in place, then there will be no work for the executive to do.
But this situation is never completely achieved hence the administrator has the leftover to do.
3.4 Roles of Coordination in Extension Organisation The roles of coordination in Extension organisation include the following:  It ensures that every unit, level or individual operates in line with the overall goal of the organisation.
This is called unity of purpose.
 It leads to the integration of the efforts of different units, levels or individuals.
 It provides for the maintenance of standards in accordance with the specific level of performance in the organisation  It enhances supervision  It makes for easy evaluation of the programme  It accounts for uniform progress of various units, levels and persons 100  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  It guides, oversees and leads the people involved in each level of organisation  It makes for efficiency in the utilisation of Extension resources and achievement of results  It removes conflict and unnecessary duplication of efforts in the various units or persons  It serves as a unifying factor of the organisation and smoothens the process of administration.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 State 2 reasons for locating the majority of coordination functions within the administrative structure 3.5 Barriers to Effective Coordination Effective coord ination can be hampered by any of the following barriers:  Threat to autonomy that is fear of reduced freedom to make decision and run their programme.
 Disagreement among resource providers.
 Too many agencies involved.
 Lack of domain consensus.
That is disagreement over which organisation should function in which geographical areas, provide which service and to which clients.
 Different expectations from federal, state and local levels.
 Coordination is a low priority area for participating organisation  Costs and benefits are uncertain  Resources not available 101  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION Supervision becomes easier and efficient when there is a proper coordination of efforts.
However, for efficient supervision to take place, the interest principles of coordination must be adhered to.
5.0 SUMMARY Coordination as an element of supervision was defined as the harmonisation of the activities of all the employees in an organisation towards the achievement of a recognised objective.
The types, principles, roles and methods of achieving coordination as well as the barriers to effective coordination were also discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is coordination in extension organisation?
2.
List and discuss the types of coordination.
3.
State the principles governing effective coordination in extension organisation.
4.
What are the uses/roles of effective coordination in extension organisation?
5.
Enumerate 5 barriers to effective coo rdination in an extension.
6.
Discuss briefly any 4 methods of achieving coordination.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akintemiju, O.A.
and Torimiro D.O.
(2008).
Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treat.. Nigeria ABC Agricultural Systems Ltd .
Akinsorotan, M.O.
(2007).
Elements of Agricultural Extension Administration.
Ibadan: Bounty Press Ltd. Certo, S.C. (2000).
Modern Management.
New Jersey: Practice Hall Inc. Madukwe, M.C.
(2005).
Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
Ilorin: AESON Ogunbameru, B.O.
(2001).
Practical Agricultural Administration.
Lagos: Kintel Publishing House.
Owuamanam, D.O.
(2002).
Fundamentals of Educational Psychology.
Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Waldron, M.N.J.
Vsanthakumar and S. Arulraj (1997).
‘Improving the Organisation and Management of Extension’.
B.E.
Swanson[ed] Improving Agricultural Extension – A Reference Manual.
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations.
102  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 DELEGATION OF TASKS AND AUTHORITY IN EXTENSION ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Delegation in Extension Organisation 3.2 What Delegation is not?
3.3 Types of Delegation 3.3.1 Job Enlargement 3.3.2 Task Delegation 3.4 The Need for Delegation in Extension Organisation 3.5 Responsibilities of Supervisors towards Effective Delegation 3.6 When to Delegate in Extension Organisation 3.7 Essential Prerequisite for Effective Delegation in Extension Organisation 3.8 What to Delegate 3.9 What Not to Delegate 3.10 Process of Delegation 3.11 Barriers to Effective Delegation in Extension Organisation 3.12 Control of Delegation in Extension Organisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION To curb the lack of confidence and inability to develop subordinates, the supervisor should give a subordinate the tasks for which he is responsible.
If this is not done the organisation will not grow as it should.
This unit therefore discusses the concept, process and rationale for delegation in extension organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of delegation  justify the rationale for effective delegation in extension organisation  highlight the supervisor’s responsibilities towards effective delegation 103  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  itemise the conditions when delegation is to be done  discuss the barriers to effective delegation in extension organisation  explain the control process of delegation in extension organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Delegation in Extension Organisation Delegation connotes giving a subordinate staff the power or authority to carry out some of the tasks in the department for which an administrator (supervising staff) is responsible.
It is the process of giving over somebody’s power or authority to another person to act in one’s own place.
Delegation in extension organisation thus entails the following:  passing down responsibility;  giving the person to whom you have delegated freedom to do the job;  monitor implementation (without interference and not ‘police’ him/her so as not to destroy his confidence);  check progress and insist on feedback;  retains accountabilit y (being accountable for success or failure of the project); and  avoid blaming staff (not offer staff as sacrifice for your own faults or errors).
3.2 What Delegation is not?
As a supervisor, you need to have a clear understanding of what delegation is and what it is not.
The following should be noted as NOT delegation: Cheating – drawing a high salary for what is supposed to be a senior position, but doing routine low level work by delegating the most important functions to your subordinates.
104  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Job Evasion – delegating the difficult tasks and keeping to yourself the simple ones you enjoy doing.
A good boss does not practice “job evasion”.
Over supervision – This is unduly interfering with the staff and looking over his shoulders.
It is a sort of over supervision.
That is, an indication of lack of confidence in your staff.
It is an attitude which could be counter-productive.
Abdication – Giving somebody a job to do, then forgetting all about it, with no checks/controls/direction and subsequently turning round to blame the staff for what goes wrong.
It is quite wrong to ask a subordinate to carry out work and then leave him to get on with it without worrying about the consequences.
The dangers are: (i) Nothing will be done.
(ii) Too much will be done.
(iii) The wrong thing will be done.
3.3 Types of Delegation There are two types of delegation: job enlargement and task delegation.
3.3.1 Job Enlargement This shows in-job re-allocation occurring from extension of job responsibility.
This may call for a revision of job description thereby passing down part of one’s own job.
3.3.2 Task Delegation This entails target setting whi ch an important task manager should do.
3.4 The Need for Delegation in Extension Organisation In Extension organisation, the following justifies the need for delegation: 1.
For Motivation Purpose: Delegation is a motivational factor.
Morale of subordinates is boosted when there is freedom of action in getting on with the job without undue interference.
2.
Building Confidence: Delegation is a demonstration of trust in somebody to do the job.
When it is done enhances confidence.
105  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.
Efficiency: One cannot do everything by oneself and as such has to entrust to other persons– It has advantage of ensuring better and proper time control.
4.
Training: Delegation makes the delegate to be undergoing a practical training.
It as well affords the delegatee’s experience to be broaden and as such building up his confidence.
5.
Expansion: A superior needs to delegate more to ensure continuing efficiency, quick and improved results particularly as the organisation is expanding.
6.
Succession: Delegation implies that you are training the man to do part of your job so as to ensure that he gets on with the job in one’s absence.
Meanwhile, sudden departure of a supervisor does not pose succession problem.
7.
Effective Time Management: With delegation, a supervisor will not be bogged down by details.
He will be able to make better, more efficient and more productive utilisation of one’s own time.
As a result of this more time would be devoted to crucial and fundamenta l aspects of the job.
8.
Promotion: Delegation guarantees a sound criterion for a supervisor’s promotion.
Getting results through others make one to be replaceable through planned succession.
It then follows that as long as few others can do the same work you were doing before, the next higher staff can succeed you.. 3.5 Responsibilities of Supervisors toward Effective Delegation To have effective delegation, supervisors should have a clear understanding of this array of responsibilities: 1.
Finding the right man for the right job.
2.
Economic use of manpower and materials.
3.
Safety and accident prevention.
4.
Making reports 5.
Morale-promoting team spirit 6.
Dealing with grievances 106  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 7.
Keeping records 8.
Housekeeping 9.
Maintaining production-quality and quantity 10.
Improving work 11.
Keeping down costs 12.
Planning 13.
Training 14.
Requisitioning materials, tools and equipment 15.
Cooperating with other supervisors 16.
Setting differences among employees 17.
Keeping employees informed 18.
Neutralising the “grapevine” 19.
Taking an interest in the employees 20.
Carrying out instructions Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007) Element of Agricultural Extension Administration.
3.6 When to Delegate in Extension Organisation It is to be noted that is not in all situations that delegation can be done.
Below are expected situations for delegation: - when the subordinate has the necessary experience or training to execute the task/job; - in time of sickness or absence of a supervisor or leave period; also - delegation can be done when wou ld-be-delegate understands ver y clearly the objectives of the organisation.
107  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 Give 4 examples of what delegation is not.
3.7 Essential Prerequisite for Effective Delegation in Extension Organisation The following prerequisites are very important for effective delegation in extension organisation: (a) Analyse the operation/problem.
(b) Negotiate with the delegate.
(c) Decide on main policy and guidelines for implementation.
(d) Recognise possible/probable problems.
(e) Do not delegate impossible tasks or challenges – delegation should be gradual.
(f) Delegate suitable actions after full consultation.
(g) Communicate delegated work in clear, unambiguous language.
(h) Accompan y delegation with adequate authority and information.
Delegation minus adequate information = zero Delegation + information – authority = zero Delegation, therefore, is work + authority + information = completed assignment.
(i) Keep in close touch, but do not interfere unless when asked for help.
(j) Follow-up, get feedback.
(Note that subordinates may never refer problems upwards resulting into serious consequences to the company and poor relationship among staff members) DELEGATION does not remove the final responsibility for success or failure.
108  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.8 What to Delegate Delegate as much relevant work as possible – as much as you reasonably reckon that your subordinate(s) can adequately cope with i.e.
: 1.
Tasks related to fact-finding and analysis.
2.
Execution of plans, programmes, or pro jects after you have made your d ecision.
3.
Preparation of first drafts.
4.
Tasks that oth ers can do better or sooner, or at a lower cost to the organization.
3.9 What not to Delegate There are some duties that you, as an executive, cannot properl y delegate.
You should, in most cases reserve for yourself such duties like: 1.
Making those critical decisions that commit substantial resources or are important to the success of the enterprises as a whole, including the determination of goals or policies and the approval of programmes, plan and projects.
2.
Personal representation at places where your own presence is very important because of its implications for your compan y’s public relations or because of the effects on the morale of those who need and desire your presence.
3.
Execution of policies that are unclear or where intimate initial contacts are required for its execution.
4.
Tasks that must be accomplished under great pressure without time of feedback.
5.
The hiring, disciplining and termination of the appointment of your immediate s taff.
3.10 Process of Delegation In extension organisation, to develop the delegation of authority in an y other department, these steps are crucial: 1.
Write a complete list of your responsibilities.
109  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 2.
Prepare job specification for each person in the organisation so that they know their responsibilities and level of authority.
3.
Get each subordinate to de fine: (a) What he/she thinks is responsible for.
(b) What he/she thinks is the scope of his decision area.
4.
Analyse your own job and classify your duties into: (a) Those that can be delegated.
(b) Those that cannot be delegated.
5.
Assess the performance of your subordinates.
3.11 Barriers to Effective Delegation in Extension Organisation The following constitutes the factors that impede effective delegation of task in extension organisation: 1.
Lack of confidence in subordinates.
2.
Feeling of indispensability.
3.
Fear of criticism from above if anything goes wrong.
4.
Lack of self-confidence.
5.
Fear that the subordinate will know too much.
6.
Feeling of omnipotence.
7.
Feeling that he/she can do the job quicker himself rather than to tell someone else.
8.
Boss lacks confidence in the experience of subordinates.
9.
Subordinates are too busy already.
10.
Staff do not want to accept delegation.
11.
Unreliable staff.
12.
Inadequate training and therefore inability to shoulder additional or higher responsibility.
110  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 13.
Undue interference.
14.
Authority delegated may be hazy.
15.
Tools for executing delegated job withheld.
16.
Inappropriate approach.
17.
Delegating ver y difficult and time-consuming job.
18.
Too much is delegated.
19.
Over-secrecy – i.e.
Pretending that ever ything is confidential.
20.
Lack of time to teach or train subordinate 21.
Lack of job description.
22.
Compan y policy 23.
Defective organisation structure Source: Akinsorotan, A.O.
(2007) Element of Agricultural Extension Administration.
3.12 Control of Delegation in Extension Organisation Control must be retained in delegation irrespective of the confidence a supervisor has in the ability of the subordinate.
The reason for this is that the supervisor is still accountable for the accomplishment of tasks delegated.
However, the control should neither be too permissive nor too restrictive.
Some of the ways by which the executives/supervisors retain control of delegation are: 1. establishment of the minimum number of feedback requirements at the beginning of the assignment; 2. establishment of a checklist of standards or sensitive points of performance that should be observed; 3. setting controls which involves guidance or periodic review; 4. using routine methods of checking through staff meetings and progress reports; 111  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 5. using indirect reminders like meetings on related memorandum sent to the recipient which generally show interest in progress to date; 6. reasonably accessible for task consultation or conferences.
4.0 CONCLUSION To avoid overwork which tends to be stressful, management or supervisory duties with commensurate power or authority have to be given (delegated) to others (subordinates) to be carried out.
A superior or administrator must however ensure caution and adequate control to avoid every kind of abuse.
He should note significantly that he is still accountable for the accomplishment of the delegated task.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the concept of delegation was considered.
It was defined as giving one’s power or authority to another so that others may act in one’s place.
It allows for continuity of operation even at the instance of sudden absence of a manager/supervisor.
It is a motivational strategy that enhances effectiveness and realisation of organisational goal.
Types of delegation, factors aiding effective delegation, process of delegation, principles of delegation, barriers to delegation and control of delegation were also treated.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is delegation in extension organisation?
2.
Itemise some conditions under which delegation can be done.
3.
Justify the rationale for effective delegation in extension organisation.
4.
Discuss the process of delegation.
5.
Highlight 5 barriers to effective delegation of duties and authority.
6.
What are the ways by which control of delegation can be retained?
112  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adejoke, J.A.
and Akinsorotan, A.O.
(1991).
‘The Importance of Delegation in a Competitive Economy’.
Paper presented at the 15th Training Programme Organised for Middle Level Manpower.
Ikeja: Berger Paints Nigeria Plc.
Cole, G.A.
(1996).
Management Theory and Practice.
London: DP Publication.
Mullins, I.J.
(1993) Management and Organisational Behaviour.
London: Pitman Publishing.
113  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 STAFF APPRAISAL, BUDGET AND FISCAL CONTROL IN AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Staff Appraisal 3.2 Appraisal of Extension Workers 3.3 Types of Staff Appraisal 3.3.1 Formal Appraisal 3.3.2 Informal Appraisal 3.4 The Need for Appraising Staff Performance in Extension 3.5 Post -Staff Appraisal Activities in Extension Organisation 3.6 Pitfalls Extension Managers Need to Avoid 3.7 Concept of Budgets and Fiscal Control in Agricultural Extension 3.7.1 Budget 3.7.2 Key Elements of a Budget System 3.7.3 Features of Budget 3.7.4 Purpose of Budget 3.7.5 Fiscal Control within Ministry of Agriculture 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Appraisal or assessment of staff is made with the intention of improving on the achievement so far made.
It may also involve some necessary changes on the performance of the assignment.
Areas of strengths and weaknesses in the job performance are necessary to be identified if improvement has to be continually made in an organisation.
Similarly, effective utilisation of resources through effective budgeting and fiscal control make the organisation to perform well in terms of attainment of set objectives.
This unit explores the idea of staff appraisal as well as budgetary and fiscal control in Extension organisation.
114  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of staff appraisal  list and discuss the two types of staff appraisal in extension organisation  justify the rationale for staff appraisal in extension organisation  highlight the post-staff appraisal activities in extension organisation  discuss the pitfalls extension managers need to avoid  explain the concept of budgeting and state at least 5 purposes of budgeting in extension organisation  define the term fiscal control and state the control measure in the agricultural extension organisation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Staff Appraisal The terms appraisal, evaluation and assessment are synonymously used to mean an estimation of the nature or value of staff.
It is therefore a process of gathering and documenting information about the achievement and performance of a programme, organisation or employees.
Staff appraisal is therefore a systematic method of assessing the performance of employees on their job with a view to helping management decisions on promotion, transfer, training or change i n pay.
It implies the continuous process of feeding back to subordinates, information about how well they are doing their work for the organisation.
The prime aim of staff appraisal is to identify and rectify deficiencies in performance.
In organisational context it means to build up an inventor y of usable control information as checkup on the effectiveness of other management processes.
3.2 Appraisal of Extension Workers Appraising extension workers is a process of feeding back to subordinates information about how well they are doing their work for the organisation.
In appraising extension work, indicators are usually in these areas; 1. construction of organisation, that is, the building of the institution; 115  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 2. the role performance of various extension actors; village extension worker, extension agent, block extension supervisor, and subject matter specialists; 3. the reaction of the beneficiaries.
However, the appraisal (evaluation) of extension work may be done by visits, recommendations (adoption) and the yields (eventual consequences).
3.3 Types of staff Appraisal There are two main types of staff appraisal: formal and informal.
3.3.1 Formal Appraisal In this method, assessment or appraisal is carried out semi-annually or annually on a formalised basis through the use of a form tagged ‘Annual Performance Evaluation Report”.
This is popularly called “APER” form.
The form contains information on the employee’s characteristics (name, age, current post/rank) and assessment section that centres principally on attitudes and behaviour to work, to peers and superior officers, punctuality, intelligence, initiative, responsibility, tolerance, persistence, emotional ability, stress copying ability, etc.
All the behavioural attitudes would be rated from a scale spanning from highest to lowest.
The overall performance is eventually shown from the summary of the whole rating.
Formal appraisal could take an y of the following approaches: i. a supervisor’s rating of subordinates; ii.
a group of supervisors rating subordinates iii.
a group of peers rating colleagues and iv.
subordinates rating their superiors.
3.3.2 Informal Appraisal Here, assessment is conducted on a day-to-day basis and as such monitors the connection between behaviour and feedback.
Primarily, this approach is to check undesirable performance before such is entrenched.
Personal characteristics such as intelligence, decisiveness, creativity and ability to get along with others are the major aspects this method hinges on.
The method does not involve record keeping, it is 116  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT usually carried out by a “whim” of the eyes.
In this approach, not all attributes are used.
Some could be forgotten and therefore unreliable.
Suffice it to state therefore that it could be a supplement to formal approach.
3.4 The Need for Appraising Staff Performance in Extension Staff appraisal if well conducted helps in: 1. informing the job holder who is being assessed as to how he is doing; 2. stimulating the person to better performance if this is seen to be warranted by the current level of performance; 3. indicating the skills that need improvement; 4. indicating the strengths and weaknesses of the organisation’s initial selection procedures; 5. cataloguing the cap abilities of the employees on an organisational basis, serving as a memory bank of information on capacity of employees; 6. reviewing of salary; 7. identifying training needs; 8. feedback to the employers; 9. serving as a basis for career counseling; 10. for succession planning; 11. it also serves as part of handover document between managers.
3.5 Post Staff Appraisal Activities in Extension Organisation Sequel to the completion of staff appraisal, the result is communicated to the person concerned.
In some organisations, to ensure this feedback, a portion is included in their APER forms where the person appraised confirms seeing the rating and thus appends his/her signature below it.
Some do hesitate to append signature as they contest the grades given to them while others, if satisfied, agree with the rating.
Few cases of disagreement calls for the attention of management to resolve issues involved in order to curb conflicts.
117  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Managers, not minding this kind of disagreement sometimes communicate the results to individuals appraised, as it serves a purpose of making subordinates to learn from their past experience.
These kinds of results in extension organisation are reported to subordinates in a feedback interview, with a view to ensure the following: - Giving both favourable and unfavourable results to subordinate; - Analysing the causes of problem(s) - Planning constructive changes and necessary actions to improve job performance; and - Mmutual agreement on objectives against next period.
3.6 Pitfalls Extension Managers Need to Avoid To make both formal and informal appraisal programmes effective, extension managers need to avoid the following pitfalls that usually impede effective appraisal.
These include: 1.
Rate Bias Some managers allow their personal bias to distort the ratings they give subordinates.
Issues of prejudices may be in terms of sex, ethnicity, religion, st yle of clothing, age and others.
2.
Different Rating Patterns The fact of individual differences is related to difference in rating styles of managers.
While some rate easily others rate harshl y.
This gap could be bridged by having precise definitions of each item on the rating form.
3.
Staffing Standards This involves rating subordinates with the use of different standards and expectations.
To be effective, methods used for rating should be perceived by subordinates as being uniform and fair.
4.
The Hallow Effect This entails the tendency to rate appraises high or low on all performance measuring, usually on one of their characteristics.
Take for instance, a situation where an attractive popular employee is given high overall rating unjustifiably; the officer next to him may be rated 118  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT negatively.
Managers need to rate employees separately on each of a number of performances to be measured with a caution towards guarding against the hallo effect.
It is worth noting however, that these pitfalls, if not cautiously taken care of, constitute constraints to effective appraisal.
Another area that needs caution is in respect of ineffectiveness of informal appraisal by managers.
This is because individuals who were informally criticised about job performance either once or twice often tend to become defensive and resentful thereby decline in their performance after feedback interview.
To avoid further confrontation, managers prefer to avoid direct confrontation and this plays hunches, guess or decide the fate of subordinates.
Likely adduced reasons on this could be as a result of poor communication, lack of appraisal training, unpleasantness of appraisal interview process, poor quality management, laziness and reluctance, etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify 2 disadvantages of informal staff appraisal technique.
3.7 Concept of Budges and Fiscal Control in Agricultural Extension 3.7.1 Budget Budget is defined as a written statement of annual plan expressed in financial terms.
Budgeting is therefore a process of optimal allocation of available resources to competing needs so as to achieve a set of objectives.
3.7.2 Key Elements of a Budget System The key elements of any budget system consist of the following: (1) Determination of what items are necessary in relation with the objectives of the organisation.
(2) Determination of the financial amounts for each line, in line with the organisational policies.
(3) Determination of overhead, surplus, and profit margin.
(4) Determination of anticipated revenue from fees, grants, gifts, etc.
(5) Discussion as well as making adjustments to produce working budget.
119  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.7.3 Features of Budget 1.
Budgets are expressed in quantitative terms.
2.
Budget must relate to a specific budget entity which may be the entire organisation.
3.
Budget covers a specific future time period such as a year or month.
3.7.4 Purpose of Budget 2.
Budgets provide clear and unambiguous guidelines about the organisation’s resources and expectation.
3.
It helps manager to supervise resources and projects.
4.
Plans are reduced to specific figures, showing where money is going or where physical inputs were used and outputs were produced.
5.
Budgets are used as checks and balances on the actual results of a business.
6.
Results analysis of the budget is used for budgeting.
7.
Performances and costs can be traced to the people concerned.
8.
Through budgeting, over and under expenditures are detected.
9.
It provides a basis for the number of emplo yees to be hired, temporarily laid off, or discharged, for arranging of bank loans and for similar activities.
10.
Budget provides a base from which to make either upward or downward adjustments when the level of business activity has changed sharply.
11.
Budget is a helpful device in anticipating problem and laying plans to meet them.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 State 5 features of budget.
120  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.7.5 Fiscal Control within Ministry of Agriculture Fiscal policy is concerned with the determination of the type, time and procedure to be followed in making expenditures and in obtaining revenues.
It is a process of aligning resources with available fund in such a way that m akes it possible to accomplish.
Below are some of the measures Ministry of Agriculture employs in controlling their fiscal (monetar y policies).
1.
Allocation of cash to departments/ministries for recurrent expenditure mostly to their revenue generating effort.
2.
To regulate recruitment and promotion of employee in the public service and in Ministry of Agriculture (where extension organisation belongs).
Control measures include temporar y embargo on new employment in the ministry unless with prior consent of the State Governor or President in case of Federal; 3.
To control expenditure of the state extension organisation, restriction to 10% of overhead for recurrent expenditure items could be done.
We can also have embargo on senior management oversee courses and oversee tours except approved by the state government.
4.
There could be issuance of general warrant (recurrent and statutory) in January, April, June and September so as to enhance the cash liquidity of the organisational finances.
5.
Accounting officers in consultation with the director of finance and supply will put a suitable competent accountant or audit in charge of the internal audit unit.
6.
There could also be a control over borrowing such that both internal and external borrowings are prohibited unless with the prior appraisal of appropriate authority.
4.0 CONCLUSION Appraisal is a necessity in any venture.
Managers are to examine constantly the effectiveness of employees’ performance and give feedback such that if there is poor performance, the analysis will serve as a basis for necessary remedial action.
Also, budgeting must be adequately prepared to guide the organisation’s use of resources, and controlled to prevent over and under expenditure problems.
121  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we defined staff appraisal as a systematic and continuous process of assessing how well employees are doing their work (Assessment of job performance).
Types of staff appraisal, means for appraisal, post appraisal activities, pitfalls on staff appraisal that managers need to avoid were discussed.
The unit also defined budgetin g as the powers of optimal allocation of resources to competing needs in order to achieve organisational objectives.
The purpose of budgeting and the fiscal control were also explained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the concept of staff appraisal.
2.
List and discuss the 2 types of staff appraisal in extension organisation 3.
What are the reasons for effective staff appraisal in extension organisation?
4.
Highlight any 5 pitfalls that extension managers should try to avoid in order to have effective staff appraisal.
5.
Define and state the purposes of budgeting.
6.
State an y five methods of fiscal cont rol in extension organisation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adegoke, J.A.
(1992).
‘Appraisal as an Important Management Tool’.
Paper presented at the 15th Training Programme Organised for the Middle Level Managers.
Ikeja: Berger Paints Nig.
Adejare, T.G.F (2004).
‘A Term Paper on Budgetary Allocation and Fiscal Control in Advanced Agricultural Extension Administration’.
Unpublished.
Akindunmade, R.O.
(2008) ‘Principles of Monitoring and Evaluation of Agricultural Extension services’.
Akinyemiju, O.A.
and Tomiwo, D.O.
(eds.).
Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treatise.
Ikeja Lagos: B.C.
Agricultural Systems Ltd. Appleby, R.C.
(1982).
Management in Action.
London: Pitman Books Limited WCWE9AN Long Acre.
Robert, L.J.
(2003).
‘Rebuild the Agricultural Research and Extension System in Nigeria’ htt://wwwnigerdeltacongress.comrartiderrebuildtheagriculturalres eachhtmc Stass, A.W.
(1989).
Financial Management in Public Organisations.
USA: Books/Cole Publishing Company.
122  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 MANAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION SERVICES IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Agricultural Extension in Nigeria: Pre-Independence Era 3.2 Extension Organisation in the Northern State 3.3 Extension Organisation in the Southern State 3.4 Problems of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria 3.5 Management of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria in the Post Independence Era 3.6 Agricultural Development Projects – Channel of Effective Extension Services in Nigeria 3.7 Training and Visit (T & V) System of Agricultural Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit explains the basic concepts of extension, organisation, management and their implications in relation to agricultural extension activities.
Approaches and principles are also discussed with a view to better understand the issues involved in the management of extension organisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  discuss the pre-independence agricultural extension systems in Nigeria  highlight the major problems of agricultural extension in Nigeria  discuss the post independence management of agricultural extension system in Nigeria.
123  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Agricultural Extension in Nigeria: Pre-Independence Era The history of the organisation and operation of agricultural extension in Nigeria is synonymous with the history of the development of agriculture in the country.
This histor y dates b ack to the year 1893 when the department of Botanical Research was established at Olokom eji in the then western province of Abeokuta.
This development marked the beginning of the history of agricultural extension activities in the country.
Ever since, the extension services has been patterned after the British system in which extension is an integral part of the Ministry of Agriculture.
By 1905, the headquarters of the department of Botanical Research was moved to Moor Plantation at Ibadan where the British with Gross Association (10.355km) acquired a large piece of land for the growing of cotton for their textile industries.
Not minding the failure of the programme, the Moor Plantation continued to operate as a research station and also as the headquarters of the Southern Nigeria Department of Agriculture.
In the year 1921, the need arose to establish a unified department of agriculture that was meant to serve both the south and north in respect of crop production on experimental basis, improvement of soil fertility, marketing of agricultural produce as well as the training of Nigerians through a well designed and organised agricultural education programmes.
Between 1914 and 1951, the organisation of the Ministry of Agriculture was based on experimental forms to serve the areas with similar agricultural conditions.
However, in 1954 the country-wide political re- organisation resulted in the creation of three separate ministries of agriculture, one each in the North, East and West.
A fourth ministry was established in 1963 following the creation of the Mid-west Region in the same year.
This ministry facilitated the specialisation of functions resulting in the Extension section which primarily got involved in supply and education functions.
With 36 states in the country, there are many distinct Ministries of Agricultures.
The organisation of each State Ministry is a reflection of the Agricultural problems of the state.
These State Ministries are related to the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
As recorded by Obibuaku (1983), Extension work was not known or attempted until 1962 when the United States Agency for International 124  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Development Extension experts were employed by the Ministry of Agriculture in the then Eastern Region.
3.2 Extension Organisation in the Northern State Extension organisation in the northern states took the form of involvement of the Ministry of Agriculture and Native Authorities in the extension work.
Farmers had implicit confidence in the Native Authorities and it was therefore proper to exploit this situation in order to move extension services forward.
Extension work was carried out on horse-back and on foot by Agricultural officers and consisted mainly in trying to convince the farmers to fit export crops into their farming system.
In this way, cotton and groundnut crops were established in the north.
Extension in this area was strengthened the more by free supply of seeds and seedlings and low rates for the transport of products by railways as well as grants given by the Empire Cotton Growers Association.
Thus, the extension services become more prominent as mixed cropping was introduced in the north in 1953 to ensure that farmers benefited from the economies of large scale.
3.3 Extension Organisation in the Southern States In the southern States, agricultural extension service was conducted on field basis with headquarters at Ibadan.
Extension efforts were directed mainly at Cocoa production for the West, Oil Palms for the East and Rubber for the Mid-West.
This involves the multiplication and distribution of improved seeds, the teaching of farm management and the processing of farm produce.
There were various schemes established which were meant for improved production, processing and distribution of cocoa, rubber and oil palm.
Organisational structure was introduced to guide the extension service.
The line of responsibility ran from the Minister of Agriculture and Natural Resources at the federal level to configure at the state level up to the village level workers.
3.4 Problems of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria Nigeria is seriously handicapped without an effective extension system.
As farmers in advanced countries differ from farmers in developing countries, so the agricultural extension problems also differ.
The following as identified by Torimiro and Okorie (2007) are some of the problems facing agricultural extension system in Nigeria.
125  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 1.
Problem of enactment – The extension system is yet to be backed by law in Nigeria.
There is no clear policy guideline on extension programme planning.
2.
Policy making – The organisational structure of agriculture shows that the administrative system is based on Top-down approach (i.e.
Bureaucratic) rather than “Bottom-up” approach (i.e.
participatory).
3.
There is no definite specification of roles for government agencies, banking institutions, farmers union and community based associations.
4.
Problems of focus – It is not clearly defined whether the focus of agriculture in Nigeria is on men, women, children or the aged.
5.
Problems of responsibility – Before the ad vent of ADP, extension services used to be the responsibility of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture.
But now, State Ministries of Agriculture draw policies.
But how relevant are the policies drawn by the government for agricultural development in Nigeria?
There is no specific policy statement on extension Service in Nigeria.
The implementation of a policy on agricultural production is always faulty.
More so, those who are left to implement policies on agriculture are not knowledgeable in agriculture extension.
6.
Inadequate funding of Extension – There is an erratic release of fund to all agricultural Extension units.
Initially, the funding of ADP in Nigeria was a tripartite approach involving the World Bank, the Federal Government and State Governments.
Now the ADPs are being under-funded as a result of the withdrawal of World Bank’s financial assistance.
Poor funding leads to poor pattern of communication.
It also affects the span of control and the unity of command in T & V system.
7.
Transportation/logistic problem– Extension workers are not given adequate means of transportation to their areas of coverage.
8.
Welfare and motivation of workers – Welfare and motivation of workers are at zero level.
The Extension workers are not encouraged to develop themselves.
There is no provision for in- services or on-the-job training.
The extension staff were active and efficient when the ADP was funded by the World Bank, but now the morale of staff has been dampened following the withdrawal of the World Bank.
126  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 9.
Political problem–Extension programme requires professional leadership for effectiveness.
As a result of political influence, any agriculturist is regarded as an extensionist and can be appointed to lead where an extension specialist is supposed to be.
Little attention is paid to extension by the people in power who do not regard agricultural extension as a tool for the nation’s development.
Different people in Nigeria perceive extension management differently.
Also, political instability often leads to policy inconsistency.
10.
Linkage between extension and research – There is a weak linkage between farmers, extension and research in Nigeria.
The available technologies are not usually suitable and adaptable to the country’s environment.
Developing an appropriate technology requires a participatory approach.
11.
Inadequate input supply – Farm inputs such as fertilizer, agro- chemicals, improved seeds, etc.
are not affordable for the farmers to buy and are not also readily available.
Poor quality of agro- chemicals arises from the unnecessary delay in clearing and distribution of chemicals to the appropriate quarters for marketing.
Extension workers cannot recommend the input that is not readily available to farmers.
12.
Problem of selfish interest and greed – This concerns the extension administrators, the supervisors, and the extension managers.
They attend seminars, workshops and conferences themselves denying the real extension workers the opportunity.
Also, funds are not released when due.
13.
Problem of extension staff-farmer ratio – In Nigeria, there is no agricultural radio or rural radio for information dissemination.
Therefore, the extension Agent (EA) transmits information to his farmers through personal contact.
As a result of understaffing, the extension Agent to Farm family ratio is as high as 1:2,500 or 1:3,000 or more.
In Denmark, a farm-family ratio is 1:325, in Canada, it is 1:110 (Axinn, 1988).
14.
Poor staffing – In Nigeria, government does not take cognisance of the employment of professionally competent staff as extension workers.
15.
Lack of programme evaluation – most agricultural extension programmes are not evaluated against the set objectives.
127  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 State 5 problems of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria and proffer solutions for them.
3.5 Management of Agricultural Extension in Nigeria in the Post Independence Era With the acute food shortages in the immediate post independence years, worsened by declining land productivity and the subsequent food importation, Nigeria was put in dire a strait.
(Amalu, 1998).
By 1968, the Federal Ministry of Agriculture was established with the mandate of coordinating agriculture programmes throughout the country.
Since then, a lot of extension approaches have been tried in Nigeria to ameliorate some of the aforementioned problems.
These include: 1.
The special commodity extension services for major export crops such as cocoa, rubber, groundnut, cotton and oil palm.
2.
Farm settlemen t schemes of the 1960s which were operated in the former western and eastern Nigeria aimed at providing young school leavers with practical training in agriculture.
It was also intended that farmers in the neighbouring villages will learn new ideas from the settlers.
3.
The River Basin Development Authorities (1975) charged with the development of irrigated agriculture in identified river basins in different parts of the country.
The River Basins employed different extension approaches.
Their mandates were however recently redefined to exclude extension services.
4.
The National Accelerated Food Production Programme (NAFPP) was launched in 1971 by the Federal Government to accelerate the production of six major food crops in Nigeria – rice, maize, cassava, sorghum, millet, and wheat.
The aim is to increase the farm yields of small-scale farmers by their adoption of improved varieties which are responsive to nitrogen and improved management by developing well organised and well trained extension workers and farmers and by developing effective support agencies to supply all the production inputs, arrange storage and marketing.
5.
The Operation Feed the Nation (OFN) was laun ched in 1976 with the aim of encouraging massive food production across the country.
With little attention to a well-articulated extension system, th e programme ended by making a little impact.
This was 128  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT later replaced in 1979 with the Green Revolution Programme which many analysts consider a huge failure.
6.
In the 70s, the Federal Government negotiated a World Bank Loan to establish three pilot Agricultural Development Project (ADP) in Funtua (Kaduna State), Sokoto (Sokoto State) and Gombe (the then Bauchi State).
The relative success achieved by this project inspired the Federal Government to establish six more in the late 70s.
The central theme of these projects was to transfer the already developed agricultural technologies to the majority of the farmers in t he rural areas.
Today, following the tremendous success recorded in the pilot projects, ADP has become statewide.
The structure of ADPs is organised on a single management system which operates with a high degree of autonomy from the parent Ministry of Agriculture, including development of work plans and budgeting control.
3.6 Agricultural Development Projects – Channel of Effective Extension Services in Nigeria The features of ADPs have popularised them as an effective institutional framework for enhancing agricultural development in Nigeria.
The government body of the ADP is the Chief Executive Council (ADPEC) which is headed by the State Governor in most states and the Commissioner for Agriculture in a few others.
The ADPEC is responsible for policy formulation, appointment, promotion, approval for annual work plan and budget.
Membership spans through the commissioners responsible for various aspects of rural development, agriculture, finance etc; Federal Department of Rural Development, Federal Agricultural Coordinating Unit (FACU) and other parastatals in the state related to agriculture, with the project manager (PM) as the secretary.
At the project level, the Project Management Unit (PMU) implements the policies and programmes approved by ADPEC, including development of the work plan budget for approval and supervision of the field activities.
The chairman of the PMU is the project manager, who ma y or may not have a deputy.
Responsible to the project manager, and also members of the PMU are the heads of the sub-programmes.
These are Technical services, Commercial services, Engineering, Finance, Administration, 129  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Agricultural Extension Services, Manpower Development and Training, Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation sub-programmes.
The technical sub-programme comprises the agricultural extension, On- farm Adaptive Research (OFAR) and seed multiplication component which are headed by officers of chief grade level.
The seed multiplication component is headed by a senior or principal grade officer.
The chief Extension officer (or Director of Extension) also has a Deputy.
At the field level, the project is divided into zones (mostly in line with the original agricultural zones) each headed by a Zonal Extension Officer (ZEO) or Zonal Manager (ZM).
There is also at zonal level a team of Subject Matter Specialists (SMS) comprising an agronomist, plant protectionist, a training and information officer, and other specialists as may be relevant to individual states.
Each zone is further divided into blocks.
Ideally, there should be eight blocks to a zone, but normally there are less or rarely more than that number.
The block is headed by a Block Extension Supervisor (BES).
The blocks are divided into circles or cells, and here again there should be eight units per block.
The Extension Agent (EA) who has the cell/circle as his area o f jurisdiction again divides his area of jurisdiction or area of coverage into eight sub-circles or 22 groups should cover an area that is compact or manageable enough for the EA to cover in a day.
This will depend on a number of factors, including mobility, farming population, farm size, absence or otherwise of natural barriers, etc.
however, each sub-circle should have at least 6–3 contact persons (i.e.
contact farmers) through whom the EA reaches other farmers.
Ideally, the basis of all demarcation should start from the sub-circle level, and rise to the zone.
This means that after demarcating the whole project area into manageable sub circles, then each group of a contiguous unit becomes a circle or cell.
Each group of eight blocks will make a zone.
In preparing the appraisal reports for the new projects, the weakness identified in the performance of the pilot phase (enclave ADPs) were taken into consideration.
Most significant among these short falls:  Technological packages were not based on the prevailing farming system and they were not readily adopted by the farmers;  There was insufficient adaptive research or on-farm-testing of improved practices.
This was due to the short life span of the project; 130  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT  The short project life period of five years was too short, considering the nature of most aspects of agricultural development; and  There was too rigid adherence to the contents of the original appraisal report and target which prevent flexible adjustment and possible redirection of course in the light of evaluation and the project management.
In the light of these identified shortcomings in the pilot phase of ADP, each of the statewide ADPs’ projects now has a total life period of ten years, divided into three phases of four years in phase 1, and three years each for phases 2 and 3.
This will allow for constant evaluation and where necessary, redirection of course.
Also, the phasing provides opportunities where their importance in the state is identified.
The ADP before the World Bank sponsored Training and Visit (T & V) programmes operated a quasi-general ministry of agricultural extension approach.
However, with the entrance of the World Bank sponsored Training and Visit System into the agricultural landscape of many developing countries, all the statewide ADPs adopted T & V system.
Presently, T & V is the dominant extension approach in Nigeria.
3.7 Training and Visit (T & V) System of Agricultural Extension The present approach to agricultural extension system in Nigeria is the T & V systems.
The T & V system of agricultural extension is a professional s ystem o f extension based on frequently updated training of extension workers and regular field visits (Benor et al., 1984).
The system operates through management by objectives (MBO), which concerns the optimisation of human resources.
The major features as described by them are: Professionalism This entails the ability of the extension worker at all levels to identify production constraints of farmers and develop appropriate solutions.
This can only be achieved through regular training and contact with research.
Single Line of Command To run the T & V system of extension very effectively, there must be uninterrupted line of command.
This implies that, an extension Agent is responsible to his Block Extension supervisor, the BES is responsible to 131  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT his Zonal Extension Officer (ZEO) and the ZEO is responsible to his Deputy Director of Agricultural Extension Services (DDAES) and the DDAES is responsible to the Director of Agricultural Extension Services.
Concentration of Efforts This is perhaps the fulcrum of all the features.
Extension workers must perform only their professional or assigned functions.
There is need to avoid dilution of effort in order to make the desired impact.
This is why, for instance, the Village Extension Workers are advised to concentrate on contact farmers in their teaching and demonstration of improved practices.
Time-bound Work This is the delivery of messages and skill to farmers in a regular and timely mann er so that they can optimise the use of the resources available to them.
Recommendations and skills for specific field operations must be taught to subject matter specialists by the scientists, and extension messages on these must also be transferred to the field staff such that they get to the farmers at the time they are useful in the farm operations.
Field and Farmer Orientation To serve farmers effectively, the extension services must be in regular contact with them on the farms where all the teaching and demonstration must take place.
The farmers must be aware of the time of visit of an extension agent, and on a regular basis, new and relevant messages must be brought by the agent to sustain the interest of the farmers.
Regular and Continuous Training To achieve professionalism, the extension workers must be in constant contact with research.
This is achi eved through the Monthly Technolog y Review Meeting (MTRM) or workshops organised by the research for Subject Matter Specialists (SMS) and regular fortnightly training sessions organised by the SMSs for field Level Block extension supervisors and extension Agents.
There are also several refresher and specialised training courses organised for extension workers to update their knowledge and skill.
132  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Linkage with Research A strong research-extension linkage is an effective vehicle through which extension workers learn new techniques which they pass on to the farmers.
In reverse manner, field problems which extension cannot resolve are passed on to research for immediate solution or further investigation.
Use of Contact Farmers The use of contact farmers by the extension services is a key feature of the T & V system.
A contact farmer is a representative of farmers in a village or group.
He is expected to help other farmers and to transmit knowledge learned from EA to other farmers.
He is regarded as the life wire of technology transfer to other farmers.
Because of the vital role the contact farmers play in good extension work, their proper selection is very important.
In-built Monitoring and Evaluation System Monitoring and evaluation of T & V extension entails three functions, the first being done by extension management and the other two by a monitoring and evaluation unit.
This involves: (1) Routine monitoring of extension activities and their impact (i.e.
training of staff employed, field visits etc.)
(2) Monitoring and evaluation surveys of farmers covered b y extension service, focusing on visits made by extension staff, recommendations taught to farmers and crop yields and (3) Special studies of particular aspects of the Extension system.
4.0 CONCLUSION Extension service in Nigeria is saturated with series of problems.
In an attempt to alleviate them, the Federal Government h as tried a number of extension approaches.
Suffice it to state that Agricultural Development Projects (ADPs) have by their features and operation stand to be an effective institu tional framework for extension activities.
What is then apparent for this channel is a stronger extension organisation and management for sustainable agricultural extension development.
133  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT 5.0 SUMMARY The history of Nigeria’s extension service had been a long one dating back to the year 1893 through 1921 to the present.
Organisational structure was introduced b y the government in order to guide effectively the operations of extension services.
As such, the line of responsibility ran from the minister of agriculture and natural resources at the Federal level to the commissioner for agriculture at the level of the States.
This unit also explained the problems confronting extension services and some of the series of approaches attempted by the federal government up to the ADPs, which stand to be an effective instructional framework for Extension management in the country.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the pre-independence systems of agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
2.
Highlight 10 problems of extension services in Nigeria.
3.
Discuss some of the schemes which the federal government has embarked upon since independence towards the development of agriculture in Nigeria.
4.
Explain briefly the management of extension service through ADPs in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adegbola, A.A. and Akinbode, I.A.
(1986).
‘A Review of Old and Current Agricultural Development Scheme in Nigeria: Lessons for Future Programme Designs’.
Ife Journal of Agriculture.
Special Publications 9:1-33.
Benor, D., Harrison, J. and Baxter, M. (1984).
Agricultural Extension: Training and Visit System.
Washington D.C: World Bank.
Johnson, R.L.
(2003).
Rebuilding Agricultural Research and Extension System in Nigeria.
Kansas University Press.
Torimino, D.O.
and Okorie, V.O.
(2008).
‘Comparative Extension Education’.
Akinyemiju, O.A.
and Torimiro, D.O.
(eds.).
Agricultural Extension: A Comprehensive Treatise.
Amalu, V.C.
(1998).
Agricultural Research and Extension Delivery Systems in Sub-Sharan Africa.
Calabar: The University of Calabar Press.
134  AEM736 EXTENSION ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Fenley, J.M.
and Williams, S.K.T (1964).
‘Background for Extension workers in Western Nigeria’.
Ibadan: Ministry of Agricultural and National Resources Extension Training Bulletin, No.
3.
Obibuaku, L.O.
(1983).
Agricultural Extension as a Strategy for Agricultural Transformation.
Nsukka: University of Nigeria Press.
135
