 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE: AEM 712 COURSE TITLE: AGRIC EXTENSION ADMINISTRATION, PROGRAMME PLANNING AND EVALUATION 1  AEM 712: AGRIC EXTENSION ADMINISTRATION, PROGRAMME PLANNING AND EVALUATION (3 Cr) COURSE GUIDE COURSE DEVELOPER/WRITER: Prof. C.P.O.
Obinne, Dept.
of Agric.
Extension & Communication, University of Agriculture, Makurdi, Nigeria.
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA.
2  AEM 712: AGRIC EXTENSION ADMINISTRATION, PROGRAMME PLANNING AND EVALUATION Contents Introduction The Course Course Aims Course Objectives WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE Course Materials Study Units Textbooks/References Assessment a. Tutot-Marked Assignment b. End-of-Course Examination Summary 3  AEM 712 INTRODUCTION The activities and efforts performed in planning, organizing and running an organization constitute what is referred to, generally, as administration.
Planning is an important element in administration as it involves a detailed arrangement of material and human resources needed to achieve a desired goal.
For any organization or business to succeed and to attain all its goals, a formidable administrative machinery must be in place.
Aspects to consider include principles of administration and planning, supervision, staff motivation,discipline, and staff participation among others.
THE COURSE The Course Guide describes, very briefly, the direction the course would follow, including the type of course materials needed as well as an indication of the importance of assignments.
There are five (5) modules in this course with each module comprising some units.
Course Aims The aim of this course is to explain the principles and processes of administration and planning as applied to extension work in order for the learner to appreciate the challenges facing Extension Administration and obtain essential skills of administration and planning.
Course Objectives The general objectives of this course are for the leaner to:   Understand the theories and principles of Extension Administration   List the tasks and functions of an Extension Administrator   Explain the principles of supervision in extension work 4         Describe some motivational techniques applied in extension work   Explain the importance of extension programme planning   Describe the extension planning process   Enumerate the principles of programme planning   Design a plan of work and a calendar of work   Discuss the usefulness and processes of Strategic Extension Campaign   Explain the concepts of monitoring and evaluation in Agricultural Extension programmes WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE To benefit from this course, the learner should study the units in detail.
Each unit contains the content materials as well as assessment exercises which should be carefully worked on and submitted for assessment.
The learner is strongly advised to study the course materials as contained in the units and attend all tutorial classes.
Course Material Items which would be provided to each learner are: i.
Course Guide, and ii.
Study Units.
A Reference list is given to guide the learner in searching for more learning materials.
The Internet is, also, very useful.
STUDY UNITS There are 5 modules, all containing 17 Units MODULE 1 Unit 1: The Concept of Extension Administration Unit 2: Principles of Extension Administration 5  Unit 3: Theories of Administration Related to Extension.
MODULE 2 Unit 4: Essential Tasks of an Extension Administrator Unit 5: Strategic Tasks of an Extension Administrator Unit 6: Qualities and Functions of Extension Administrators.
Unit 7: Organizing and Coordinating for Extension Work MODULE 3 Unit 8: Extension Supervision Unit 9: Staff Recruitment, Placement and Discipline Unit 10: Motivation in the Extension System MODULE 4 Unit 11: Extension Programme Planning and Execution.
Unit 12: Strategic Extension Campaign Unit 13: Personnel Management and Staff Training MODULE 5 Unit 14: The Role of Public Relations in the Extension Service Unit 15: Marketing Extension Unit 16: Monitoring and Evaluation in Extension Programmes Unit 17: Field Visits and Reporting In Module 1, the concept of Extension Administration is explained while the basic principles of Extension Administrationare detailedimp are presented in Unit 2.
The theories of administration which are related to extension are presented in Unit 3.
Module 2 contains four units.Every Extension Administrator has specific duties to perform.
The essential tasks of an extension administrator as well as his strategic tasks have been documented in Units 4 and 5.
6  The functions expected of the administratunitsoeaspects xter are treated in Unit 6.The process of organizing and coordinating for effective extension work is presented under Unit 7.
In module 3,there are three important units.
The Principles of Extension Supervision are detailed in Unit 8.In Unit 9, details of staff recruitment, placement and discipline are discussed.The meaning, process and relevance of motivational techniques as they relate to extension personnel are explained in Unit 10.
Module 4 contains three special units.In Unit 11, the importance, general principles, planning and execution processes are discussed.Unit 12 dwells extensively on a modern terminology called Strategic Extension Campaign.Personnel management and aspects of staff training in the Extension Service are handled in Unit 13.
In Module 5,there are four units.
In Unit 14, the roles of good public relations are examined with reference to the extension system.The concept of marketing extension is briefly explained in Unit 15.
In Unit 16, the concepts of monitoring and evaluation are described as applied in agricultural extension programmes.Unit 17 deals with field visits and reporting in extension work.
Textbooks/References In addition to the Internet, other sources of information are the textbooks on general administration and programme planning.
7  Assessment There are two aspects of assessment in this course, viz: (1) Tutor-marked assignment (TMA), and (2) End of Course Examination.
(a) Tutor-Marked Assignment The TMA is the continuous assessment component given by the teacher as he teaches.
It is marked by the tutor and the number of such tests varies.TMA accounts for 30% of the total examination.
(b) End-of-Course Examination An examination is given at the end of the course.
It accounts for 70% of the entire examination.
Summary This book covers the essential concepts of extension administration and programme planning.
Other specific areas treated are staff supervision, recruitment, discipline, motivation as well as strategic extension campaign,personnel management, public relations and evaluation.
8  MODULE 1 Unit 1: The Concept of Extension Administration Unit 2: Principles of Extension Administration Unit 3: Theories of Administration Relation to Extension UNIT 1 THE CONCEPT OF EXTENSION ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Administration 3.2 Management versus Administration 3.3 The Concept of Extension Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Market Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Agricultural Extension has been regarded as a voluntary, out-of-school educational system.
It has no fixed curriculum and deals mainly with the present needs of farmers.
All types of farmers are involved (heterogenous) – male, female, smallscale, large scale, etc.
The experiences acquired are meant for immediate application on the farmer‟s field.
Extension is a democratic and continuous, cyclic process.
Through extension work, farmers learn the need for change, the process of change, its results and benefits.
It is, therefore, education for use/action.
9  Therefore, it is necessary to ensure a well co-ordinated and effective administration of the processes of involving farmers and researchers for effective and efficient outcomes.
The need for understanding the basic concept of extension administration becomes apparent.
This Unit explains the meaning of administration and extension administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objectives of this Unit are to:   Define administration   Highlight the purpose of extension administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Administration ADMINISTRATION is the guidance, leadership and control of the efforts of a group of persons towards some common goals.
Administration implies conscientious efforts directed towards organizing and controlling human activities in order to achieve agreed or desired goals.
It involves, therefore, the organization, direction and control of persons and facilities in order to accomplish specified ends.
Administration involves essential activities of the people charged with ordering, forwarding and facilitating the efforts of individuals or groups brought together for desirable purposes.
It involves efforts such as decision-making, programming, communicating relevant information, controlling and evaluating various actions.
Administration is used during policy formulation for developing staff, understanding the planning process, job description, training and evaluation processes.
10  3.2 Management Versus Administration Management is a part of Administration.
Management is an administrative technique in the conduct of public affairs.
The traditional framework within which a civil service exercises its responsibilities is described as an administration.
Administration lays emphasis on proper procedure, regulation and control.
It employs ease of communication to achieve an unambiguity – interpreting words and issues to ease the operation of a system.
Administration takes place in the health sector, universities, army, church, agriculture, industries, business and social organizations such as the Agricultural Extension Service.
3.3 The Concept of Extension Administration Agricultural extension involves various activities directed to improve food production and living standards of the people.
Extension, therefore, requires direction and control of these activities in order to achieve the desired goals.
Extension administration depicts the effort of the administrator to direct, guide and integrate the activities of members of his staff in order to attain the goal of the extension service and help farmers realize their objectives.
Thus, extension administration refers to the art of directing, guiding and controlling human and material resources in an extension system.
It involves articulate joining of all aspects of agriculture such as animal and crops husbandry, soil management, technology design and supply services in order to increase food production and income levels of farmers.
Administration in extension is concerned mainly with bringing human beings together for the purpose of executing extension functions.
The administrator at the upper hierarchy should permit all members of the extension agency to participate in the efficient utilization of the available resources in 11  order to achieve set goals.
Members of an extension service are categorized into directive or executive cadre.
Any staff in the directive cadre assumes responsibility for directing which indicates that there are people to direct.
Similarly, the executive staff (also known as organizing staff) has the responsibility for organizing and executing issues, which indicates that there are people to organize.
For a meaningful extension administration, mutual co-existence among members of an extension system is necessary.
Extension administration recognizes the existence of people with diverse interests, aptitudes, attitudes and social background.
Therefore, extension is designed to serve farmers with differences in orientation.
Extension has the task of limiting various interests and discouraging the uninteresting nature of farmers in order to salvage the whole agricultural system and achieve overall improvement in national economy.
Extension administrators should focus efforts towards desired change.
Change can be achieved through meaningful inter and intra-organisational relationships among extension workers and other development agencies.
4.0 CONCLUSION The purpose of extension administration is to obtain results primarily through the efforts/actions of other people assigned to perform specified tasks.
5.0 SUMMARY Extension administration involves the direction and organization of human and material resources in order to achieve set goals.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What is the purpose of extension administration?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Swanson, B.E.
and J.B. Claar (1984), “The History and Development of Agricultural 12  Extension”, Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual, 2nd United Nations, Rome, PP 1 – 19.
UNIT 2 PRINCIPLES OF EXTENSION ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Guides to Extension Administration 3.2 Conditions Necessary for Successful Extension Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is not possible to draw up a blueprint of exactly how to serve most effectively as an extension administrator.
Most principles of management are pragmatic rules of thumb and outgrowths of experience.
The principles are at best limited tools but, if wisely and carefully used, they can be very valuable.
They are a guide to action.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, the learner should be able to:   State the principles that guide the administration of extension services.
  Explain the conditions necessary for successful extension administration.
13  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Guides to Extension Administration Principles are a guide to action in an organization.
1.
The structure of an administrative organization is established in a subordinate – super-ordinate hierarchy.
Each worker should know his supervisor.
Each supervisor is expected to supervise a person.
Each member of staff within the extension agency should report to one and only one leader.
This structure should be made flexible and modifiable.
2.
The authority delegated to an individual in an organization should be commensurate with the responsibility assigned to him.
Responsibility implies accountability for the performance of the duty.
Responsibility cannot exist without authority.
Responsibility cannot be delegated but authority can be delegated.
Authority is the supreme coordinating power within an organisation.
3.
Effective administration occurs when authority and responsibilities assigned to an individual or group are clearly defined and understood.
A job description which clearly sets out the duties of each person and the degree of authority given is very crucial.
What is job description?
Job description is a statement describing the duties of a worker.
Job specification is a statement that explains the minimum requirements of the staff qualification.
4.
A two-way channel of communication must exist for a meaningful administration of an extension system to be achieved.
Vertical and horizontal communication should be maintained to develop desirable staff attitude and interest in an organization.
Communication is a 14  process whereby decisions are transmitted from one member of extension organization to another through agreed channels.
Without effective communication, an organization cannot function and there will be no opportunity for individual members to get information and fine-tune farming activities of farmers.
Thus, communication is inseparably linked with co-ordination which is a process by which multitude of skills, attitude and interests in an agency are bound together (Obinne, 1990).
5.
Effective use of specialist knowledge in planning and implementing programmes is very necessary and greatly required in performance- oriented extension administration.
One of the serious problems facing administration the world over is inadequate use of specialist knowledge in policy formulation, planning and execution of programmes.
Extension administration requires specialist knowledge in various aspects of agriculture and extension services.
Efficiency in extension administration depends on the extent to which specific issues recommended by specialists in different disciplines can be adequately addressed and controlled.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain any principle of extension administration you believe is most important.
3.2 Conditions Necessary for Successful Extension Administration The success of administration in an extension service depends on the following conditions: 15  1.
The extension service should be seen as an institution established for the purpose of assisting rural people through educational process to make maximum use of their available resources.
2.
Administrators should realize the need for the identification of sources of technological information to be used for the solution of problems of rural people.
3.
Extension administration should regard extension education as the sharing of technical knowledge useful for solving recognized problems of rural people.
4.
Extension education should be available to all rural people irrespective of race, creed, social class, or sex.
5.
Extension administrators and extension policy makers should develop an extension service adapted to the social realities and social organizations of the society being served.
6.
There is need to establish institutions for the training of personnel required for the effective running of the extension service.
7.
There is the need for organizing the educational and training methods to suit the skills, attitudes, abilities, knowledge and resources of the people.
8.
The principle of local involvement or participation in the planning of extension programmes should be ensured at all times.
9.
Efforts must be made for auxiliary services such as transport, veterinary services and credit.
16  4.0 CONCLUSION Basic principles should be followed to ensure success of administering an extension organization.
The conditions needed for efficient operations should be recognized.
5.0 SUMMARY The major principles that guide extension administration are assignment of responsibility with authority to perform, a two-way communication channel, and effective use of specialist knowledge and skills in planning.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List any four conditions necessary for successful extension administration in Africa.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Akubuilo, C.J.C.
(2008).
Modern Approaches to Agricultural Extension (Chapter 8), New Generation Books, Enugu.
17  UNIT 3: THEORIES OF ADMINISTRATION RELATED TO EXTENSION Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Management/Administrative Theories 3.2 Behavioural and Systems Approaches 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The theories of management make it easier for extension administrators or managers to decide what to do to perform their duties most effectively.
Extension administrators should be familiar with the major theories and try to apply them as appropriate to given situations.
There are three well-established schools of management thought, namely classical, behavioural and quantitative.
There are two newer approaches, the systems approach and the contingency approach.
It is possible to integrate all of these.
There is nothing rigid in administrative matters because of changing circumstances.
2.0 OBKECTIVES At the end of the Unit the learner should be able to:   Describe the five schools or approaches of management thought   Discuss the merits and demerits of each 18      Explain how each theory can help perform management functions 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Management/Administrative Theories 3.1.1 The Classical Management Theories The Classical School has two branches – scientific management and classical organization theory.
Important proponents of the Classical School include Robert Owen (1771 – 1858), Frederick W. Taylor (1856 – 1915) both of the Scientific Management Thought, and Henri Fayol (1841 – 1925) who was of the Classical Organisation Theory.
A.
Scientific Management Theories Robert Owen believed that the manager should bring reforms into the organization by improving the workers‟ conditions.
He invested in his workers as “vital machines”.
He put in place specific work procedures to ensure increased productivity.
Frederick W. Taylor worked towards increasing the efficiency of workers.
He constructed the principles of scientific management.
Taylor determined how much time workers needed to perform certain tasks.
Thus, he broke down each job into its components and established the best methods of operation for each part.
He applied the „indifferential rate system‟ to workers‟ earnings based on set performance standards of work.
Taylor is often referred to as the father of scientific management.
Taylor‟s principles of scientific management are as follows: 1.
The development of a true science of management – the best method for performing a task should be determined.
This scientific-method-of- 19  work principle also states that the responsibility for workers‟ methods of work should be that of management.
2.
The scientific selection of the worker – each worker should be given responsibility for the task for which he is best suited.
3.
The scientific education and development of the worker.
4.
Intimate, friendly cooperation between management and labour.
5.
Piece-rate principle – wages should be proportional to output and the rates should be based on the standards determined by time study.
Emphasis is on maximizing the use of available human and material resources in achieving the goals of the organization.
Taylor emphasized economic rationality, hard work as well as defined social roles and position.
He believed that workers should neither be overpaid nor underpaid.
Benefits One contribution of scientific management is the efficiency of the techniques advocated such as time and motion studies.
Another is that the work design suggested makes managers to search for the “one best way” of doing a job, that is professionalization of management.
Finally, the emphasis placed on scientific selection of workers has shown that a worker cannot do his job properly without ability and training.
Demerits The proponents laid too much emphasis on economic and physical needs of workers but failed to recognize the place of the social needs of staff as group members.
Secondly, they overlooked the desire of workers for job satisfaction (issues about working conditions, etc).
20  In brief, scientific management was concerned with how to increase the productivity of the organization and that of the individual worker.
B.
Classical Organization Theory This is the second part of classical management, and it seeks guidelines for managing complex organizations.
The founder of this school of thought is Henri Fayol because he was the first to systematize managerial behaviour.
He produced a blueprint for a cohesive doctrine of management, stressing that management is a skill, and, thus, management could be taught.
Fayol explained management in terms of five functions, namely: 1.
Planning - devising a course of action that would enable the organization meet its set goals.
2.
Organizing - mobilizing resources (human and material) of the organization to make the plans come into effect.
3.
Commanding – motivating workers and getting them to do their work.
4.
Coordinating – ensuring that the human and material resources as well as activities of the organization work harmoniously to attain the set goals.
5.
Controlling – monitoring/supervising the plan to see that it is being executed properly.
Fayol’s 14 Principles of Management These are frequently applied in administration.
1.
Division of Labour - Specialization of work will ensure efficient performance by workers.
2.
Authority – Ability to give orders to ensure compliance.
Managers need formal authority to be able to command but they, also, need 21  personal authority (e.g.intelligence to compel obedience).
Responsibility assigned should be followed by authority to act.
3.
Discipline - Workers need to respect and obey the rules and agreements existing in the organization.
4.
Unity of Command - Each employee should be responsible to only one superior officer.
In other words, each worker must receive instructions/orders about an issue from only one superior in order to avoid conflict and confusion.
5.
Unity of Direction - Similar operations in the organization should be directed by only one manager using one plan.
6.
Subordination of Individual Interest to the Common Good - The interest of the organization should be paramount.
Therefore, the personal interests of workers should not come first.
7.
Centralization - Managers should have the final responsibility but there is need to give their subordinates enough authority to do their works properly.
An optimum balance is necessary.
8.
The Hierarchy - The line of authority runs (by ranks) from top management to the lowest level of the organization.
This is the scalar chain - subordinates should recognize the formal chain of command in the organization (that is, the well defined organizational hierarchy).
9.
Remuneration - wages paid should be fair to both employees and the employers.
10.
Order - People and materials should be in their right places at the right time.
Workers should be put in positions most suited to them.
22  11.
Equity - Fairness and friendliness toward subordinates should be ensured.
12.
Stability of staff - Efforts should be made to encourage workers to remain in service for relatively long period.
A high worker turnover rate creates inefficiency in an organization.
13.
Initiative - Workers should be allowed to formulate and executive their plans.
14.
Espirit de Corps - Team spirit is important.
One criticism of Fayol‟s views is that some of the principles lack universal applicability.
Another is that the definitions of some principles are imprecise.
Some principles are, also, mutually contradictory.
3.2 Behavioural and Systems Approaches 3.2.1 The Behavioural Theory The focus is on the “human side” of an organization.
It considers the best possible worker with needed skills, the best possible work conditions, and the best possible effect or influence to motivate workers.
A.
Human Relations Movement Elton Mayo (1880 – 1949) stressed the need for managers to create good human relations by finding out why workers act the way they do and what social and psychological factors motivate them.
The Hawthorne Experiment Mayo and his Harvard associates conducted a famous study of human behaviour in work situations at the Hawthorne Plant.
In one of the experiments, they placed two groups of six women each in separate rooms and acted as supervisors.
In one room the conditions were varied and in the second room they were not.
Variables 23  tried were (i) salaries increase, (2) coffee breaks, (3) shortened workday and work week.
They discovered that output went up in both the test and control rooms (groups).
They concluded that because the test and control groups had been singled out for special attention, the workers developed a group pride that motivated them to improve their performance at work.
Another source of increased motivation was the sympathetic supervision the workers received.
Mayo believed, therefore, that when special attention is given to employees by management, productivity is likely to increase regardless of actual changes in working conditions (Stoner, 1978, P. 47).
This phenomenon is called the Hawthorne effect.
Mayo sought answers to this discovery – the social environment of workers (informal work groups) have a great influence on productivity.
The implication is that management must recognize workers‟ needs for recognition and social satisfaction in order to maximize the organisation‟s output.
The concept of the social man must be understood and utilized by management by stressing social needs in addition to organizational needs as well as personal economic needs.
B. Behavioural Science Approach Mayo and the other theorists of the Human Relations School introduced the “social man” motivated by a desire to form relationships with others.
In order to more accurately explain the motivations of people, McGregor, Argyris and Maslow applied the concept of “self-actualizing man”.
The concept states that the needs which people are motivated to satisfy fall into a hierarchy.
At the top of the hierarchy are the higher-level needs for example, ego needs (the need for respect, etc), and self-actualizing needs, for example, the need for meaning and personal growth.
At the bottom of the hierarchy are the lower-level needs, for example, physical and safety needs.
The lower-level needs, for example 24  physical and safety needs.
The lower-level needs must be satisfied before the higher- level needs become noticeable.
An extension administrator could use different ways to motivate his workers once he understands this hierarchy.
However, every body may not go from one need level to another the same way, because no two individuals are exactly alike.
3.2.2.
Systems Approach/Theory A System is an interdependent group of items that form a unified whole.
The systems approach is believed to provide an integrated framework to help administrators solve problems.
The systems approach to management views an organization as a unified, purposeful system made up of interrelated parts.
Thus, the activity of a part of an organization affects that of every other part.
The common concepts in the systems approach are sub-systems, synergy, open and closed systems, system boundary, flow and feedback.
Subsystems - These are the parts that make up the whole of a system.
For example, a department is a subsystem of the organization.
Synergy - This means that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts such that as separate departments in an extension organization cooperate and interact, they become more productive than if they had acted in isolation.
Open and Closed Systems - An open system is one that interacts with its environment.
A closed system does not.
System Boundary - Every system has a boundary which separates it from its environment.
It can be rigid or flexible boundary.
Flow - Each system has flows of inputs and outputs.
The flows of information, material and energy (eg human) enter the system from the environment as inputs.
They leave the system as outputs in terms of goods and services.
25  4.0 CONCLUSION An understanding and wise use of the theories of management would greatly assist the extension manager to run his organization very smoothly and productively.
5.0 SUMMARY The classical and behavioural schools of management have helped extension administrators in understanding their organizations well and how to run them.
A good extension administrator would seek to integrate the theories as appropriate.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the major features of any one of the theories of management?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Stoner, J.A.
(1978), Management.
Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 683pp.
26  MODULE 2 UNIT 4: ESSENTIAL TASKS OF AN EXTENSION ADMINISTRATOR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Essential Tasks of Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The task of administration is to guide and direct an administrative process which allows the full participation of other members in the system.
Administration is both an art (involving many tasks and technical and human elements) and a science (involving proven procedures useful for carrying out the administrative duties).
There are many components of good administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit, the learner should be able to: * Review the essential tasks involved in planning and execution of good extension administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 27  3.1 Essential Tasks of Extension Administrator Planning is an important work of an administrator.
It involves getting ready to carry out the job.
In the first place, targets to be accomplished within a specific time frame must be set.
Such performance objectives are set with reference to activities to be undertaken, where the activities would be executed, what each activity would actually accomplish and how much of each activity can be successfully carried out in the plan period.
The next task under planning is budgeting.
The administrator has opportunity to influence the budget of his agency.
Ideally, input into the next year‟s budget is made by all levels right from the lowest level of an organization.
The budget must state the amount of funds needed by each department/unit, stating the amounts according to uses.
The most usual types of budget are those that include separate line items for salaries, travel, equipment, buildings, and vehicles (Mosher, 1975).
Programme budget is common these days, covering specific programme objectives.
It is ideal to involve all subordinate administrators in budget making.
The third task is for the administrator to prepare a work schedule of what is to be done month by month and note the individuals to be involved.
This arrangement makes supervision easy.
The fourth task is to draw up plans for adequate information flows.
An extension administrator must be up to date on events in the organization and within the society.
He should be conversant with the duties of each worker, problems faced and the farmers‟ situations.
Methods of collecting and processing relevant information include weekly, monthly or quarterly reports, studies, field visits and staff meetings.
Good information flows allow the organization to be effectively integrated and to operate from day to day.
28  SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Why are the four essential asks discussed above useful to an extension administrator?
The tasks of the administrator, also, include those that must be performed on a daily or weekly basis.
These tasks of execution are eight.
1.
Assigning Tasks to Staff Members The good administrator places each staff in a job for which he is well qualified.
He needs to consult other members of staff before assigning tasks.
2.
Supervising Personnel Direct supervision is carried out to ensure that workers perform efficiently.
Quite often, supervision is delegated to others who inform the administrator about what each worker does.
3.
Authorizing Expenditures Expenditures have to be approved.
How best to use the available funds allotted in the budget should be determined.
4.
Maintaining Physical Facilities All physical facilities should be accounted for – availability, proper storage, functioning.
5.
Resolving Conflicts Conflicts which occur between individuals in the organization must be promptly resolved.
Conflicts may, also, occur between subordinate units.
6.
Revising Programmes 29  Programmes may be revised to meet new situations.
Modifications to work plans are allowed from time to time.
7.
Assessing and Reporting Progress Work accomplishments should be assessed annually or periodically.
It is important to regularly submit written reports of programme activities.
8.
Recruiting and Promoting Employees Administrators are often involved in replacing staff or recruiting new ones when vacancies exist.
Appropriate disciplinary measures may be taken when necessary.
4.0 CONCLUSION The essential tasks are important for the smooth running of an extension organization.
Many members of staff should be brought into the administrative process.
5.0 SUMMARY The administrator must be involved in the tasks of prior planning (setting performance objectives; budgeting; preparing work schedule; and planning information flows).
The tasks of execution for every extension administrator are task assignment; personnel supervision; expenditure authorization/control; physical facilities and supplies maintenance; conflict resolution, and programme revision.
Others are assessing and reporting programmes as well as employee recruitment, promotion and discipline.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How would you improve on the tasks of programme planning, programme implementation and programme evaluation?
30  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Mosher, A.T. (1975).
Serving Agriculture as an Administrator, Agricultural Development Council, INC. New York.
UNIT 5: STRATEGIC TASKS OF AN EXTENSION ADMINISTRATOR CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Strategic Tasks of an Extension Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The strategic tasks of administration are additional tasks.
They indicate the manner in which essential tasks are carried out.
Good extension administrators make effective and regular use of the strategic tasks because these tasks shape the entire organizational goals.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit the learner should be able to:   Discuss the strategic tasks of an extension administrator   Identify causes of low staff morale   List factors that can help raise staff morale 31  3.0 MAIN CONTENT Let us examine some of these tasks.
1.
Looking Ahead A good extension administrator keeps thinking ahead, looking at possible ways of improving his organization.
He keeps learning about agricultural development, his own specialized field, and administrative needs generally.
He could study methods used by other organizations elsewhere in order to gain more understanding of how to manage his agency.
2.
Linkage with Similar Organizations Inter-agency coordination is very necessary.
A good extension administrator would consider what contribution he could make to ensure effective coordination and how to go about it.
Regular contact (formal and informal) with similar agencies would promote a better understanding of how best to serve the needs of overall agricultural development through sharing experiences.
3.
Staff Development Both the individual staff members and organization stand to benefit if training programmes are incorporated in the activities performed.
Workers should be encouraged to acquire greater competence through training.
Individual employees gain experience and new knowledge through professional growth.
Staff development can be promoted through conferences and seminars, formal in-service training and training in other organizations (universities, etc).
4.
Maintaining Staff Morale Staff morale is related to enthusiasm and attention to careful work performance, confidence in the organization and commitment to work.
Morale tends 32  to increase among staff if the extension administrator treats workers as human beings with individual differences and personal problems.
To increase staff morale, administrators should apply some techniques, namely: i.
Ensuring regular staff promotions ii.
Regular payment of salaries iii.
Clear definition of work responsibilities iv.
Encouraging participatory administration v. Posting staff according to areas of specialization.
A good administrator should avoid personal favoritism and delays in making decisions.
Nepotism has a negative impact on organizations.
Therefore, the extension administrator should not employ mainly family members in the system.
4.0 CONCLUSION The strategic tasks of an extension administrator are additional tasks that a good administrator recognizes and uses regularly.
5.0 SUMMARY The strategic/additional tasks of a good extension administrator are: a.
Thinking and looking ahead b.
Linking with other similar organizations c. Ensuring staff development through training, seminars, etc.
d. Maintenance of staff morale e. Avoiding personal favoritism 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Each learner should: i.
List the causes of low staff morale.
33  ii.
Suggest appropriate solutions to the problems identified.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Obinne, C.P.O.
(2008).
Rural Development and Leadership.
(Module 1, Unit 5), National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos, Pp.
30 – 39.
UNIT 6: QUALITIES AND FUNCTIONS OF EXTENSION ADMINISTRATORS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Leadership Qualities of Extension Administrators 3.2 Functions of an Extension Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The first concern in staffing an extension organization is the position of the administrator or director.
Not all administrators show evidence of the qualities needed for good leadership.
Some leaders end up being poor administrators.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 34  At the end of the Unit, the learner should be able to:   Itemize the essential attributes of an extension administrator   Describe the functions of an extension director.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Leadership Qualities of Extension Administrators In most extension services the administrator is advised to develop the approach known as “staff development leadership”.
The words “leader” and “leadership” are not synonymous with the term administrator.
Leaders should be able to administer, and administrators should serve as leaders of an organization.
A good administrator is one who is both an effective leader and an efficient administrator.
3.1.1 Essential Attributes of an Administrator A good administrator should: 1.
Command respect and loyalty 2.
Transfer (delegate) authority 3.
Include all levels in policy development 4.
Instill confidence 5.
Generate enthusiasm 6.
Teach others.
7.
Learn from others 8.
Build team spirit and action 9.
Make on-the-spot decisions 10 Assume responsibility 11.
Be a good listener and diplomatic 35  12.
Recognize limitations in himself and others 13.
Judge fairly 14.
Be honest, and 15.
Be objective (Swanson, 1984) 16 Be able to foresee the future impact of decisions taken 17.
Be flexible 18.
Appear decent in the public.
3.2 Functions of an Extension Administrator (Extension Director) The Director of Extension is the organization‟s Chief Executive.
The function of the Director is to plan, organize, staff, direct and control the activities of the organization.
The position includes responsibility for supervision, personnel management, salary administration, facilities management, fiscal management, programme development and co-ordination; programme execution and programme evaluation.
The Director is ultimately responsible for managing the organization and for giving it leadership and direction.
The above functions must be delegated to some extent to others in the organization.
There is, also, a great need for effective communication within the organization.
The Extension Director should have the following minimum qualifications: a. a university degree in a relevant field and, usually, a postgraduate degree, and b. several years of professional experience, preferably at different levels in the extension organization.
Other qualities expected of the Extension Director are: a. the ability to make decisions and follow through on those decisions 36  b. a positive attitude in dealing with superiors, subordinates, and the general public c. a highly developed sense of co-operation d. the ability to inspire in others a sense of responsibility and duty to the people being served e. a basic understanding of the educational philosophy and methods of an effective extension organization f. the technical skills of management, and g. an understanding of agriculture and the ability to relate to rural people.
3.2.1 Other Responsibilities and Functions of an Extension Administrator A.
Responsibilities (1) Delineation of the objectives of extension service - since the extension service exists to fulfill set objectives, there is a central source from which activities are initiated.
(2) Drawing broad plans of action - he is responsible for drawing broad plans for restructuring activities in the extension service.
The administrator must be fully conversant with the functions in other areas of agriculture.
(3) Assembling of various categories of staff - provision of support staff at all levels is a major responsibility of top administrative staff.
The top administrator should assemble an adequate working team of experts whose activities are complementary to each other.
(4) Delegation of function - it is the usual practice for the chief executive to delegate functions.
He should be able to assign specific functions to individual members of staff.
In all cases, responsibilities are clearly written down and not 37  merely stated verbally.
Periodic review of job description is made by the administrator to reflect changing situations.
(5) Directing (supervising) delegated functions - this responsibility assumes that the administrator has a clear understanding of his authority and how it is exercised.
Directing and overseeing requires that an officer to whom function is assigned should report back to the administrator.
The report could be oral or written.
(6) Definition and standardization of performance - it is the responsibility of the administrator to clearly define and set standards of performance.
This is needed to ensure that the quantity and quality of the performance of the organization and staff is established.
(7) Provision for evaluation of performance - evaluation of the overall result of extension effort is the responsibility of top administrators.
Evaluation refers to the appraisal of the degree to which goals set for various programmes have been attained.
(8) Provision for stimulation and energization of personnel - when large numbers of people are brought together in an organization, it is not feasible to have common interest spontaneously.
They need guidance and stimulation from their superior officers.
The degree of interest, enthusiasm and devotion to duty will tend to be the product of similar qualities found in superior officers.
It is the responsibility of administrators to show, by example, a high degree of interest, devotion to duty for the junior ones to emulate and create a good working atmosphere that will stimulate staff to work efficiently.
B.
Functions The functions of an administrator in the administrative process are: a) Planning b) Organizing 38  c) Staffing d) Directing e) Coordinating f) Reporting g) Budgeting These are represented by the acronym POSDCoRB a.
Planning - Effective extension work results from planning.
Any administrator that does not plan ahead, with specific aims and objectives to be realized within a specific time, is bound to inhibit performance.
It is the function of the administrator to plan the programme of extension and such a programme will include: 1. the description of situation 2. problems or actions that need to be given attention 3. aims and objectives to be achieved 4. responsibilities of various officers, and 5. possible courses of action to achieve the stated objectives Planning helps to (a) avoid waste of resources, (b) facilitate proper allocation and distribution of available resources, and (c) provide a guide to constructive action in the field.
b.
Organizing: Organising refers to the arrangement of persons, ideas, materials and other facilities necessary for the performance of functions.
Work is assigned to individuals, groups or departments.
c. Staffing: This involves the recruitment, selection, development, utilization and accommodation of human resources in the organization.
d. Directing (Supervision) 39  This involves direct face-to-face oversight of tasks assigned to individuals or small groups in order to ensure correct and adequate performance.
It is the process of ensuring that policies, administrative procedures and programmes are carried out properly.
The supervisor is a person who is responsible for overseeing the work of a given number of field officers in a given area.
The function of a supervisor is that of translating extension policies into action.
Optimum performance is obtained under a supervised condition.
e. Coordination The organisation‟s activities must be coordinated and correlated.
Coordination is an essential element in administration and it involves adjustment of the parts to each other.
The administrator should coordinate the human efforts and group staff activities in order to obtain the best results.
f. Reporting (Evaluation) This function involves appraisal of activities or performance.
From time to time, administrators must evaluate themselves, their staff and the system.
Evaluation offers the opportunity to determine how well the goals of the extension service are being achieved and the overall performance of the organization.
Information and data are gathered from the various units, departments and even individuals in the form of a report.
Based on the report, adjustments could be made.
g. Budgeting Budgeting is a process of optimal allocation of available resources to competing needs, so as to achieve set objectives.
Some of the objectives are to: a) plan the policy of an organization b) coordinate the activities of an organization so that each is part of the integral whole 40  c) control each function so that the best possible result may be obtained, and d) evaluate the activities of an organization.
The budgeting process creates a formal planning framework and gets people involved in deciding what is to be done in the future.
It fosters coordination and communication, and promotes efficiency in operating an organization.
Budgeting makes people aware of the cost of undertaking a specific activity or project.
It aids in orienting organizational operation towards the goals of the organization.
Limited resources can be allocated to provide the greatest degree of benefits.
4.0 CONCLUSION Good leadership qualities must be shown by administrators who must also perform their duties well.
5.0 SUMMARY Among the functions of a good extension administrator are assumption of responsibility, objectivity,preparing action plans, setting standards of performance,as well as reporting and budgeting.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List any ten key functions of an extension administrator.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Swanson, B. E. (1984),Agricultural Extension:A Reference Manual, FAO of the United Nations, Rome 41  UNIT 7: ORGANIZING AND CORRDINATING FOR EXTENSION WORK CONTENTS 2.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Importance of Organizing 3.2 Structure of Extension Organizations 3.3 Coordination Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION An organization always includes persons who interact within a specified structure.
Individuals in an organization have personal goals and contribute to the attainment of organizational goals.
An organization (another meaning is an institution, e.g.
government agency) is a structured process in which persons interact for objectives (Hicks and Gullett, 1976, 42  P. 22).
It is a process of organizing – the way in which work is arranged and allocated to persons.
It is the arrangement of persons, ideas, materials and other facilities necessary for the performance of functions.
An extension organization, therefore, is established to get work done.
An extension organization is constantly changing.
This calls for a strategy for organizing and coordinating its activities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit, the learner should be able to:   Define organizing and coordinating   Describe the organizing process   Describe the coordinating process and mechanisms.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Importance of Organizing The organizing process is a three-step procedure: 1.
Detailing all the work that must be done to attain the organisation‟s goals.
2.
Dividing the entire work load into activities which can logically and comfortably be performed by one person.
Work is divided among members based on suitability and ability in order to avoid too heavy work load and idleness/inefficiency.
3.
Setting up a mechanism to coordinate the work of the organization members into a unified, harmonious whole.
This is done to enable members keep sight of the organization‟s goals and reduce inefficiency and harmful conflicts.
A successful accomplishment of the organizing process will enable the extension organization to achieve its goals.
Through the organizing process, members 43  know their duties well, allowing extension administrators to concentrate on other tasks.
Confusion and doubt in the organization are reduced by the organizing process.
There is no wasteful duplication of effort or conflict as the activities of managers and their subordinates are coordinated.
An extension organization usually has a document of operation (a mission statement) which contains, among others, the following: a) Clear objectives of the organization and the means of achieving them.
b) The policies and guidelines to be followed by individuals to make optimum use of the available resources.
c) The resources available to the organization which include people.
d) The expected outputs from the organization e) The clientele to be reached f) The responsibilities of the individuals and groups within the organization and the relationship between them.
3.2 Structure of Extension Organisations Extension is organized in many different ways around the world.
Different organizational approaches can operate effectively if the people involved understand them and want to make them function.
There is no idea model that can be recommended for all countries.
Extension generally functions at each level of government in Nigeria.
In any extension organization, certain elements must be present and these include research, extension and education.
In Nigeria, agricultural extension services are organized according to various subject areas and administered under various state ministries of agriculture.
Extension services are, also, provided by agricultural development programmes 44  (ADPs) as well as some non-governmental agencies.
Subject-matter specialists (SMSs) from the various disciplines provide training to field extension agents.
Extension, also, depends on other agencies by way of linkage and interaction for a variety of services (e.g.
credit and input, research, education, etc).
3.2.1 Some factors that affect organizational design a) The scope of the extension content (subject matter) to be covered and the nature of client problem b) The size of the area to be covered (extension domain) c) The number, type and characteristics of the clientele to be served d) The duties to be performed by different personnel e) The extension methods that are relevant, and the relative emphasis to be placed on them f) The number and type of extension personnel to be employed and supervised g) The distribution of knowledge centres, such as universities and field research stations, with which extension will need a special relationship.
3.2.2 Guidelines for Setting up or Modifying an Extension Organisation 1.
The organization should be hierarchical to accommodate the different administrative and geographical levels at which extension needs to function 2.
Units with similar functions should be grouped together to provide a reasonable workload for such administrator 45  3.
Authority should be delegated so that it is commensurate with the responsibilities that are assigned throughout the organization 4.
Lines of authority should be as short and direct as possible, especially where communication is slow and knowledge of the local situation limited 5.
Each individual staff should have only one supervisor 3.2.3 Extension Administration in Ministry of Agriculture During the colonial era in Nigeria, the agricultural system was organized as a division or department.
Its services were devoted to crops, livestock, fishery and forestry, in line with the agricultural policy that gave pre-eminence to production for the export market.
The organizational structure of former regional Ministries of Agriculture in Nigeria indicated that the agricultural department was divided into three divisions, namely: 1.
Administration, 2) Veterinary and (3) Extension or Agricultural Services.
With the establishment of farm settlements, these three divisions were further divided into six sub-divisions, namely (1) Training (2) Agricultural Engineering (3) Forestry (4) Research (5) Produce Inspection , and (6) Fisheries.
The Agricultural Services division was directly responsible for all extension services.
Agricultural policies of Government are implemented by the Ministry f Agriculture and agricultural extension services are administered under the various state ministries of agriculture.
Administration at Federal Level At the Federal level, the MANR is headed by the Minister who is responsible for the implementation of national agricultural policies.
Under the Minister is the 46  Permanent Secretary (PS).
There are specialist officers heading the various divisions or departments, as well as other ancillary officers.
Administration at State Levels At the State level, the Ministry is headed by a Commissioner who is, also, responsible for the implementation of agricultural policies in the State.
Below the Commissioner is the Permanent Secretary who is the administrative head of the ministry and the chief adviser to the commissioner on all matters pertaining to agricultural development and progrmmes.
He is, also, responsible for the coordination of various technical divisions and the implementation of policies with regard to agricultural development.
He is assisted in matters of finance and administration by a cadre of executive officers.
Each of the departments is headed by a technical chief responsible to the PS for all activities under his portfolio.
Their responsibility is to translate Government policies and programmes into field action.
The agricultural department, headed by a Chief Agricultural Officer (CAO), is divided into other sections, one of which is the Extension and Training Division.
3.3 Coordination Process Coordination of functions and activities in an extension organization is necessary for successful accomplishment of desired goals.
Coordination is the process of integrating the objectives and activities of the separate units/departments of the extension organization.
The objective is to efficiently accomplish the goals of the organization, even though there is division of labour.
An organization is the means through which individuals work as a group as effectively as each would work alone.
When people work together, the best results are attained when there is division of labour.
47  Division of labour is one main reason for creating an organization.
Work is often divided among persons because: 1) men differ in nature, capacity and skill, 2) the same man cannot be in two places at one and the same time, and 3) the range of skills and knowledge is so great that a man cannot know more than one small fraction of the whole.
Division of labour makes possible the utilization of varying skills and aptitudes and eliminates wastes of time.
The main task of the administrator in an organization, therefore, is to coordinate all human efforts and to group staff activities in such a way as to obtain the best results.
Coordination is the guiding principle of organizations.
Coordination, also, operates through the existence of knowledge.
Knowledge is as important as authority.
All the way down the line, staff must know what should be done to solve a given problem.
They should, also, know the channels through which they can communicate in order to function effectively.
Certain principles guide and ensure coordination in an organization.
3.3.1 Principles of Coordination Administration and coordination are linked together in the organization and direction of human and material resources.
They are important in the efficient operation of the extension service or any other agency that is responsible for developing economic or cultural well-being of people.
Effective coordination is a process which grows through cooperation and willing interaction between people.
There are principles of coordination to be considered in the early stages of organizational planning and policy development.
1.
Professionally competent staff must be provided 48  The basic strength of any organization rests on the professional competence of its staff.
The amount of coordination required by administrative officers is inversely related to the competence and training.
2.
Administrative staff in key positions must be cooperative and enjoy mutual respect for each other The policies related to coordination are usually established at the top administrative level.
Procedures and practices to effect coordination policies are, also, determined by top administrative staff through their philosophies and their actions in the performance of their day-to-day duties.
If top administrators and heads of departments communicate with each other, seek advice from each other, hold each other in mutual respect and create a sense of unity, the attitude becomes contagious among the rest of the staff.
Mutual respect and confidence among staff is built on: a) A foundation of comparable professional training and ability.
b) Willingness to examine a given problem and the facts associated with it objectively.
c) Recognition and acceptance of honest differences of opinion.
d) A “give and take” philosophy.
3.
Objectives of an organization must be clearly defined and understood Well-defined and relevant objectives of an organisation‟s programmes provide the direction, incentives and reasons for coordination.
Definition of what is to be accomplished, why, when, how and by whom it is to be done, provides vital information to persons who are willing to coordinate their resources with others to achieve set objectives.
49  4.
Two-way channels of communication must be kept open Coordination and communication are important in an organization.
Coordination can be considered as a product of effective communication.
It is a poor administrative procedure to ignore the tasks of communicating decisions to those concerned with their execution.
Frequent staff meetings are most effective for communicating policies, problems and accomplishments of staff.
Careful minutes of meetings containing decisions should be kept and circulated to staff concerned.
Letters and memoranda should be circulated to staff.
Seminars and workshops involving policy makers and leaders of the extension service in which major problems dealing with organization, policies, programme content, effective extension methods and personnel requirements are analyzed facilitate two-way communication processes.
Newspaper publications, bulletins etc.
are useful in informing staff about decisions and problems of the organization.
Office arrangements are important in facilitating face–to-face communication with minimum time and effort involved.
People doing similar kinds of work should be accommodated together so that they communicate freely with one another.
5.
A feeling must be created that field staff are important members of the organization If every staff member feels a sense of responsibility for the total programme, the results are likely to be more rewarding.
To achieve this, field staff should be consulted on current problems and possible solutions.
They should, also, be kept informed of new policies and programmes.
In-service training, conferences, use of newsletters and personal visits, as well as letters of appreciation recommending a field 50  work are, also, effective ways of convincing staff that they are important members of the organization.
6.
The location of responsibility for coordination is important The coordination of programmes within an agency should be so placed within the administrative structures that: (a) The persons responsible for coordinating have authority to deal with administrative problems and report directly to the chief administrative officer.
(b) Officers at the zonal or divisional headquarters have status commensurate with their responsibilities.
Responsibility is judged by the size of the budget, the number of staff and scope of public service.
3.3.2 Coordinating Procedures Mechanisms useful in achieving effective coordination are: 1.
Managerial Hierarchy - Using the organization‟s chain of command, the extension manager judiciously exercises his authority, establishes procedures, and resolves disagreements in order to ensure efficient operation of the organization.
2.
Interdepartmental Communication - An effective aid to coordination is the communication between managers on the same level (horizontal communication).
This mechanism allows managers from different subunits or departments to integrate their activities.
3.
Organizational Committees - The meetings of formal committees can bring about effective interdepartmental coordination.
Committee members meet formally (as frequently as once a week) to share information and jointly take decisions.
These are specialized 51  management, multiple management and general management committees.
Advantages of committees include creating valuable ideas, transmitting information or ideas, consolidating power and authority to implement decisions, combining knowledge and abilities, advising, representing diverse views, blurring individual responsibility, and coordinating groups.
4.
Liaison Individuals Liaison persons help extension managers achieve more effective coordination of activities.
They link departments and units and clarify specific roles or duties meant for each unit.
3.3.3 Span of Management Span of management is closely related to coordination.
It means the number of subordinates reporting to a manager or supervisor.
Span of management is broader than “span of control”.
There is no ideal span but the factors to consider in deciding a range of span include economic costs, business realities, management realities, human realities, and management level.
3.4 Budget and Fiscal Policies 3.4 Meaning of Budget The budget is a financial statement which spells out estimated revenue and proposed expenditure for the coming financial year.
It contains proposals about expected revenue from different sources and expenditure items.
In many cases, the budget contains an appraisal of the performance of the economy in the previous year.
3.4.2 Role of the Budget 1.
It is a tool for economic planning 52  2.
It helps to remedy depression.
3.
It is used as a means of raising revenue.
4.
It helps to control inflation.
5.
Budgeting aids in creating organizational orientation towards its goals.
3.4.3 Types of Budget There are two major kinds: (a) The master budget, that is, the total budget package consisting of numerous separate budgets combined into the overall plan.
(b) The financial budget consists of budgets that involve short-term and long-term financing activities which affect the financial statements of an organization.
Performance reports are prepared periodically to compare actual operating results with budget.
Control involves the use of performance reports to encourage successful budget performance and discourage unfavourable performance.
3.4.4 Budget Defence Guidelines During defence, the heads of departments present their budget estimates to the budget committee for defence and approval.
Budgets are a way that managers or ministerial heads of departments have of proposing plans and projects that they would like to see implemented.
The budget proposal should be presented in a professional manner.
The materials should be quantified since objective figures are more likely to be accepted than vague generalizations about the benefits of the budgets.
53  Priorities must be set such that the most important part of the budget is presented first.
3.5 Budget Development and Fiscal Control The organization starts the preparation of its budget estimates in response to the call circular from the director of budget and planning.
Each department makes estimates with a view to getting much more than it had in the previous year.
The state budget is classed into three broad categories of Recurrent Revenue Heads, Recurrent Expenditures, and Capital Estimates.
(a) Recurrent Revenue Heads – comprise revenue projections of the organization for the coming year.
These could be revenues from the sale of seedlings, farm equipment, fertilizer, money to be paid in by farmers, etc.
(b) Recurrent Expenditure - consists of resources/money for the day- to- day running of the organization and they include such things as staff and personnel costs (that is, salary), allowances and overhead costs for example, money for the maintenance of office, or farm equipment, vehicles, training and staff development, maintenance of capital assets, buying of stationary , miscellaneous expenses etc.
(c) Capital Expenditure/Estimates include such projects that run for more than one year.
Examples are oil palm rehabilitation scheme and establishment of livestock farm .
3.5.1 Budget Implementation/Fiscal Control 54  Fiscal policy is concerned with the determination of the procedure to be followed in making expenditures and in obtaining revenue.
It involves the use of government income and expenditure instruments to regulate the economy.
To increase substantially, monthly expenditure should be related to revenue generating effort.
Measures to regulate recruitment and promotion of personnel include temporary embargo on new appointment, and promoting staff in the organization in accordance with the provisions in the approved estimates.
Measures aimed at cutting down public expenditure include restriction of 10% on overhead charges of recurrent expenditure items, embargo on senior management overseas courses and overseas tours by functionaries and restricting allocation of official vehicles to certain categories of officers.
Measures to control the execution of capital projects and programmes include devoting available resources to on-going viable projects that are likely to be completed and have immediate and direct impact on the masses.
Experts have suggested that the solution to the problem of fiscal indiscipline in Nigeria lies on the reform of the economy with a view to closing the valves through which resources flow into private packets.
Some managers and organizations expend their resources most inefficiently.
There are two forms of inefficiency, namely, allocative and X – inefficiencies.
Allocative inefficiency involves using the resources to create wealth elsewhere or using the resources in a way that does not benefit the target beneficaries.
X – Inefficiency involves using the resources in a manner that tyields lower output than could have possibly been obtained with the allotted resources (that is, wasteful spending and/or corruption).
55  The legal framework to make policy makers and executors in Nigeria act fiscally responsibly has been provided by the Fiscal Responsibility Act 2007 and the Public Procurement Act 2007.
4.0 CONCLUSION Organizing and coordinating are important management concepts which help to ensure efficient administration.
5.0 SUMMARY Workers must be put in suitable positions in order to achieve organizational goals.
Their work should be coordinated properly to reduce disagreements.
One key measure in coordination is the use of committees.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the three steps that make up the organizing process.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Hicks, H.J.
and C.R.
Gullet(1976), The Management of Organizations, 3rd ed.
McGraw-Hill Kogakusha Ltd. Stoner, J.A.F.
(1978).
Management.
Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
56  MODULE 3 UNIT 8: EXTENSION SUPERVISION CONTENTS 3.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Importance of Supervising 3.2 Principles of Extension Supervision 3.3 Functions of the Extension Supervisor 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Supervision in most extension programmes is government-controlled.
The effect is bureaucratic real-tape which does not leave room for much initiative on the part of the workers.
The quality of supervisions will determine the extent to which supervision in the extension system succeeds.
Who are extension supervisors, and what work do they do?
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit, the learner should be able to:   Define supervision and explain its usefulness in extension work   State the principles of extension supervision 57  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Importance of Supervision Supervision may be defined as a social process, a critical watching and directing of activities or course of action.
It deals mainly with leadership, guidance and personnel development.
Supervision is the art of working with a group of people over whom authority is exercised in such a way as to achieve the goals of the extension organization.
Supervising people requires great skills, high common sense, good foresight and high intelligence.
Extension supervision is the process by which agricultural officers and agricultural superintendents who are in charge of zones, blocks and cells assist junior staff to do their job more satisfactorily.
A supervisor, therefore, is any one responsible for ensuring the effective performance of the work of others.
3.1.1 The Importance of Extension Supervision Supervision is needed for the following reasons: 1.
Giving and receiving instruction and directions.
2.
Understanding essential policies, procedures and rules in the organization.
3.
Co-ordinating activities in the extension organization.
4.
Developing understanding and co-operation between individuals and organizational units.
5.
Guiding a smooth functioning team in action.
6.
Developing in each staff member the feeling that he belongs to the group and is properly informed of all relevant decisions.
7.
Providing a relief valve for emotional tension.
58  8.
Developing improved performance through the use of goals and creative discipline.
3.2 1.
Supervision is an integral part of administration.
2.
Supervision is a co-operative activity.
It takes place through the shared ideas, efforts and experiences of all staff members.
3.
Supervision is ordinarily concerned with the co-operative improvement of the setting in which work takes place.
It seeks improved methods of teaching and creates a physical, social and psychological climate favourable to learning at work.
4.
Planning is fundamental to supervision.
5.
Supervision is creative, not prescriptive.
It determines procedures in the light of the needs of each situation.
6.
Supervision substitutes leadership for authority.
It is based on the democratic philosophy that respects individual differences.
It stimulates initiative, self-reliance and individual responsibility.
7.
Supervision primarily builds creative human relationship.
8.
Supervision provides for the establishment of extension objectives and goals and means for systematic evaluation of extension programme.
9.
Supervision recognizes the need for constant monitoring and evaluation.
59  3.2.1 Necessary Administrative Conditions for Supervision Administrative conditions that facilitate effective extension supervision are listed.
1.
The people under a supervisor should be limited to a number he can effectively supervise (span of control).
2.
Activities closely related to each other should be grouped together under common direction.
3.
Keep to a minimum the number of supervisory levels.
4.
Each supervisee should have only one supervisor to whom he reports.
5.
The system should afford the immediate supervisor an opportunity to have the final say in selecting his own subordinates in order to make adequate use of the unique relationship that must exist between this key man and those whom he supervises.
6.
Good supervision results not so much from what a person does but the manner in which he does his supervision.
3.3 Functions of the Extension Supervision The success of the supervisor depends on the success of those he supervises.
Conversely, the success of those being supervised is dependent, to a large extent, upon the degree to which the supervisor acts responsibly towards several levels of personnel within the organization.
The function of the supervisor falls into four main areas: 1.
Personnel 2.
Extension programmes 3.
Finance 4.
Public relations 60  3.3.1 Personnel Functions For effective extension programme there must be a trained supervisor to play the following roles: a.
Recruitment - he must seek persons of exceptional ability and initiative to fill vacant positions b.
Selection - he gives advice in selecting those who will make the greatest contribution to extension work.
c. Placement for induction training - New employees are placed in a location which is likely to match their interests.
d. Training - The supervisor should visit the new agents frequently to confer with them on policy and procedures.
e. Counseling - He should consult frequently with the agents on problems of personnel relation and extension programme and policies.
f. Guidance - He should assist the agents in setting for themselves educational, occupational and personal goals.
g. Appraisal - He should appraise agents‟ works and guide them in making own appraisal of work and its effectiveness.
h. Transfers and promotions - These are made on the basis of the supervisor‟s recommendations.
Promotions should be made on merit basis only.
i.
Separation - He should ensure that agents have completed all necessary reports and forms prior to separation and minimize any ill- will that a separation may incur.
61  3.3.2 Extension Programme Functions The following are roles which the supervisor must perform if the programme of extension must be developed: a. Programme planning - Give agents guidance in programme planning and execution.
b. Co-ordination - Assist the individual agent in co-ordianting the programme with the various subject matter departments.
c. Evaluation - He is responsible for the evaluation of the effectiveness of the programme of the area.
3.3.3 Finance Function Discuss the extension programme with the sponsoring organization and be ready to assist with preparation of state extension budget when asked to.
3.3.4 Public Relations Functions Below are his duties in building good public relations: a.
Working conditions: Assist the local government staff in securing adequate, most attractive, pleasant office facilities.
b.
Communications: Encourage the agent to express himself freely.
He must communicate the agents‟ ideas and suggestions to the Extension Director and, in turn, communicate the ideas and wishes of the Director to the agent.
3.4 Problems of Extension Supervision in Nigeria Supervision in Nigerian Extension Services is fraught with numerous problems, ranging from poor staffing of the service to lack of logistic support.
62  The problems can be classified as follows: 1.
Staffing problem - inadequate in number and quality.
2.
Lack of or insufficient and inappropriate extension work tools.
3.
Lack of adequate logistic support.
4.
Poor and irregular supply of recommended farm inputs.
5.
Poor provision of professional improvement opportunities for staff.
6.
Financial problems.
4.0 CONCLUSION Supervision is very important in the process of attaining the goals of the extension service.
It is guided by a set of principles.
5.0 SUMMARY Through supervision, the performance of workers become efficient.
The principles needed for effective supervision in extension work include cooperation, leadership, creative human relationship and constant monitoring.
Financial, staffing, and logistic problems tend to militate against effective supervisory work.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the conditions needed for effective extension supervision?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Stoner, J.A.F.
(1978).
Management, Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
63  UNIT 9: STAFF RECRUITMENT, PLACEMENT AND DISCIPLINE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Staff Recruitment and Selection 3.2 Discipline in the Extension Service 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Staffing is an important aspect of extension organization.
The quality of personnel as well as their number would be considered in filling positions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit the learner should be able to: * Discuss the procedure for staff recruitment.
* Describe the process of discipline.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Staff Recruitment and Selection The two initial stages in staffing an organisation are recruitment, the process of finding qualified people and encouraging them to apply for work within the organization, and selection, the process of choosing among those who applied.
The first concern in staffing an extension service should be the position of the 64  administrator or director.
The personnel department is usually responsible for designing and implementing the recruitment programme.
3.1.1 Recruitment Methods Most organizations follow a deliberate practice of recruiting from within and use job posting to announce available positions to current employees who may then bid for them.
Other internal recruitment methods include employee referrals by other departments, and computerized skills inventories of employees which provide a list of qualified employees for openings.
Expanding organizations and those with many positions to fill must use outside recruitment programmes.
The major methods include employees referrals, advertising, placement agencies (which include state agencies, known as job services, and private agencies which include executive search firms specializing in recruiting top managers), campus and field recruiting, and unsolicited applications.
Laws and regulations designed to help prevent discrimination in employment have caused organizations to recruit specific groups, including women, old workers, minorities and the handicapped.
3.1.2 Staff Selection Once the recruitment programme has supplied enough job applicants, the selection process begins.
In most organizations, the personnel department is responsible for designing the selection system and managing its everyday operation.
It does the screening of applicants to determine who will be sent to the departmental heads or other managers for final evaluation.
Selection standards should have reliability, meaning that they consistently produce the results, and validity, high correlation between test scores or ranking and success on the job.
In addition, selection standards must have job relatedness – be 65  relevant to actual performance of the job, and must be legally acceptable under the uniform guideline but not having an adverse impact on any legally protected group.
The major sources of information about applicants are the application form (which supplies basic background information), the reference check, and physical examination.
Selection tests (measures of proficiency, achievement or knowledge, aptitudes or potential ability, mental ability or intelligence, personality, physical ability and interests) are generally administered and evaluated before the final stages of the selection process.
Interview Interview can take place at several stages of the selection process.
Although interviews can be the least objective part of the process, they are generally considered the most valuable.
The different interviews scenerios include the group interviews (during which one candidate meets with two or more interview3ers), and the one-on- one interview (during which the candidate meets privately with a single interviewer).
Interview techniques include structured or patterned interviews during which the interviewer follows a standard list of questions for all applicants; the non-directive interview, during which the interview does not follow a list of questions; and the situational problem interview, during which the candidate is given a specific problem to solve or project to complete.
Two major problems of interviewing are the halo effect in which the interviewer is so impressed with one area, that he or she concentrates on it in exclusion of other matters, and the horn effect in which the interviewer concentrates on a negative area.
For an interview to be effective, the following should take place: 66  a) The interviewer should be thoroughly familiar with the job description and the candidate‟s qualification.
b) The interview should not be interrupted.
c) The interview should begin in general talk to put the candidate at ease and establish rapport.
d) During the interview, the candidate should make sure he or she understands the exact nature of the job.
e) Listen to the candidate‟s answers to the questions asked and take notes discretely, so as not to hinder the discussion.
f) Close the interview by giving a date by which the candidate would learn of the organisation‟s decision.
g) The interview is followed by bringing the candidate back to the reception area; and h) Writing notes on the interview.
After all qualified or the most qualified candidates have been interviewed, the selection committee or the supervisor (in the case of private organizations) generally makes the selection decision.
3.1.3 Number of Extension Personnel Needed The number of personnel needed in an extension service depends on several factors, namely: 1.
The size of the extension area to be served.
2.
The scope and complexity of the extension programme (crop, livestock, marketing).
3.
The size and complexity of the farms 4.
The mobility of the extension staff.
67  5.
The ease of communication between staff segments.
6.
The number and the educational level of the extension clientele.
7.
The educational level and experience of the extension staff, and 8.
The major extension methods used to reach the clientele.
In projecting extension staffing requirements, there should be approximately 12 percent administrative and supervisory staff (zonal managers, etc), 13 percent subject matter specialists (SMSs), and 75 percent Village Extension Workers (VEW).
The appropriate extension ratio between extension workers and farmers should be 1 : 100 – 250, depending on various influencing variables.
3.2 Discipline in the Extension Service Staff should abide by the rules, regulations and agreements that govern the extension service.
Obedience to rules would make the running of the organization to be smooth.
There are laid-down ways to behave involving the training of the mind and body or behaviour at work in order to produce self-control or good conduct.
This is discipline.
It is being patient, humble, loyal, fair, just, committed and sincere at work.
Discipline is the willingness or ability to respect or obey authority and observe rules in the extension organization.
It is an ingredient of effective administration.
Both the administrator and the workers should exhibit discipline at work.
Many organizations have rules directly concerned with the behaviour of workers.
Rules of behaviour state what workers should or should not do and the punishment for disobedience.
Repeated offences of the same type tend to increase the severity of the penalty.
For a first offence, an employee is rarely dismissed.
Major offences (theft, fighting) may result in severe punishment.
According to Hicks and Gullett (1976, P. 434), organizations generally use the idea of major and minor offences and a sequence 68  of penalties or progressive disciplines for repeated minor offences within a given time period.
With increased litigation in the work place, extension administrators must ensure that their disciplinary actions are fair and just.
Fairness can be achieved through progressive discipline.
3.2.1 Sequence of Punishment Under Progressive Discipline 1st Stage: A clear oral or verbal warning of the staff, stating calmly that any repetition of the offence will be visited by more severe action.
2nd Stage: Written warnings, put in the worker‟s file.
The inappropriate behaviour should be specifically detailed.
The behaviour should be monitored.
Discussion with the staff is helpful.
3rd Stage: The staff may be laid off for a limited time with loss of pay.
4th Stage: The worker may be discharged, that is, dismissed, as the ultimate punishment.
There should be a well-documented case to substantiate the act of termination.
Effective Discipline: The purpose of discipline is to assist in securing organizational objectives by guiding workers‟ behaviour.
It is a corrective measure rather than a punitive one.
The essence is to encourage workers to learn from their mistakes.
Effective discipline states that “Experience is the best teacher – if you learn from it”.
The discipline is directed against the act, not against the individual.
When disciplining workers, the focus must be on the behaviour – not on personality.
3.2.2 Principles of Effective Discipline 1.
Immediacy - The sooner the discipline follows the offence, the more likely it is to be associated with the offence.
69  2.
Forewarning - There should be clear knowledge of those offences that lead to discipline problem and of the severity of disciplinary action imposed for each.
3.
Consistency - If rule enforcement is consistent, a worker would easily accept disciplinary measure without cries that he or she is being discriminated against.
4.
Impersonality - Workers should be made to understand that it is the particular act committed, not the individuals, that invites punishment.
Discipline must be used carefully in the extension organization.
The manager‟s first step should be to set good example and reward appropriate behaviour.
Behaviour that is positively rewarded easily becomes habit and remains (http://www.allbusiness.com/human-resources/employee- development/384684_1.html, assessed 6/8/09).
3.2.3 Points to Consider when Conducting Investigation into a Misconduct 1.
Conduct an investigation with another member of management.
2.
When interviewing a unionized employee, it is necessary for his or her union to be represented.
3.
Many witnesses should be talked to when conducting an investigation.
4.
The paper trail should be checked - Documentary evidence that can be used to support evidence of a misconduct include policy documents, performance appraisals, financial records, computer records, e-mails, telephone call records, etc.
5.
Seek outside or expert assistance to investigate evidence of misconduct (http://www.hr.ubc.ca/adv_srv/er/discipline.html, accessed 6/8/09).
70  4.0 CONCLUSION The success of an extension organization partly rests on the quality and quantity of personnel appointed into positions of administration.
It is advisable to use standard procedures in selecting personnel into the service.
5.0 SUMMARY Methods of staff recruitment include job posting and employee referrals.
Interviews are very useful means of selecting extension personnel.
Discipline in the workplace is the means by which the supervisor corrects behavioural deficiencies and ensures adherence to established organizational rules.
Discipline is not designed to punish or embarrass a worker.
Positive approaches are useful to ensure harmony.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What measures should be taken to ensure effective staff selection in an extension service?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Buhler, P. (1993).
Administering Discipline in the Organization, http://www.allbusiness.com/human-resources/employee- development/384684-1.html, accessed on 6/8/09.
2.
Hicks, H.G.
and C.R.
Gullet (1976).
The Management of Organizations, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill Kogakusha Ltd. 3. http://www.hr.ubc.ca/adv_srv/er/discipline.html, accessed on 6/8/09- Discipline in the workplace.
4.
Swanson, B.E.
(1984).
Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual.
2nd ed., FAO of the United Nations, Rome.
71  UNIT 10: MOTIVATION IN THE EXTENSION SYSTEM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Meaning and Types of Motivation 3.2 Classification of Motivation Theories 3.3 Factors affecting Motivation in Organizations 3.4 Maslow‟s Hierarchy of Human Needs 3.5 Theory X and Theory Y Assumptions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 72  1.0 INTRODUCTION The question of what motivates workers to perform effectively is not easy to answer.
Individuals pursue different goals at work – promotion, monetary rewards, job satisfaction or self-esteem.
Many strategies help to make workers perform efficiently.
The reactions of persons to success or failure at work differ.
Beliefs which administrators have about motivation are important determinants of how they attempt to manage workers.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the Unit the learner should be able to:  Explain the types of motivation.
 Classify motivation theories  Understand the importance of motivation in the extension service.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Types of Motivation 3.1.1 Meaning Motivation refers to the force which causes, channels, and sustains a person‟s behaviour.
It is any influence that directs or maintains a goal-directed behaviour.
Motivation may be positive or negative.
The positive type, also called “anxiety-reducing motivation” or the “carrot approach” offers benefits (pay, praise) to the individual for his acceptable performance.
Negative motivation (also called the “stick approach”) uses punishments (threats of dismissal, reprimands) where an individual performs below expectation.
Motivation is not the only influence on a worker‟s performance level.
Other factors are the individual‟s abilities and his understanding of what behaviours are necessary in order to achieve high work performance (role perceptions).
73  The relationship of the three factors to work performance can be represented by the equation: Performance = f (motivation, ability, role perceptions) Every factor is critical; if any one factor has a low value, performance will be low even if the others are high.
3.1.2 Types of Motivation 1.
Achievement Motivation – It is the drive to pursue and attain goals.
An individual with achievement motivation wishes to advance up on the ladder of success.
2.
Affiliation Motivation – It is a drive to relate to people on a social basis.
Persons with affiliation motivation tend to perform work better when they are complimented for their favourable attitudes and co-operation.
3.
Competence Motivation – It is the drive to be good at something, allowing the individual to perform high quality work.
Competence – motivated people seek job mastery, take pride in developing and using their problem-solving skills and strive to be creative when confronted with obstacles.
They learn from their experience.
4.
Power Motivation – It is the drive to influence people and change situations.
Power-motivated people wish to create an impact on their organization and are willing to take risk in doing so.
3.2 Classification of Motivation Theories There are three classifications – content, process and reinforcement theories.
1.
Content Theories – These are theories that focus on the “what” (motive or stimulus) of motivation (that is, the content and driving nature of needs).
Proponents include McGregor and Maslow.
The content approach stresses the 74  need to understand the factors within the individual which cause him to act in a certain way, e.g.
the need for security, food, achievement, or sex.
Managers should realize that workers tend to behave in ways that would lead to the satisfaction of their needs.
Therefore, extension managers should regularly observe the actions of their workers in order to determine workers‟ needs and predict, to some extent, their behaviours.
NEED DRIVE ACTIONS Deprivation Tensions or drives to Goal-directed fulfill a need behaviour SATISFACTION Reduction of the drive and satisfaction of the original need Fig.
1 A Content Theory Model of Motivation (Source: Stoner, 1978, P. 407) 2.
Process Theories – These theories focus on the “how” and “by what goals” individuals are motivated.
An individual may work very hard to be promoted.
There is the notion of expectancy in the process theories, that is, what a worker believes would likely occur as a result of his behaviour.
Valence is, also, an important factor in motivation.
It means the strength of the worker‟s preference for the expected outcome.
3.
Reinforcement Theories – They focus on the ways in which behaviour is learned or acquired.
Often, workers behave the way they do because, in the past, they had learned that certain actions or behaviours were rewarded while 75  certain other actions were associated with unpleasant results.
Thus, the theories emphasize how the consequences of a past action influence future behaviours in a cyclical learning process.
One proponent of these theories is B. F. Skinner.
Administrators have attempted to motivate workers by increasing their job satisfaction.
They want workers to accept the work situation as established by management.
In some cases (e.g.
the traditional model of motivation), workers are expected to accept the authority of management in return for high wages.
In the human relations model, workers are expected to accept management authority because the supervisors treat them with consideration and listened to their needs.
3.3 Factors Affecting Motivation in Organizations Experts have identified three variables affecting motivation in organizations as individual characteristics, job characteristics and work situation characteristics.
1.
Individual characteristics refer to the interests, attitudes, and needs that an individual brings to the work situation.
Since individuals differ in these characteristics, their motivations will, therefore, differ.
2.
Job characteristics refer to the attributes of the employee‟s tasks.
These characteristics include the amount of responsibility the individual is given, the variety of tasks the individual can perform, and the extent to which the job itself is satisfying.
3.
Work situation characteristics refer to what happens to the individual in his or her work environment.
For example, do superiors reward high performance, or do they ignore it?
76  3.4 Maslow’s Hierarchy of Human Needs Maslow‟s hierarchy of needs is very useful in organizations.
Maslow provides a theory that not only classifies human needs in a convenient way but, also, has direct implications for managing human behaviour in organizations.
Maslow views human motivation in terms of a hierarchy of five needs: 1.
Physiological needs, which include the need for air, water, food and sex.
2.
Security needs, which include the need for safety, order, and freedom from fear or threat.
3.
Belongingness and love needs (or social needs), which include the need for love, affection, feelings of belonging, and human contact.
4.
Esteem needs, which include the need for self-respect, self-esteem, achievement, and respect from others.
5.
The need for self-actualization, which includes the need to grow, to feel self-fulfilled, and to realize one‟s potential.
According to Maslow, individuals will be motivated to fulfill the need that is prepotent, or most powerful, for them at a given time.
Starting with the physiological needs, each need must be at least partially satisfied by the individual before he or she moves up the hierarchy to the next need stage.
77  SELF – ACTUALIZATION (fulfillment of individual potentialities) ESTEEM (self-respect; Esteem of others) SOCIAL (love, affection, belongingness) SECURITY (freedom from fear; need for order and rules to guide action) PHYSIOLOGICAL (water, food, sleep, sex) Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs Maslow‟s Hierarchy of Needs The practical implication of this theory for motivation in organizations is that unless employees are provided with the means to gratify their basic, physiological needs with a wage sufficient to feed, shelter, and protect their families satisfactorily and with a safe working environment, managers will get little result from incentives designed to provide employees with esteem, feelings of belonging, or opportunities to grow.
3.5 Theory X and Theory Y Assumptions McGregor suggested that there are two sets of assumptions about how workers can be motivated (Table 1).
Theory X assumptions are based on the traditional view that human beings regard work only as something that must be done to survive.
Therefore, they would avoid work if it is possible.
Theory Y assumptions state that people do not inherently dislike work but can find it a great source of satisfaction.
78  Theory X and theory Y assumptions may be merged to form Theory Z.
The general patterns of the three views are presented in Table 2.
Table 1: McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y Assumption of Theory X: Assumption of Theory Y: 1 The average human being has an The expenditure of physical and mental inherent dislike of work and will avoid e ffort in work is as natural as play or rest.
it if he can.
2 Because of this human characteristic of External control and the threat of dislike of work, most people must be punishment are not the only means for coerced, controlled, directed, or bringing about effort toward organizational threatened with punishment to get them objectives.
Man will exercise self-direction to put forth adequate effort toward the and self-control in the service of objectives achievement of organizational to which he is committed.
objectives 3.
The average human being prefers to Commitment to objectives is a function of be the rewards associated with their directed, wishes to avoid responsibility, achievement.
has relatively little ambition, and wants security above all else.
The average human being learns, under 4 proper conditions, not only to accept but to seek responsibility.
The capacity to exercise a relatively high 5 degree of imagination, ingenuity, and creativity in the solution of organizational problems is widely, not narrowly, distributed in the population.
Under the conditions of modern industrial 6. life, the intellectual potentialities of the average human being are only partially utilized.
Source: McGregor, D. (1960), The Human Side of Enterprise McGraw- Hill, New York pp.
33 – 34; 47 – 48.
79  3.5.1 Management by Objectives “Management by Objectives” (MBO) was first applied by Peter Drucker in 1954.
Supporters of MBO believed that many problems faced by managers could be avoided by using MBO.
In MBO, effective planning in an organization depends on the manager having clearly defined objectives that apply specifically to his or her individual functions in the organization.
Managers should participate in setting their performance objectives.
They should, also, outline the specific plans for achieving set goals.
The common elements in any MBO system are: i.
Top-Level Goal Setting – Effective goal setting and planning start with top management.
ii.
Individual Goal Setting – Managers and subordinates set individual goals that are related to the organizational goals.
iii.
Participation – Subordinates mutually participate at various degrees in setting objectives.
iv.
Autonomy in Implementation – Individuals have a wide range of discretion in developing and choosing the means for achieving the objectives.
v. Review of Performance – Regular, periodic reviews of performance by managers and subordinates.
vi.
Commitment to the Programme – Managers and subordinates must commit a great deal of time and energy in order to implement a successful MBO Programme.
MBO can be highly motivating if properly introduced and implemented.
80  Table 2: Comparison of the Patterns of Managerial Approaches to Motivation Traditional Model Human Relations Model Human Resources Model Assumptions (1) Work is inherently (1) People want to feel (1) Work is not distasteful to most people.
useful and important.
inherently distasteful.
People want to contribute to meaningful goals that they have helped establish.
(2) What they do is less (2) People desire to belong (2) Most people can important than what they and to be recognized as exercise far more earn for doing it.
individuals creative, responsible self- direction and self-control than their present jobs demand.
(3) Few want or can (3) These needs are more handle work that requires important than money in creativity, self-direction, motivating people to work or self-control.
Policies (1) The manager‟s basic (1) The manager‟s basic (1) The manager‟s basic task is to closely supervise task is to make each task is to make use of his and control his worker feel useful and “untapped” human subordinates important resources.
(2) He must break down (2) He should keep his (2) He must create an tasks into simple, subordinates informed and environment in which all repetitive, easily learned listen to their objections to members may contribute operations.
his plans.
to the limits of their ability.
(3) He must establish (3) The manager should (3) He must encourage detailed work routines and allow his subordinates to full participation on procedures and enforce exercise some self- important matters, these firmly but fairly.
direction and self-control continually broadening on routine matters subordinate self – direction and self- control.
Expectations (1) People can tolerate (1) Sharing information (1) Expanding work if the pay is decent with subordinates and subordinate influence, and the boss is fair.
involving them in routine self-direction, and self- decisions will satisfy their control will lead to direct basic needs to belong and improvements in to feel important operating efficiency.
(2) If tasks are simple (2) Satisfying these needs (2) Work satisfaction enough and people are will improve morale and may improve as a “by- closely controlled, they reduce resistance to formal product” of subordinates‟ will produce up to authority-subordinates will making full use of their standard.
“willingly cooperate”.
resources.
Source: Stoner (1978, p. 411) 81  4.0 CONCLUSION Motivation is a powerful tool in the hands of a good administrator.
It can be used to significantly increase workers‟ productivity.
5.0 SUMMARY Motivation can be positive or negative, depending on its use by a manager.
Motivation is grouped into three theory categories – content, process, and reinforcement theories.
There are different levels of human needs – individuals are motivated to meet the needs that are prepotent.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain Maslow‟s hierarchy of human needs.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Stoner, J.
A. F. (1978), Management, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
82  UNIT 11: EXTENSION PROGRAMME PLANNING AND EXECUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Purpose of Programme Planning 3.2 Principles of Programme Planning 3.3 The Extension Planning and Implementation Process 3.4 Plan of Work 3.5 Calendar of Work 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading.
1.0 INTRODUCTION Developing a programme of extension includes intensive planning, preparing work plan and teaching plan, carrying out (executing) the plans, as well as determining and reporting accomplishments.
The extension programme is a statement of objectives of an extension organization, formulated based on analysis of the existing situation and needs of the clientele.
A plan of work is prepared to implement the programme.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit the learner should be able to:  Understand the need for extension programme planning.
83   State the principles of programme planning.
 Describe the steps in extension programme planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Purpose of Programme Planning 3.1.1 Meaning Planning is the process of preparing what to do, and how to do it.
Planning involves stating programme objectives/goals and determining the most effective means and activities needed to attain the objecyives/goals.
In so doing, planning specifies the programme activities, time, human and material resources needed, cost estimates, and performance indicators.
3.1.2 Purposes of Extension Programme Planning Planning is the most critical function of management.
It precedes other management functions such as organizing, staffing, controlling and directing.
Extension programme planning is conducted systematically in order to promote the diffusion and utilization of science-based and indigenous knowledge in the relevant geographical location.
1.
Planning represents a guide to development.
It provides a basis for establishing the current status of the extension service, what farmers already know and do, what yields are obtained and what is possible within available resources.
2.
It provides the extension organization with a blue-print of problems, needs and resources (funds and personnel) at its disposal for implementing change programmes.
3.
It provides a basis for financial appropriation to each activity.
84  4.
It is, also, a public relations tool, making the public aware of what the extension service is doing and providing for the much needed concept of accountability.
5.
Planning is a guide to purposeful change through understanding the farmer and his farming situation.
Programme planning involves the mutual interaction between the processes of rural research, programme evaluation, local participation, field staff management, actual programming and implementation, and plan formulation.
Rural Research and Plan Formulation Development Evaluation Programming and Implementation Local Participation Field Staff Procedures Management A dynamic system perspective in the programming process.
(Source: Swanson 1984 P. 111) 3.1.3 Who Plans the Extension Programme?
1.
Every body – Farmers, extension administrators – should be involved.
2.
Farm families in remote villages plan how to fit extension programmes into their complicated set of activities.
3.
Ministries of Government should plan policy implementation methods.
85  4. Business industries, corporations, and non-governmental organization should also plan.
In agricultural extension, planning is done mostly with and for rural farm families e.g.
farmers, home makers, children, farmers clubs and so on.
3.1.4 Farmers’ Participation in Planning Since any change ultimately must depend upon the cooperation of farmers themselves, prior consultation with all the farmers is needed.
There has for long been very slow rate of adoption of many so-called improvements.
Many extension programmes have, also, failed to meet the expectations of farmers and planners.
Farmers may organize themselves into powerful pressure groups to put their case before the legislators.
Planners may consult local leaders or a representative sample of farmers.
Farmer participation in planning requires that the extension worker should have details of the problems facing the farmers and how they might be tackled.
A systematic survey work at the planning stage is needed for an understanding of the farmer situation.
The extension worker must be ready to listen to the farmers, and have respect for the local culture.
Consultation between the extension worker and the farmers should be regular.
The involvement of extension personnel in investigative survey can contribute greatly to their training and experience and serve to prevent the imposition of over- ambitious and impracticable proposals.
86  Farmers should be sufficiently interested in the planned programme.
Participation helps to arouse interest and ensures efforts by all to see the programme succeed.
Close liaison with schools, research agencies and social organizations at all stages of extension programme development and implementation encourages cooperation and reduces friction.
Involvement ensures commitment; develops rapport, legitimizes action; develops self-reliance in the client system; and ensures accurate decisions.
3.2 Principles of Programme Planning 1.
All facts about the situation in which the clientele lives must be examined.
Situation analysis would include determination of the present level of technical competence of the farmer, natural and physical resources available, economic and social factors as well as the population of farmers and their personnel resources.
2.
In planning a programme, the wants and needs of the clientele are determined, priorities set, and decision taken on possible solutions to identified problems.
The planner should involve various clientele groups such as small farmers, their wives, children, and progressive farmers.
To achieve comprehensiveness in the programme, the varied interests of farmers should be considered.
Therefore, the programme must be planned based on the socio-economic and technical background of the clientele.
3.
Programme objectives must be clearly stated and agreed upon with the farmers.
The programme should be comprehensive to meet the needs of all 87  groups – rural women, men, youth, the aged.
It is necessary to consider the experience of the clientele in development and cooperative efforts.
4.
Voluntary leaders should be used in the planning and implementation of programmes.
5.
Programmes should be made flexible to meet short-term changes, socio- economic emergencies and long-term situations.
Thus, they should have permanence with flexibility.
6.
Research stations, faculties of agriculture in universities, lay people, government bodies and trained extension personnel should be involved at the planning and implementation levels of the programme.
This is the essence of participatory democracy in extension (democratization of extension).
7.
Evaluation techniques should be incorporated to appraise the programme activities.
3.3 The Extension Planning and Implementation Process 1.
Identification: This involves a determination of the farmer group requiring a programme, identification of the problem and opportunities available for improvement as well as decision on the environment to base the programme on.
2.
Situation Analysis: All aspects of the farmer situation must be examined carefully, including political, social, economic, religious, educational, cultural and agricultural factors as well as the level of competence of the clientele.
3.
Organization for Planning: Administrative support should be sought for the progrmme as a means of legitimizing the extension action.
Provision must be made to effectively involve the clientele in planning.
Involvement ensures 88  commitment and accurate, acceptable decisions.
Others to involve include the local leaders, the extension system and various interest groups.
4.
Programme Planning Process: To build a good extension programme requires that the farmers‟ needs and wants are satisfied, and priorities set based on importance attached to the problems identified.
Alternative solutions must be found to specific problems.
To make the programme acceptable, the extension personnel should meet with the clientele and both parties must agree on workable objectives.
5.
The Planned Programme: There should be a document explaining the planned programme.
The written document has to include the needs and identified problems of the target group, a statement of the accepted objectives, the names of the programme planners, and suggestions for coordination with various interest agencies.
6.
Plan of Work: This is usually prepared by the extension personnel.
The plan of work must specify the activity, required resources, place of action, persons participating, time to implement, and expected results (see 3.4).
7.
Execution of Plan of Work: At this stage of the programme, people change their attitudes through learning improved skills.
Methods used by the extension worker must be suited to the characteristics of the clientele.
Advance planning is necessary to ensure that human and material resources are available when required.
A calendar of work (time – table of operations) is prepared to facilitate programme implementation (see 3.5).
8.
Appraisal of Accomplishment: The objective of programme evaluation is to determine the degree of influence of activities on the clientele.
Evaluation should be continuous(Fig.1).
89  Appraisal of Identification Situation Accomplishment Analysis Execution of Plan Organization for of Work Planning Plan of Work Programme Planning Process The Planned Programme Fig.1 – Programme development cycle.
90  3.4 Plan of Work Activity Required (When) (Where) (Whom) Purpose Resources & Date/Time Place Persons Concerned (Result Expected) Source Extension campaign October 15 to (Aniocha South Loc.
Rice growing farmers in To create awareness on October 22, 2009 (1 Govt.
Area) Ogwashi Anochia L.G.A.
the need to use wet-bed week) 5.30 – 6.30pm town (1 evening) Ejeme Extension Officers (Mr. method to prepare daily Unor (1 evening),Ejeme- S. K. Uti, Mr. C. Akpan FARO 12 rice Aniogor (1 evening) Mrs. Egbuga.
seedlings, the need to Ewulu (1 evening) Adoh improve quality and (1 evening) Obidugbo (1 quantity of rice evening) production through the above method.
Farmers‟ meeting October 22, 2009 Ogwashi town hall.
(a) Rice growing farmers To convince the farmers 5.30 – 6.15 p (Aniocha South LGA in Aniocha L.G.A; that wet-bed method is Headquarters) (b) Extension officers; better than their Mr. S. K. Uti traditional method of “ C. Akpan raising seedlings.
Mrs. Egbuga.
Repetition of October 28 to Run through in the above (a) Rice growing farmers To intensify campaign 91  campaign October 30, 2009 specified villages.
in Aniocha L.G.A.
so that farmers can 5.30 – 6.30pm daily (b) Extension officers: come for the training.
1.
Mrs. Egbuga 2.
Mr. S. K. Uti 3.
Mr. Akpan Meeting October 31, 2009 Aniogor town Hall, Rice growing farmers.
To select and prepare 5.30 – 6.30p.m.
Aniocha South LGAs Extension officers: the land to be used for 1.
Mrs. Egbuga teaching farmers.
2.
Mr. S. K. Uti 3.
Mr. C. Akpan Training programme Nov. 5 – Nov. 10, Obelese village in -do- Farmers to be taught 2009 5.30 – 6.30 Aniocha Loc.
Govt.
Area how to prepare wet- p.m. daily beds.
Method demonstration Nov. 12 – 17, 2009 Mr. F. Madu‟s farm at “ To teach steps (by (learning by doing) 4.30 – 6.30 p.m. Ejeme (selected in a method demonstration) daily meeting held & in soaking.
unaniomously agreed upon).
Method Nov. 26 – 30, 2009 Mr. Madu‟s farm at “ To teach by method 92  demonstration/training 4.30 – 6.30 p.m. Ejeme demonstration) sowing programme/(learning daily of FARO 12 rice variety by doing) on prepared wet-bed Method Dec. 3 – 7, 2009 4.30 - do- “ To teach how to irrigate demonstration/training – 6.30 p.m. daily seed-beds programme/learning by doing.
Brief meeting Dec. 12, 2009 4.30 – “ “ Farmers to be reminded followed by method 6.30 p. m. daily on irrigation of seed demonstration beds.
Lectures/method Dec. 27 – 28, 2009 “ “ Farmers to know how to demonstration/learning 4;30 – 6;30 p.m. lift seedlings from the by doing.
daily seed beds to the field without damaging the roots.
93  3.5 Calendar of Work: Month Operations 3rd week in 1.
Extension campaign begins in order to explain to the farmers in October Aniocha Local Government Area the need for improving rice production and quality of rice by the use of wet-bed method.
2.
Meeting to help farmers in Obelese village understand that the wet- bed method is better than the traditional methods.
4th week in 1.
Campaign to be intensified for more farmers to come for the October training.
2.
Meeting for selecting and preparing the land to be used in teaching the farmers.
1st week in 1.
Farmers to be trained on how to prepare the wet-beds.
Method November demonstration to be used.
2nd week in 2.
With the use of method demonstration, teach the farmers the steps November in soaking and incubation of the seeds before sowing.
4th week in 1.
Farmers to be taught how to sow rice seeds into the wet-bed.
November 1st Week in 1.
Farmers are taught how to irrigate the seed beds gradually to a December depth of about 1cm.
2.
Farmers to be reminded of the need to irrigate the seed beds continuously to control weeds.
3.
Farmers to learn how to drain occasionally to improve aeration of the soil and encourage the production of vigorous seedlings with short roots.
2nd week in Teach farmers how to apply the insecticide: December (a) Dithane M 45 (w.p.
at 20 grams in one litre of water).
(b) Benlate EC at 1 – 2kg/ha (c) Fertilizer N.P.K.
15.
15.
15 3rd Week in December 1 .Teach farmers how to lift seedlings from the wet-bed without causing damage to the roots 2.Farmers to learn how to transplant the seedlings and recommended spacing to be taught.
94  4.0 CONCLUSION The primary goal of extension programme planner is to raise productivity, through increased utilization of recommended innovation among farmers.
Unplanned activities can lead to disturbance and chaos.
5.0 SUMMARY Planning in extension involves determining “where to go” and “how” to get there in terms of human and material resources as well as good coordination.
One key principle in planning is involvement of the clientele and other stakeholders.
There are major steps in the planning process.
6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the steps needed in planning extension programmes.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.
Akubuilo, C. J. C. (2008), Modern Approaches to Agricultural Extension, New Generation Books, Enugu.
95  UNIT 12: STRATEGIC EXTENSION CAMPAIGN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Importance of SEC 3.2 Characteristics of SEC 3.3 SEC Programme Planning Framework and Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION A campaign is an extension method which can reach a large number of target beneficiaries in a short period.
This calls for planning in a comprehensive and an integrated manner, using various educational and communication methods to achieve extension goals.
Extension planning and field implementation need to be more systematic, interactive, and holistic.
Extension programmes have to be more strategically planned, needs-based, participatory, and problem-solving oriented.
Extension experts have suggested extension methodologies which rely on strategic planning applications and participatory approaches which would minimize inputs and maximize outputs.
Strategic Extension Campaign (SEC) is a technology transfer and application approach which is 96  needs-based, demand-driven and has a problem-solving orientation.
It starts with the farmers‟ knowledge, attitude and practice (KAP) survey.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit, the learner should be able to:   Understand the usefulness of SEC   Explain the operational phases of SEC planning.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Importance of SEC Strategic Extension Campaign (SEC) is a methodology which emphasizes the importance of people‟s participation (that is, the participation of intended programme beneficiaries, e.g., small scale farmers) in strategic planning, systematic management, and field implementation of agricultural extension and training programmes.
According to Adhikarya (1994), SEC is operationally defined as: “a strategically planned, problem-solving, and participatory-oriented extension programme, conducted in a relatively short time period, aimed at increasing awareness/knowledge level of identified target beneficiaries, and altering their attitudes and/or behaviour towards favourable adoption of a given idea or technology, using specifically designed and pretested messages, and cost- effective multi-media materials to support its information, education/training, and communication intervention activities”.
SEC enhances the agricultural extension planning process.
It places key importance on a systematic procedure of assessing the felt needs of target beneficiaries as well as other stakeholders in extension.
It, also, identifies the perceived problems 97  associated with innovation adoption.
SEC facilitates the development of specific and precise extension objectives based on the felt needs of the people.
SEC emphasizes human development through staff training, as an “insurance” to ensure sustainability of the programme.
Thus, SEC builds cadres of extension programme planners and trainers.
SEC helps in improving extension linkage with research and training.
It, also, encourages partnership with community-based organizations in addition to promoting their participation.
SEC helps to revitalize extension workers‟ professionalism.
By providing them with attractive and useful multi-media campaign materials, SEC programmes can boost the prestige and credibility of extension workers among farmers and their friends.
3.2 Characteristics of SEC 1.
SEC goals are consistent with, and guided by, the overall agricultural development policies and extension programme objectives.
2.
SEC is purposive, problem-solving, participatory-oriented, and focuses on a specific, recommended technology.
3.
Campaign objectives are specific and formulated based on intended beneficiaries‟ felt needs and problems which have been identified through a baseline survey of their knowledge, attitude, and practice (KAP) vis-à- vis the recommended technology.
4.
A specific campaign strategy is developed with the aim of solving problems that caused non-adoption, and/or inappropriate or discontinued practice of the recommended technology.
98  5.
A strategic planning approach is applied in the process of target audience segmentation, multi-media selection, message/information positioning and design, and extension/training materials packaging, development and production, with a view of obtaining maximum output/impact with the least or minimum efforts, time, and resources.
6.
Formative evaluation in the form of field pretesting of prototype multi- media campaign materials is conducted before they are mass-produced.
7.
A comprehensive and detailed campaign management planning is an integral and vital part of the SEC process, and it will not only spell out the implementation procedures and requirements, but such a plan will, also, be used to develop a management information system, including monitoring and supervision procedures.
8.
Special briefing and training for all personnel who are involved in SEC activities must be undertaken to ensure that they understand their specific tasks and responsibilities and have necessary skills and support materials to perform such tasks effectively.
9.
Process documentation and summative evaluation are conducted to assess the progress of implementation and impact of SEC activities.
The results are used to improve its on-going performance (through Management Monitoring Survey), and to determine SEC‟s results and overall effectiveness (through Information Recall and Impact Survey, Focus Group Interviews, etc), as well as to draw lessons learned from such experiences for future replications.
99  3.3 SEC Programme Planning Frameowrk and Process The SEC method advocates the need to carry out extension activities in a systematic, sequential, and process-oriented manner.
Well-trained personnel implement the plan.
The operational phases are not implemented or conducted in isolation with each other because they are part of an integrated and systemic process which requires that they reinforce each other in order to produce a synergic effect.
There must be training activities (through skills-oriented workshops) which are related to the operational phases or implementation steps.
The ten operational phases are shown here: 1 Technology and problem identification and 10 Information Needs Process documentation Assessment 2 and summative evaluation Objective formulation 9 MIS 3 Field implementation Formative Strategy development and Evaluation information positioning 8 Info – data 4 Staff training base Audience analysis and segmentation 7 Management planning 6 5 Message design, Multi-media selection development, pre-testing and materials production Ten Operational Phases of the Conceptual Framework for Extension Campaign Planning.
Source: Adhikarya, 1994, P. 18.
4.0 CONCLUSION SEC can contribute in improving and strengthening agricultural extension systems and programmes.
Strategic planning principles should be applied especially in 100  prioritizing problems to be solved by extension and training activities, and in audience analysis and segmentation of target beneficiaries.
5.0 SUMMARY SEC shows that extension programmes can be strategically planned, effectively managed, and systematically monitored and evaluated.
Extension objectives should be specific, measurable, problem-solving oriented, reflected in terms of knowledge, attitudes, and/or behavioural changes, and based on the needs of target beneficiaries.
Extension programmes must be planned, implemented and managed by a multi- disciplinary team of personnel.
This calls for practical and workable, functional linkages and collaboration among relevant agencies/staff concerned with agricultural research, extension, training, communication support as well as government and non-government organizations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Using the 10 phases of the Operational Phases in SEC, complete the table below: Operational Phase Type of people Means for People‟s consulted/involved Participation 1 Tech.
and Problems Target beneficiaries, KAP/baseline survey .
identification and Extension & Research staff KAP Workshop, Focus info.
needs Group Interviews (FGI) assessment 2.
Objectives formulation 3 101  4 5 6 7 8 9 10 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adhikarya, R. (1994).
Strategic Extension Campaign: A Participatory-Oriented Method of Agricultural Extension, FAO of the United Nations, Rome.
102  UNIT 13: PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT AND STAFF TRAINING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Functions of Personnel Management.
3.2 Responsibilities of Personnel Administration.
3.3 Guidelines for Effective Personnel Management 3.4 Staff Training 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Personnel management refers to planning for human resources needs, hiring/recruiting employees, training, compensating and retiring them.
Training of workers is an essential component of personnel administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit the learner should be able to:   Understand the functions of personnel management   State the guidelines for successful personnel administration   Discuss the importance of staff training 103  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Functions of Personnel Management 3.1.1 Meaning Personnel management involves planning, organizing, selecting, controlling and directing of the human resources in order to achieve individual and organizational goals.
Aspects of personnel management functions include policies, procedures, and practices which result in the recruitment, training, promotion and discipline of staff.
The way these issues are dealt with tend to affect staff morale, loyalty to the organization and satisfaction at the job.
3.1.2 Functions i.
Planning the human resources needs of the organization.
ii.
Recruitment and selection of employees.
iii.
Ensuring proper employment legislation.
iv.
Maintaining the safety and health of employees v. Maintaining a conducive organizational and/or working environment.
vi.
Facilitating effective labour relations.
vii.
Training and development of employees.
viii.
Staff appraisal and compensation.
3.2 Responsibilities of Personnel Administration Among the most important responsibilities of administrators in African extension services is to ensure the selection, recruitment and effective utilization of qualified persons to develop their capabilities to meet the objectives of the organization.
The result of this principle is maximum staff efficiency which, in turn, leads to an effective 104  extension service.
It is, however, crucial for the administrator to maintain uniform policy and equity in handling personnel issues and maximize satisfaction among the staff.
Another important responsibility of personnel administration is to direct Government towards formulating aims and objectives that foster good staff morale.
In this regard, personnel administration should endeavour to use all scientific knowledge in improving human relations and working conditions.
The implication is that the employment and working conditions of extension workers should create an atmosphere conducive to self-realization and personnel satisfaction in working with rural people.
Co-operation among the personnel unit in the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Establishment and the Public Service Commission should be emphasized.
This is necessary so that decisions taken in the framework of civil service administration standards and procedures do not hamper the development and execution of extension programmes.
In other words, co-operation among government civil service structure and other agencies with extension organization will enable extension administration to operate in such a way as to maintain good relationship with extension staff, inspire their confidence and maintain good morale.
It is necessary to take special consideration when formulating the rules and regulations in personnel administration.
The growing importance of the extension service and its special needs call for creation of a special personnel office to administer extension personnel matters.
The duties of such an office would complement rather than overlap those of the personnel division of the Ministry, and, by creating an atmosphere of understanding and co- 105  operation with the division, would help in making wise decisions in personnel administration.
Under personnel administration, the administrator is expected to be, among other things, an expert in human motivation and in the application of democratic principles and methods.
In order to achieve this and the purpose of the extension service, the personnel officer should be: 1.
A dynamic influence on Government in the formulation of the aims of the extension service and in publicizing the aims within and without the service with a view to achieving unity of purpose and good organization morale.
2.
The conscience of the government, by keeping it alert to the consequences and implications on staff relations of its policies, methods and procedures.
3.
The champion of the cause of staff by assisting the government to preserve the personal integrity and rights of the members of the service.
4.
An organizer and facilitator of good communication on relevant information or criticism within the organization.
5.
An interpreter to Government of extension workers‟ attitudes, desires and needs.
6.
An initiator of the educational and training programme within the service.
7.
The pivot point of all aspects and processes of negotiation of Government with representatives of workers.
106  8.
The contact point between the organization and various groups and agencies whose activities affect the life and welfare of members of the service.
Administrators should direct attention of Government to the claims of staff for individual staff respect and personal integrity.
It is their duty to balance and reconcile staffs‟ claims to productivity, efficiency, job-security and group harmony.
The more staff repose confidence in the administration, the more they are infected by the enthusiasm and belief in the extension philosophy of administrators and supervisors, and the easier it will be to resolve any individual and group differences that might arise.
If the extension service has a sound, consistent administrative policy of good relation with its personnel, staff loyalty is assured.
The components of personnel policy which will evolve favourable response from people include a number of factors such as promotion, salary increase, hours of work, leave, health and medical care, pension and various fringe benefits.
Staff loyalty and good staff morale are important ingredients in a successful personnel administration.
Frequent consultations with group leaders, supervisors and key personnel will provide the extension manager with an opportunity to assess personnel matters correctly and to develop a cooperative spirit among the staff.
Staff loyalty can only thrive under conditions conducive for its growth.
The conditions necessary for improvement of staff loyalty include: 1.
Careful selection of staff.
2.
The presence of good administrative leadership to direct the affairs of the service under conditions of mutual understanding and mutual self-respect.
107  3.
The presence of incentives in the service.
4.
Training for the job must be good enough for effective performance.
The Ministry should draw from University resources to provide adequate training for extension work.
Where there is good cooperation, the Ministry/Administration can influence the curriculum of courses offered for potential extension staff.
Furthermore, the faculties can offer intensive short courses embodying both technical agriculture and extension methods.
When workers possess competence in their job, their performance, loyalty and morale are enhanced.
Provision of logistic support In many African extension services, poor provision of logistic support seems to be the order of the day and is creating problems not only in achieving programme goals, but also in lowering staff morale.
Field staff are often without necessary facilities and transport at the time these are needed.
A thorough review of budgeting and fund release procedures should be undertaken with a view to allocating sufficient funds and releasing the funds at the time in the seasons when they can be applied meaningful in the execution of programme.
Functions of a Personnel Department The functions of a personnel department fall into the department‟s sub-divisions as follows: 1.
Employment 2.
Training 3.
Job evaluation, classification and wage correlation 4.
Health 108  5.
Service features – cafeterias etc 6.
The conduct of negotiations with labour leaders 7.
Giving operative effectiveness to agreed personnel policies These areas constitute aspects of the functions of a personnel department.
3.3 Guidelines for Effective Personnel Management 1.
The personnel management function should be centralized.
Consideration should be given to the need for flexibility and the recognition of individual differences among staff.
2.
Design personnel policies and procedures to facilitate effective extension work.
3.Design personnel policies to promote employee cooperation.
4.Conduct personnel administration fairly and impartially.
5.In taking decisions on important issues such as staff recruitment, placement, performance appraisal, and promotion, it is necessary to consider the needs of the organization.
This should be based on merit.
6.Group participation in decision-making should be pursued as this will legitimize actions and result in better decisions.
Therefore, extension staff should be involved at all levels of decision-making 3.4 Staff Training Adequate training of extension personnel is very important for efficient operations in the extension service.
Extension workers need training in technical agriculture as well as in the social and behavioural sciences.
Training should be a continuous feature in the extension system.
3.4.1 Purpose of Training Obibuaku (1983) listed the reasons for continuous extension training as follows: 109  1.
Increase of staff knowledge.
2.
Keeping abreast of the latest research findings needed to improve production.
3.
Improvement of workers‟ professional skills and competence in work performance.
4.
Provision of opportunities for staff to exchange ideas and experiences with one another during the course of training.
5.
Filling gaps that may exist in the basic training received.
6.
Training in special areas for increased responsibilities.
Swanson (1984) suggested areas in which the extension service personnel (administrators, field level extension agents, specialists) should possess skills and understanding as: 1.
Technical subject matter areas.
2.
Extension service organization and operation – overall purpose, mission, policies and procedures.
3.
Human resource development, including the participatory processes of involving people in programme planning and development, group behaviour, staff-clientele relationships, and personnel management.
4.
Programme development process – from problem identification and needs assessment to programme design, implementation, appraisal, and programme administration.
110  5.
Pedagogical skills, including the teaching – learning process of adults (men and women), as well young people, and instructional design and teaching strategies.
6.
Communication strategies not only for programme delivery (utilizing both modern and indigenous systems of communication), but also for obtaining feedback information from client groups and feeding this information to research and other appropriate agencies.
7.
Evaluation techniques for the purpose of determining the effectiveness and value of extension programmes to users.
3.4.2 Types of Training Training is the process of development, in all workers, the knowledge, skills, and attitudes that will maximize their present and future work efficiency and effectiveness in the organization.
Pre-service Training Pre-service training is a programme of learning activities which prepares individuals for a certificate, diploma or degree in agriculture, or other technical areas.
The essence of pre-service training programme is to prepare people with appropriate technical and pedagogical skills in extension work.
Change agents are most effective when there is no “social gap” between them and the clientele.
Extension administrators should recruit candidates that have good training 111  in the relevant disciplines either from Colleges of Agriculture, Universities or similar institutions.
In-Service Training Extension administrators need to ensure that field staff maintain their competencies throughout their careers.
Field-level extension workers should stay up-to- date, so that they may function effectively as educational leaders.
The major types of in- service training can be described as follows: 1.
Training which is designed to correct deficiencies of new or promoted staff in their appropriate subject matter areas.
2.
Bringing staff regularly up-to-date on new developments in their respective subject matter areas.
3.
Training in the extension teaching methods that are necessary for success on the job, e.g.
participatory extension, marketing extension etc.
In-service training must be provided by the organization and be tailored to specific needs.
4.0 CONCLUSION In an extension organization, two twin activities needed for the attainment of goals are personnel management and staff training.
5.0 SUMMARY Personnel management involves selecting and controlling all workers for the achievement of the goals of the extension organization.
It facilitates labour relations and staff appraisal among others.
One critical responsibility of personnel management is to encourage the training of workers regularly.
112  6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the responsibilities of the personnel department of an extension organization.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Swanson, B.E.
(1984).
Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual, 2nd ed., FAO of the United Nations, Rome.
MODULE 5 UNIT 14: THE ROLE OF PUBLIC RELATIONS IN THE EXTENSION SERVICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning and Aims of Public Relations 3.2 The Extension Supervisor as a PR Coordinator 3.3 Plan for Organizing PR Efforts 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 113  1.0 INTRODUCTION Every organization should have corporate social responsibility as its ultimate goal.
It should make efforts to enjoy local community acceptance, recognition, support and win the favour of both its employees and the general public.
All chief executives and the entire management teams require assistance and advice of skilled public relations (PR) personnel.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit, the learner should be able to:   Understand the meaning and aims of public relations.
  State the steps in organizing public relations efforts.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning and Aims of Public Relations 3.1.1 Meaning Public relations (PR) is a management function involving the understanding and influencing of the perceptions held of an organization as well as the establishment and maintenance of goodwill and mutual understanding between an organization and its stakeholders.
According to the World Assembly of Public Relations Associations, PR is the art and science of analyzing trends, predicting their consequences, counseling organization leaders and implementing planned progrmmes of action which will serve both the organization‟s and the public interest (Nolte, 1974).
As stated by Obeta (2007), public relations involves a careful planning and sustained effort which would ultimately translate into some goodwill and mutual understanding between an organization and its relevant publics.
114  It is, therefore, clear that any organization should evolve a public relations outfit.
PR is an essential function of management of any set up (Keghku, 2007).
3.1.2 Aims of Public Relations The aim of public relations is to influence others on the reasonableness of a perspective of a group, individual or organization through information, dialogue and exchange of ideas (Salu, 1993).
1.
PR helps management to keep informed on and be responsive to public opinion.
2.
It helps to establish and maintain mutual lines of communication, as well as acceptance and cooperation between an organization and its publics.
3.
PR helps management to keep abreast of changes in the environment.
The basic purpose of PR practice is to achieve harmony and excellence in any human endeavour.
3.1.3 Functional Areas of Public Relations * Corporate/organizational communication.
* Organisational image and reputation management.
* Employee relations.
* Attitude and opinion management.
* Environmental public relations * Community relations * Media relations * Donor/Investor relations * Issues and crises management.
115  Public relations practice, according to Black (1976:16) includes: 1.
Everything directed towards improving communication between people or organizations.
2.
Everything that is calculated to improve mutual understanding between an organization and all with whom it comes into contact, both within and outside the organization.
3.
Advice on the presentation of the “public image” of an organization.
4.
Action to discover and eliminate sources of misunderstanding.
5.
Action to broaden the sphere of influence of an organization by appropriate publicity, advertising, exhibitions, films, etc.
PR takes positive steps in arousing and maintaining goodwill and public interest in the activities of an organization.
It is of practical applications also as PR tries to eliminate customs and practices which might offend public opinion or disturb mutual understanding.
PR is used internally to encourage staff and employees of the organization to identify their own interests with those of the management (Black, 1976:16).
3.2 The Extension Supervisor as a PR Coordinator The extension supervisor/coordinator or manager has a three-fold function in performing public relations activities.
1.
Ascertaining and evaluating public opinion with regard to the organization.
2.
Discussing with other appropriate personnel on ways of dealing with public opinion.
116  3.
Using communications to influence public opinion in favour of the organization.
The publics essential to an extension organization are:   Farmers and their farm families   Large-scale agro-producers and processors   Workers   Legislators   Policy makers   Associations (agro-allied, professional, etc)   Media houses and their personnel   State and local governments   Farmer (male and female) groups   Civil servants   Retired individuals   Religious groups   Labour organizations 3.3 Plan for Organizing PR Efforts A plan of approach needed to win the consent of the public to support the achievement of the goals of the extension organization must be carefully engineered by the PR unit.
There is an eight-point plan for organizing public relations efforts.
117  1.
Determine the target audience and objectives – what publics are to be reached and what objectives are to be attained?
The targets include policy-making individuals and groups in the community.
2.
Conduct a research - determine the opinion or knowledge of the publics about the organization‟s goals.
Collect data on the current situation and determine opportunities and threats to achieving organizational goals.
3.
Revisit objectives - a re-orientation of the objectives may establish the need to change them in view of new/changing issues.
Let objectives be specific, measurable, attainable and goal-oriented.
4.
Theme determination - Base theme on the present needs or interests of the public/community.
5.
Selecting the right strategy - chose the best approaches to adopt.
6.
Good organization - work within the operational plan already set up.
Examine the work to be done and not the personal gains.
Assign the personnel for each activity in the plan.
7.
Plan orderly - Activities should be mapped out.
There is need to carefully budget for time and money costs.
8.
Use tactics - Actual techniques and media to adopt should be selected last.
4.0 CONCLUSION Organisations have very strong need for public relations unit in order to facilitate the attainment of goals.
PR is indeed an organizational or management 118  function which tries to evaluate public views and attitude towards the organization in order to reconstruct the opinions positively.
5.0 SUMMARY PR is a management function which evaluates public attitudes, identifies the policies and procedures of an individual or an organization with public interest, and executes a programme of action to earn public understanding and acceptance.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Students are to discuss the ways in which PR can assist an extension organization.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Black, S. (1976).
Practical Public Relations.
4th ed., Pitman, London.
Keghku, T. (2007).
“Professionalism in Public Relations Practice: Issues and Challenges”, in I.E.
Nwosu (ed.
), Public Relations Journal 3(2): 99 – 114.
Nolte, L.W.
(1974).
Fundamentals of Public Relations, Pergamon Press, New York.
Obeta, C. E. (2007).
“Public Relations: An Introductory Overview”, in I.E.
Nwosu (ed)., Public Relations: Insights from Nigeria, Ezu Books Ltd., Enugu, Pp 11 – 25.
119  UNIT 15: MARKETING EXTENSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Marketing Extension 3.2 Role of Marketing Extension 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Prior to the discovery of oil in great quantity in Nigeria, agriculture was the main stay of the economy.
The government paid a lot of attention to agriculture with the establishment of marketing boards which not only encouraged the production of specific crops but, also, guaranteed market for farmers‟ harvests.
With the advent of the oil „boom‟ in the 1970s and the massive importation of food, rural income decreased, as farmers no longer had incentives to produce.
Government had embarked on a number of programmes and activities geared towards boosting agricultural production, improved income, and standard of living of the rural majority.All the efforts by successive governments to boost food production and improve the standard of living of farmers since the 1970s were geared towards increased production with no consideration for marketing of agricultural produce.
Thus, the 120  extension programme has always been production-oriented, with no field-marketing component.
This has impacted negatively on the production and income of the farmers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit, the learner should be able to:   Understand the meaning of marketing extension.
  List the roles of agricultural marketing extension.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Marketing Extension Marketing can be defined as the business activities associated with the flow of goods and services from production to consumption (Abbott and Makeham, 1992).
Agricultural marketing is described by Arene (1998) as involving all those legal, physical and economic services that make it possible for agricultural products from producers to get to consumers in the form, place and time desired by consumers, and at the price agreeable to producers and consumers for effecting a change of ownership/possession.
Obinne (1992) observed that extension in agriculture is concerned with the transfer of scientific knowledge from research to farmers in suitable language and in simple steps and manner which is easy for the farmer to understand and apply.
This is done through the production of topical packages involving the re-stating of research findings in simple topical steps.
It, also, involves the creating of awareness, arousing of interest and motivation of farmers to accept and utilize recommended farm practices.
Marketing extension involves sharing information about marketing with the public including all aspects of processing, storage, packaging, buying and selling of commodities as well as all the legal and transportation issues concerned.
121  Ugwuanyi and Obinne (1998) identified poor marketing and processing systems, outdated production techniques, insufficient investments in farming, ineffective agricultural extension services and soil fertility problems as major constraints to agricultural development.
Agricultural marketing is not limited to the buying and selling of agricultural produce but includes warehousing, grading, transportation, processing, packaging etc.
Agricultural marketing, therefore, adds value to or creates utility for farm produce in the following ways:.
Utility of form: This is achieved through processing.
Value is added to cassava tuber if processed to garri, for example.
Maize grains could be processed to maize flour and yam tubers into yam flour or yam chips.
Utility of place: This is achieved through transportation of agricultural produce from place of harvest to big markets.
Transporting yam from Benue State to Port Harcourt in Rivers State, for example, would add value to the yam tubers.
Exporting yam to Europe will add so much value to the yam.
Utility of time: This is achieved through storage of farm harvest to sell at times of scarcity.
The price of most farm produce varies with season, often very cheap at harvest and becoming most expensive at planting season.
The expected output of agricultural marketing is consumer satisfaction with the goods or services provided.
Agricultural marketing provides incentives to farmers to grow more crops thereby increasing farmers‟ income.
Agricultural production can only be truly efficient if the accompanying post-harvest and marketing systems are, also, efficient.
Well- 122  functioning marketing systems, are therefore, essential to increase farmers‟ production thereby increasing farmers‟ income and promoting food security.
In Nigeria and, indeed, in most of the West African countries in the past, marketing of the major cash crops was undertaken by government-established marketing boards.
Under this arrangement, the farmer simply takes his harvest to government produce collecting centres and collects fixed prices from the government.
Thus, there was no need for marketing extension in that system.
Extension only engaged in the promotion of production and, to a very little extent, processing of agricultural harvest.
The logical outcome of this system is that all efforts made by Government to reduce poverty through boosting agricultural production has been geared towards increasing the number of hectares under cultivation and introducing more efficient production systems.
No serious thought has been given to improving marketing extension as a means of boosting agricultural production.
An efficient marketing extension network is essential for rural development.
3.2 Role of Marketing Extension 1.
Advising Farmers on What Crops to Grow The marketing extension worker (MEW) should forecast the demand for some crops and on that basis advise farmers on what crops to grow in any particular farm year.
It is common knowledge that farmers react to the rise in price of crops by growing so much of that crop in the next cropping season which results in over production and subsequent fall in price in the new year.
123  2.
Provision of Marketing Information The marketing extension worker could advise farmers on marketing trends.
Some government policies invariably affect the price of farm harvest.
A ban on the importation of an agricultural produce could increase the price of such commodities produced locally.
The farmer may not be able to take advantage of such government policies to produce more of such crop except someone advises him along that line.
This should be one of the roles of the marketing extension worker.
The MEW should, also, be able to tell farmers current prices of inputs such as fertilizers, seeds and agrochemicals and where to procure them.
3.
Securing Market for Farmers Marketing extension agents should assist farmers in finding markets for their products.
They should link them up with processors, exporters, wholesale buyers, retailers, foreign buyers and fair-trade organizations.
4.
Advising Farmers on Time to Sell their Produce From their knowledge of the demand for produce, marketing extension workers could advise farmers to stagger their harvests to prevent glut and stabilize local market price.
Farmers should, also, be told current prices of produce at regular intervals.
This will enable them sell their crops wisely.
5.
Advise Farmers on Improved Marketing Practices Marketing extension workers should teach farmers good marketing practices such as improved harvesting processes, grading and standardization of produce, improved sorting, storage and packaging.
124  6.
Promote Group Marketing Most of the crops produced in sub-Saharan Africa are produced by smallholder farmers.
Marketing extension agents could encourage them to form cooperatives to enable them take advantage of the economy of scale.
Cooperatives often play a pioneering role in introducing modern technologies that help farmers increase production and maximize returns on their output through effective and efficient marketing.
7.
Advise on Financing and Insurance of the Agribusiness Agriculture is a business and, like every other business, there is the need to finance the operations of the farm business such as input supply, labour and machinery.
Most farmers do not have access to loan facilities.
On the other hand, Government has put in place some policies and structures to enable farmers access loans.
It is part of the responsibility of the marketing extension agent to advise farmers and assist them to access such loans.
Every business has an element of risk.
This is more so in the agribusiness, hence the need for insurance to help bear part of the risk.
Farmers in Nigeria and in most developing countries do not insure their farms probably due to lack of the knowledge of the workings and advantages of insurance.
It should be the role of the marketing extension worker to advise farmers on the need for them to ensure their businesses.
4.0 CONCLUSION Emphasis in agriculture in the past was on production without efforts towards promoting marketing extension.
125  An efficient marketing extension network is essential for improved farmers‟ income.
5.0 SUMMARY Extension workers can play a key role in ensuring that the marketing systems work to the benefit of both farmers and consumers.
They should provide information and advice to farmers and consumers on all stages in the marketing chain.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Each student should explain the major areas of the functions of marketing extension.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Abbot, J.C. and Macham, J.P. (1992).
Agricultural Economics and Marketing in the Tropics.
Longman Group UK Ltd. Arene, C.J.
(1998).
Introduction to Agricultural Marketing Analysis for Developing Economies.
Fulladu Publishing Company, Nsukka.
Obinne C. (1992).
“Effective Communication in Agricultural Extention” Productivity Volume 33 No.2.
Ugwuanyi, J.U.
and Obinne, C. (1998).
“Promoting Food Security in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Outlook on Agriculture .Vol.
27.
No.
1.
126  UNIT 16: MONITORING AND EVALUATION IN EXTENSION PROGRAMMES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Meaning and Scope of Monitoring and Evaluation 3.2 Indicators to Guide Information Collection Needed for Monitoring and Evaluation 3.3 Steps in Conducting an Evaluation 3.4 Levels of Evidence to Use in Evaluation.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION „Monitoring‟ and Evaluation‟ are central functions of development management.
These concepts are familiar in every project these days.
Monitoring and evaluation (M & E) are used for performance assessment as they may feed back into the implementation process, aiding management to improve the quality of its decision-making, and aiding it to develop a learning orientation.
The debate about M and E has often centred on the search for appropriate methodologies.
127  2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the Unit the learner should be able to:  State the meaning and scope of M & E.  Understand the monitoring and evaluation indicators.
 List the steps in conducting an evaluation.
 Understand the hierarchy of evidence for programme evaluation.
3.1 Meaning and Scope of Monitoring and Evaluation 3.1.1 Meaning Monitoring is a continuous assessment both of : (i) the functioning of the project activities in the context of implementation schedules, and (ii) the use of project inputs by beneficiaries in the context of design expectations (Murphy, 1993).
It is a day-to-day management activity.
Monitoring is the gathering of information on the utilization of project inputs, on unfolding of project activities, on timely generation of project outputs, and on circumstances that are critical to the effective implementation of the project.
Evaluation is a periodic assessment of the relevance, performance, efficiency, and impact of the project in the context of its set objectives.
The extension organization provides advice (and , in some cases, inputs, credit, and marketing services) to farm families so that their productivity and well-being would increase.
128  3.1.2 Scope In extension, managers make decisions at four levels and require information in four categories: According to Murphy (1993), the decision levels are: i.What type of services do the people need and how should they be delivered?
ii.Are these services being delivered as planned?
iii.Are the farmers aware of the availability of services being provided and are they using them?
Reasons should be sought for their use or lack of use.
iv.What differences have occurred due to the services provided?
Extension managers require four categories of information: diagnostic information, implementation information, utilization information and impact information.
1.
Diagnostic Information involves description of the current farming situation, and analysis, which makes it possible to understand why a situation is as it is and what it means in terms of extension programme design or redesign.
Issues here include current technology in use, types of farming households identified or felt needs and constraints.
An understanding of these factors would ensure that the messages selected for extension fit within the existing system.
During implementation, diagnostic information is needed to understand why farmers adopt or fail to adopt a given recommendation, as well as constraints to implementation.
2.
Implementation information (Physical and financial information or inputs) includes a description of the implementation of the programme.
This involves staff availability, training sessions held, number of visits, cash flow situation, number of demonstration plots planted and so on.
These will help to establish if implementation is going on as planned.
Managers will have to determine the percentage of realization of the 129  training seminars, ratio of field staff to farmers in place, percentage of field visits on schedule, and costs involved.
3.
Utilization Information (also known as on-going evaluation, evaluation or beneficiary contacts) includes key indicators such as rates of participation in extension demonstrations by different categories of farmers, adoption rates of major technological changes in relation to farmers reached by the extension service, and in relation to all possible users of the technology in that area (to see if there is a spread of information from farmers to farmers).
Have the farmers actually modified their behaviour in response to the extension advice?
4.
Impact Information measures the difference resulting from the shift in technology.
Expectations include increase in productivity, change in cropping pattern, as well as increased income and well-being of the farmers.
Impact information to collect, also, includes data on activities outside the extension programme itself, useful to managers in the planning and finance ministries, and donors (Murphy, 1993).
3.2 Indicators to Guide Information Collection Needed for Monitoring and Evaluation Three concentration points to consider are: (a) The visits – main concern of monitoring.
(b) The yields (overall production level) – main concern of evaluation.
(c) The recommendations (adoption of) – concern of both monitoring and evaluation (Cernea and Tepping, 1977).
3.2.1 Implementation Indicators Relevant indicators for monitoring are the: i. resources put in place (personnel, mateials), 130  ii.
number of contact farmers reached by the VEW; iii.
number and frequency of visits by the VEW to the farmers; iv.
degree of understanding by the farmers of the messages that were to be spread by the VEW; v. degree to which the recommended practices are adopted by the contact farmers and transmitted to other farmers.
vi.
attitude of the farmers toward the usefulness of the extension programme and its staff.
3.2.2 List of Indicators for Monitoring 1.
Institution Build-up Info.
Source (a) Staffing of extension organization.
Reporting (b) Selection of contact farmers.
Ad hoc survey, and reporting (c) Training (role learning).
Reporting (d) Physical equipment.
Reporting and accounting 2.
Extension Performance (a) Degree of exposure to extension: Monitoring sample survey(MSS) - Farmers reached directly.
- Farmers reached indirectly (b) Quality of visits.
Monitoring sample survey (c) harvest survey (d) Adoption of farm practices MSS,Harvest study,Village 131  studies, and farm practices ad hoc study.
(e) Role behaviour (VEWs, AEOs) (f) Training (quality).
Ad hoc study, and study on VEWs These indicators provide a means to monitor, both quantitatively and qualitatively: (a) the construction of the organization.
(b) the role performance of its actors (VEWs, AEOs, SMSs.
Etc) (c) the reactions of the beneficiaries.
3.2.3 List of Indicators for Evaluation Impact Indicators Data Sources 1.
Yields of major crops Harvest survey 2.
Cropping intensity and patterns (changes) Harvest survey 3.
Areas under High yielding varieties (HYVs) Reporting 4.
Spread of key practices Monitoring & harvest Surveys, village studies 5.
Amount of purchased inputs (fertilizer, etc.)
Aggregate statistical information from distributing agencies 6. Credit use/recovery Cooperative/bank statistics 132  It should be recognized that the indicators of agricultural production levels are susceptible to competitive explanations; they may result from actions other than extension.
In evaluating extension, effort is made to establish a link between extension, the adoption of a recommendation and an increase in yields (e.t.c).
3.3 Steps in conducting on Evaluation 1.
Develop an evaluation plan – determine all resources required.
Determine the personnel and financial resources available and needed for carrying out the evaluation.
Determine, also, the amount of time needed to complete the evaluation.
2.
Select and define the part of the programme to study – training methods, results of accomplishments, and so on.
3.
Determine the need for the evaluation – define the objectives of the evaluation, stating what evidence is needed to show that the programme is reaching the people, e.g.
accomplishments, changed behaviour etc.
4.
Decide the method of collecting information – for example, questionnaires, observations etc.
5.
Determine the potential audiences (the population) to be sampled and what sample is necessary and feasible.
6.
Determine the criteria for evaluating the programme - e.g.
number of beneficiaries etc.
7.
Collect information, after training interviewers - Employ field supervisors.
8.
Collate field data collected and analyze data.
133  9.
Interpret the data and prepare a report of major findings.
10.
Plan for use of the findings (workshops, seminars) and determine their implication for future work.
The findings should be applied and utilized to improve the on-going programme and/or in modifying a future one.
3.4 Levels of Evidence to Use in Evaluation Criteria Categories Examples of Types of Evidence 7.
End Results Achievement of set objectives.
Changes in quality of life of farmers 6.
Change in Practice Number of farmers using improved practices.
5.
KASA change Changes in Knowledge, Attitudes, Skills, and Aspirations (KASA) of farmers 4.
Reactions Number of farmers indicating if the programme is useful.
3.
People participation Percentage of farmers involved in the programme, e.g.
attending meetings, receiving training, receiving inputs etc.
2.
Activities Learning situations set up, subject matter taught, experiences gained.
1.
Inputs Number of visits, meetings, calls, discussions etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION Monitoring and evaluation are important concepts in any development programme.
Many approaches are available but there are a set of guidelines that run 134  through all of them.
The extension manager should select the methodologies that are appropriate to particular situations.
5.0 SUMMARY Monitoring involves gathering information to show whether objectives of the organization are being achieved.
Evaluation explores whether the achievement of immediate project objectives leads to desired goals.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe, briefly, the four categories of information required for decision-making by extension managers.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Cernea, M. M. and B. J. Tepping (1977).
A System for Monitoring and Evaluating Agricultural Extension Projects.
World Bank Staff Working Paper No.
272.
Agriculture and Rural Development Department, The World Bank, Washington D. C. Murphy, J.
(1993).
“Good Enough, Soon Enough”, The Rural Extension Bulletin, No.
1 (April), University of Reading, Reading, pp.
4 – 8.
135  UNIT 17: FIELD VISITS AND REPORTING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Field Visits 3.2 Reporting Accomplishments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Many concepts which are taught in the classrooms do not tend to remain very long in the memories of learners.
They are soon forgotten or remembered only faintly due to the absence of field or practical experiences.
Field visits are needed in many extension situations to drive home the points made during meetings, discussions or lectures.
The activities of extension personnel should be documented and reported to guide future planning or programme modification or evaluation of achievements.
2.0 OBEJCTIVES At the end of this Unit, learners should be able to:   Appreciate the nature of field visits.
  Understand different ways of reporting extension activities.
136  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Field Visits It is suggested that some visits be made to extension organizations in different locations or States.
Areas of main concern should be: a.
Structure of the administration b.
Tasks undertaken by each level of the management cadre c. Supervisory schedules and guidelines d. Level of participatory planning, implementation and evaluation undertaken e. Strategies used in motivation and discipline f. Nature of public relations practice adopted g. Training guidelines.
Experiences in each of these issues should be documented.
There should be close interactions with staff concerned with each aspect during the field visits.
Suggestions should be put forward for improvement of future activities.
Where possible, photographs should be taken of places visited, group meetings and relevant processes/events.
At the end of the visit, an opinion of the visitors should be articulated.
A vote of thanks should, also, be given to the administration.
3.2 Reporting Accomplishments If we must make plans that are sometimes elaborate, then it is wise to prepare a report of our planned activities.
Planning and reporting obviously introduce structure into an unstructured organization/system.
137  3.2.1 Purpose of Reports a.
Maintaining regular link with extension administration b.
Serve as a basis for decision-making c. Explaining work accomplishments to the administration d Serve as a reliable tool for public relations e. Serve as input to other organizations f. Serve as a good evaluation document 3.2.2 Principles of Reporting There are many means of reporting accomplishments (activities and performance) in an organization.
Extension experts tend to use the ones that fit their situations most.
However, there are some general principles to consider in deciding on what mechanism of reporting to adopt.
Claar and Bentz (1984) have itemized some.
These principles equally apply to plans.
i.
Reports (as with plans) should be developed in the light of realistic expectations in the framework of activities and goals that can be accomplished within time frames and for a given clientele group.
ii.
Reports should be made useful to those who prepare them and to those who read them.
iii.
Reports should be used locally with advisory groups and programme development committees.
iv.
Reports should be used as input by decision makers.
138  v. Reports should be used to help extension personnel improve their performance - serve as input for counselling by extension supervisors and for training of new staff.
vi.
They are used to justify public expenditures and to support requests for future financial support.
vii.
Reporting should be standardized for the entire organization.
viii.
In gathering data, only the information really needed should be collected in order not to clutter up the system.
ix.
Reports should make it possible to retrieve and use information contained for comparison purposes.
x.
They should be accurate, based on facts.
xi.
Concise reports should be prepared - stating the problem, the activities conducted, the number of clientele who participated or benefitted, and the change that resulted from the extension effort.
4.0 CONCLUSION Field visits to different organizations have value in all extension works.
Keeping good records require documentation and writing up factual reports.
5.0 SUMMARY Field visits should be built into extension programming to strengthen administration and service delivery.
All aspects of administration should be visited and studied.
139  Good report preparations are necessary and should follow a set of general guidelines.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Make a list of seven key principles that should be considered in preparing plans and reports.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Claar, J.B. and R.P.
Bentz (1984).
“Organizational Design and Extension Administration”, in B.E.
Swanson (Ed.
), Agricultural Extension: A Reference Manual, 2nd ed., FAO of the United Nations, Rome, Chapter 12.
Obinne, C.P.O.
(2008).
Rural Development and Leadership.
AEM 638, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
140
