 COURSE GUIDE AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT Course Team Dr. M.G.
Olujide (Course Developer) - University of Ibadan NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA AEM 458 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2012 ISBN: All Rights Reserved ii AEM 458 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction …………………………………………… iv Course Aim …………………………………………….
iv Course Objectives ……………………………………… iv The Course Materials …………………………………….
iv Study Unit ……………………………………………….
v Text Books ……………………………………………… v Assignment File ………………………………………….
vi Assessment ……………………………………………… vi Tutor-Marked Assignment ……………………………… vi Tutor and Tutorials ……………………………………… vi End of the Course Examination ………………………… vi Course Overview ………………………………………... vi Summary ………………………………………………… vii iii AEM 458 COURSE GUIDE INTRODUCTION AEM 458: Extension strategy in pilot rural development is a 2-unit 400 level course.
The course consists of five units divided into three modules which involve basic concepts and principles of extension strategies in pilot rural development.
This Course Guide introduces you to the course, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
The course guide suggests some guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit in order to complete the course successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments.
COURSE AIM This course aims at developing in you the knowledge and understanding of basic principles and practice of extension strategy in pilot rural development.
COURSE OBJECTIVES At the end of this course, you should be able to have a thorough knowledge of: • approaches and models for rural development • strategies for rural development • purchasing, distribution of inputs and marketing of commodities of rural people • training of beneficiary • participatory agents and extension staff of government and non- government organisation.
THE COURSE MATERIALS The major components of this course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units iv AEM 458 COURSE GUIDE STUDY UNITS There are 5 study units divided into three modules in this course, as follows: Module 1 General Introduction to Principles and Practice of Extension Strategy in Pilot Rural Development Unit 1 Rural Development and Concept of Pilot Projects Unit 2 Approaches and Models for Rural Development Module 2 Basic Strategies Involved In Pilot Project for Rural Developments Unit 1 Strategies for Rural Development Unit 2 Purchasing, Distribution of Inputs and Marketing of Commodities of Rural People Module 3 Pilot Project Beneficiaries Unit 1 Training of Beneficiary, Participation Agents and Extension Staff of Government and Non-Government Organisation TEXT BOOKS The following textbooks are recommended for further study in this course: Ekong, E.E.
(2003).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Uyo: Dove Educational Publishers.
Ekpere, J.A.
(1991), “Agricultural Extension Search Light of the Nigeria Small Farmer 1990.” University Lectures, Ibadan: University of Ibadan Press.
Jibowo, Gboyega (1992).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press Limited.
Williams, S.K.T.
(1985).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ife: University of Ife Press.
Williams, S.K.T.
Fenley, J.M, & Williams, C. E. (1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Les Shyraden Publishers.
v AEM 458 COURSE GUIDE ASSIGNMENT FILE In this file, you will find the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for the course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the Assignment File and in this course guide in assessment section.
ASSESSMENT There are two components of assessment for this course: the tutor- marked assignment (TMA) and the end of course examination.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT The TMA is the continuous assessment component of the course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You will be giving four TMA’s to answer which must be submitted before you will be allowed to sit for the end of the course examination.
The best three would be recorded as your continuous assessment.
These TMAs would be given to you by your facilitator.
TUTOR AND TUTORIALS There are some hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and locations of these tutorials together with the name and phone number of the tutor as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
You should try to attend the tutorials, because this is the only chance you have to meet your tutor face to face and to ask question on any area of the course and for you to get instant answer to the questions.
END OF THE COURSE EXAMINATION This examination concludes the assessment for the course; it constitutes 70% of the whole course.
You will be informed of the time for the examination.
COURSE OVERVIEW The table below shows the number of weeks it should take you to complete the study units in this course.
vi AEM 458 COURSE GUIDE Unit Title Week Assessment Activity 1.
Rural Development and Concept of Pilot Projects 2 Assignment 1 2 Approaches and Models for Rural Development 2 Assignment 2 3 Strategies for Rural Development Training of Beneficiary, 2 Assignment 3 participation Agents and Extension Staff of Government and Non 4 Government Organisation 2 Assignment 4 Total 8 weeks SUMMARY AEM 458: Extension strategies in pilot rural development is the field- based laboratory for the students of Agricultural Extension and Rural Development, which enhanced testing of extension principles and philosophies among rural farmers; teaching of student about rural living; collection and establishment of database; and assisting in the empowerment processes of the rural dwellers.
Wishing you success in this course and hoping that you will find it both interesting and useful.
vii  COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 General Introduction to Principles and Practice of Extension Strategy in Pilot Rural Development Unit 1 Rural Development and Concept of Pilot Projects ……………………………………….
1 Unit 2 Approaches and Models for Rural Development ……………………………………….
11 Module 2 Basic Strategies Involved in Pilot Project for Rural Developments Unit 1 Strategies for Rural Development ………………….
18 Unit 2 Purchasing, Distribution of Inputs and Marketing of Commodities of Rural People ……….. 30 Module 3 Pilot Project Beneficiaries Unit 1 Training of Beneficiary, Participation Agents and Extension Staff of Government and Non- Government Organisation …………………….. 37 AEM 458 MODULE 1 MODULE 1 GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF EXTENSION STRATEGY IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 Rural Development and Concept of Pilot Projects Unit 2 Approaches and Models for Rural Development UNIT 1 RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND CONCEPT OF PILOT PROJECTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Rural Development 3.2 Objectives of Rural Development 3.3 Concept of Pilot Project 3.4 Steps in achieving the Objectives 3.5 Badeku Rural Development Pilot Project 3.6 Isoya Rural Development Pilot Project 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Rural areas are of importance to the nation as they serve as the base for the production of food and fibre.
They are also the major source of capital formation for the country and provide market for domestic manufacturers.
Rural areas serves as a place of refuge during crisis and most urban dwellers goes there to relax.
In Nigeria, over 70% of the population lives and derives their livelihood from the rural areas and despite their importance, they have not been adequately developed as most of the rural areas lack basic social amenities such as water, electricity supply, motorable roads, health centre, schools and so on.
Therefore, the need to develop rural areas in order to improve the quality of life of rural inhabitants and also to raise their standard of living cannot be over emphasised.
1 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what is meant by rural development • enumerate the objectives of rural development • state the steps involved in achieving the objectives of rural development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Rural Development There is no universally acceptable definition of rural development; the term is used in different ways and in many divergent contexts.
It may be centred around income criterion when it address the problem of poverty; It can be defined in a sociological concept whereby rural poor people represents a reservoir of untapped talent, a target group that should be given opportunity to enjoy the benefits of development through improved education, health and nutrition.
Rural development can also be view in terms of concept, a phenomenon, a strategy and a discipline.
As a concept, it involves overall development of rural areas with a view to improve the quality of life of rural people.
In this sense, it is a multi-dimensional concept and it includes the development of agriculture and allied activities such as the cottage industries and craft, socio-economic infrastructure, community services and facilities, and above all, human resources in the rural areas.
As a phenomenon, it utilises the interaction of various physical, technological, economic, socio-cultural and institutional factors.
As a strategy, it is designed to improve the economic and social well being of a specific group of people in the rural area.
As a discipline, it is multidisciplinary in nature representing an integration of engineering and management sciences.
Rural development therefore implies the transformation of rural community into a socially, economically, politically, educationally, orderly and materially desirable condition, with the purpose of improving the quality of life of the rural populace.
Rural development must be clearly designed to increase production.
It recognises that improved food supplies and nutrition together with basic services, such as health and education, not only directly improve the physical well being and quality of life of the rural people, but can also enhance their productivities and their ability to contribute to the national economy.
2 AEM 458 MODULE 1 3.2 Objectives of Rural Development The objectives of rural development are to: • improve income distribution between the rural and urban dwellers to narrow the disparities between the two parts of the society • increase food production to enhance household, nation and global food security • increase productivity through sensitisation of the rural people to their potentials for development, and acquiring the education and training needed to translate the potentials into productive efforts • widespread literacy so as to allow rural people participates intelligently in the political, economic and social activities of their society • narrow the gap between the rural and urban areas in the provision of social amenities and infrastructures such as pipe borne water, electricity supply, motorable roads and other welfare needs.
3.3 Concept of Pilot Project Pilot project on rural development is usually a social laboratory designed to integrate agricultural research, education and extension as a viable step towards effecting a rapid and lasting impact on such communities.
It is set up to enhance rural development by using the concept of regional or area planning.
The rural pilot project approach is hinged on the assumption that better results can be achieved by taking a project approach in a particular location during a specific time period with large infusion of outside resources.
Ample levels of facilities are provided to staff including availability of foreign advisers.
Success is measured through achievement of short run changes.
Rural development activities are usually organised and implemented under the general areas of agriculture, health, women programmes in home economics and youth development.
In the area of agricultural activities, farmers are encouraged through their farms to incorporate improved cropping patterns, they are also organised into groups and hold monthly planning meetings which in turn serves as an avenue for extension training of contact farmers.
Health activities are facilitated by the supervisory staff from established government hospitals or nongovernmental agencies.
Emphasis is usually laid on preventive and curative medicine noting that health is wealth and there is a strong relationship between health and productivity.
The health personnel usually incorporated into their programmes; immunisation, environmental sanitation, maternal and childcare education.
3 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT Women activities centre upon areas of home economics and child care, processing and preservation of crops and livestock products, food preparation and home management.
Follow up are carried out to check whether the acquired skills are well utilised.
Recognising the importance of youth as rural adults of tomorrow, the rural development programmes usually pay attention to them by providing training for them in the areas of health and agricultural activities.
3.4 Steps for Achieving the Objectives of Pilot Project The following are steps for achieving the objectives of pilot project: • Selection of a project area in accordance with some predetermined criteria.
• Benchmark survey and situation analysis.
• Formulation of a development programme and determination of specific activities with village representatives through a process of dialogue and reflection.
• Implementation of the programme by villager’s themselves and their local organisations.
The above procedure is in line with extension principles and tenets which states that extension should start from where people are, assist people to determine their own problems, help them to find desirable solutions to their problems and to encourage them to take action.
Extension should be based on the needs and interests of the people which are closely related to improving their livelihood.
Extension should provide maximum opportunity for the people to work on the programmes that have been designed by them and others.
Pilot project in rural development was based on the principle of liberating education otherwise known as conscientisation, which involves establishing dialogue among learners that generate analysis of social reality.
An objective perception of that reality leads to higher levels of consciousness and eventually transforms limiting structures.
The process also leads to attitudinal and behavioural changes.
Extension education programme considers that in a rural development process, teaching and learning should be carried out in an atmosphere of mutual trust and respect between the change agents and their clientele.
The first meeting with the villages’ farmers occurred in a casual manner as significant number of people starts to dialogue about the extension project.
The purpose of the meeting will be highlighted and the difficulty that will be encountered in carrying out the initial investigations of the areas without their cooperation, understanding and trust will be mentioned.
At the concept of the leadership, a bench mark survey to obtain agricultural, environmental, social and cultural data on 4 AEM 458 MODULE 1 the life of the area will be achieved through dialogue with the people.
The situation will be studied and the problems discussed together with a view to developing an agricultural programme based on their existent, reality and needs.
This preliminary joint meeting will be followed by a series of planning and programme review meetings on the activities of the extension staff and farmers in the village.
3.5 The Badeku Rural Development Pilot Project The Badeku pilot rural development programme of the University of Ibadan was initiated in October 1970 by the then Department of Agricultural Economics and Extension (now two separate departments) to try innovative strategies in education and information delivery for rural development.
Badeku, the site of the project is about 17miles from the university in Egbeda local government area of Oyo state.
It was a pilot project on rural development; the activities were funded by the Rockefeller Foundation for five year period of (1973 – 1978) and the University of Ibadan Senate Research Grant in 1982.
The objectives of the project are to: • create an innovative work and research area for students and staff of the faculty • promote local initiative, self reliance, confidence and participative involvement of rural people in planning and implementation of activities for their own development • provide a basis for linkage between the rural population and several agencies working for them • establish a real life laboratory type situation in which staff and students of the faculty and university can learn study and participate in agriculture and rural development.
The plan of action for achieving the above objectives included: • selection of a project area in accordance with some pre- determined criteria.
• thorough benchmark survey and situation analysis.
• formulation of a development programme and determination of specific activities with village representatives through a process of dialogue and reflection.
• implementation of the programme by villagers themselves, local organisations and other government agencies with the project playing a facilitator and a catalytic role.
5 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT The above procedure was employed by University of Ibadan on her Badeku project and 36 villages participated actively in the project.
Each village was assisted to conform and practice the dialogical process in the identification of problems and determination of solutions.
Voluntary groups were democratically organised based on trust and commitment.
They met regularly to re-evaluate progress and make future plans.
The Badeku project was reported to have better the lives of the farmers in the participating villages as they have increase in yields and incomes due to adoption of improved practices and access to factors of production.
3.6 The Isoya Rural Development Project The project was sets up as a model for rural development in some selected villages in Ife division where University of Ife now Obafemi Awolowo University is located.
This pilot project (Isoya) was directed at improving the socio-economic conditions of the people in the selected villages.
Eleven (11) villages participated in the project and they were selected based on their willingness to cooperate, relative smallness of population and accessibility to university campus.
Two villages withdrew before committing their resources into the project as they wanted to see tangible evidence that would benefit them.
The nine villages that participated in the project are Erefe, Aroko, Iyanfoworogi, Ladin Akeredolu, Isoya, Olorunbo, Esera and Walode and the project was located about 15miles north of the university campus.
At the inception of the programme only five of the village have primary schools, there were no health facilities, health officers, and farming is the major occupation of the people.
6 AEM 458 MODULE 1 Fig.
1: Organisational Structure of Isoya Project 7 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT The head of the department of agricultural extension and rural sociology of Obafemi Awolowo University is the director of the project and is responsible to the university for all its activities.
He establishes liaison with the aid granting agency, assisting him is the project planning committee which comprises of all members of staff in the department.
The committee under his chairmanship is responsible for the planning, execution and evaluation of the project and it must approve all research activities connected with the project.
The planners’ have firm control over all activities going on in the villages, other interested departments in the faculty of agriculture and elsewhere in the university are co-opted to work with the planning committee as necessary.
At field level, it is head by a coordinator who directed the execution of the planned action programmes and relaying field problems to the director and the planning committee.
Under the coordinator are two posts: an agricultural technician and an agricultural assistant, there is also a home economics with field assistant who is responsible for planning all programmes related to women.
Strategy Once the objectives were clearly stated, a programme of planned action was developed in cooperation with the people involved.
The strategy was to foster closer relationship with other agencies or institutions in creating essentials and accelerators of change that were lacking such as improved planting materials, adequate supply of farm inputs, information sourcing on credit and effective communication on improved technological information.
Planned Action Programme In planning the action programme, the project coordinator was saddled with the responsibilities of directing the activities by preparing operational plans, executing them summarising and reporting results.
He gains the supports of other agencies and interested department by keeping them informed on the activities of the project, its achievements as well as constraints.
Action programme were initiated in areas of agriculture, intermediate technology program, home economics and cooperative studies and the following results were obtained.
1.
Efficient technologies for producing maize and cowpea resulting in an increase of about 200% on the average yield of maize.
2.
Development of a simple low-cost dryer to improve the marketing of maize at the time when prices are most favourable.
8 AEM 458 MODULE 1 3.
Formation of cooperative societies to handle the marketing of the maize and to channel credits and loans for agricultural activities.
4.
Introduction of adult literacy programmes.
5.
Improvement in child nutrition, resulting in reduction of infant mortality, and the awareness among the women of the need to seek medical attention for themselves and their children.
6.
Development of audio visual aids for teaching improved technological practices and for functional literacy programmes.
7.
Development of formidable group capable of accepting responsibility.
8.
The launching of the monthly Isoya newsletter an alternative means of carrying information to the villages and of giving the residents an opportunity to express themselves.
4.0 CONCLUSION Rural areas are very important to stability of the nation as it serves as a place where foods are being produced.
There is need to develop rural areas to enhance food security and narrow down the income distribution between rural and urban dwellers.
Rural projects in rural development are usually set up to integrate agricultural research, education and extension to the rural communities in order to improve their income and standard of living.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit examined the meaning of rural development and its objectives.
It also defined the concept of pilot projects in rural development stating the objectives and steps for its achievement; using Badeku and Isoya rural development projects of University of Ibadan and Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife respectively as examples.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Define the term rural development ii.
Give four reasons for developing rural areas iii.
What are pilot projects in rural development?
iv.
State four objectives of pilot projects.
9 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ekong, E.E.
(2003).
An introduction to Rural Sociology.
Uyo: Dove Educational Publishers, pp.
351 – 362.
Ekpere, J.A.
(1991).
“Agricultural Extension Search Light of the Nigeria Small Farmer 1990”.
University Lectures, Ibadan: University of Ibadan press, pp.
44 – 47.
Jibowo, Gboyega (1992).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press Limited.
pp.
229 -230.
Singh, Kafar (1986).
Rural Development Principles, Policies and Management.
(1986), p.18.
Williams, S.K.T.
(1985).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ife: University of Ife Press, pp.
23 – 43.
Williams, S.K.T., Fenley, J.M.
& Williams, C.E.
(1984).
A Manual for Agricultural Extension Workers in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Les Shyraden Publishers, pp.
15 – 17.
10 AEM 458 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 APPROACHES AND MODELS FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Models for Rural Development 3.1.1 The Sectional Approach 3.1.2 Holistic Approach 3.1.3 Regional Approach 3.2 Models of Rural Development 3.2.1 The Rural Urban Integration Model 3.2.2 The Intersectoral or Zonal Coordination Model 3.2.3 The Package Model 3.2.4 The Community Driven Development Model 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Rural areas in Nigeria and other third world countries are characterised by widespread poverty, ignorance and disease.
The standard of living is very low and it is shown in form of low level of income or poverty, inadequate housing, poor health, low literacy level, high mortality rate, low life expectancy, and lack of self esteem.
Rural development is thus a broad re-organisation and mobilisation of the rural masses in order to enhance their capacity to cope effectively with the daily needs of their lives and to improve their standard of living on a self sustaining basis through the transformation of the socio-spatial structure of their productive activities.
To achieve these rural development objectives, many programme had been embarked upon by governmental and non government organisations using series of approaches and strategies.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end this unit, you should be able to: • describe the various approaches to rural development • explain four models of rural development in Nigeria.
11 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Models for Rural Development Approaches for rural development are the geographical and the subject matter scopes of rural development.
Three approaches can be identified namely: a.
The sectional approach b. Holistic approach c. Regional approach 3.1.1 Sectorial Approach This approach identifies the major sectors of the economy with the attempt to develop one at a time or a particular sector.
The sector identified such are: agriculture, health, education and infrastructural sectors.
It is the approach that tended to favour the development of agricultural sector because majority of the rural people engage in it.
The weakness of the approach is that.
1.
Agriculture sector had not been developed wholesomely because of the relationship with other sectors which had not been supportive 2.
The remaining sectors were ignored in the development process.
3.1.2 Holistic Approach As the word implies it attempts to develop all the sectors in a given area about the same time.
Agriculture, health, education, rural infrastructure sectors are developed simultaneously.
The shortcoming of this approach is as follows: • inadequate funding to implement development programmes on all sector simultaneously • inadequate number of specialised and technical manpower to implement the programmes.
• inadequate coordination of the development activities in all the sectors.
• the approach is usually top driven.
12 AEM 458 MODULE 1 3.1.3 Regional Approach In regional approach to rural development a society is divided or classified into development regions.
Efforts were made to identify the developmental strategies most suitable for each region based on their climatic conditions.
For example grains thrive well in savannah areas while tree crops are commonly grown in rainforest belt in additional to grains crop.
Some areas were classified as industrial zone or residential zone.
The disadvantages of this approach include: • It tends to forget that scientific rural development can bring facilities to areas where they do not exist before e.g.
channelling river course to where there is no water before.
• some geographical region may be well favoured than others in terms of development.
3.2 Models of Rural Development What is a model?
A model can be defined as a theory in the form of an outline, or a representation of a plan.
It can also be seen as a conception of what is common to all members of a class.
Four major models peculiar to Nigeria and other Africa countries are: 1. the rural-urban integration model 2. the intersectoral or zonal coordination model 3. the package model 4. the community driven development model.
3.2.1 The Rural Urban Integration Model This involves the development in which the rural and urban areas are considered an integral part of the same planning object.
The model was based on the principle that the rural dwellers should share the better conditions of life enjoyed in urban centres in terms of hospitals, good roads, pipe borne water and electricity.
The provision of these amenities is expected to prevent rural-urban migration.
The rural-urban integration model is a deliberate attempt at the involvement of rural people in the planning, execution and evaluation of development projects that is directly affecting them.
It tends to promote the ideology of social equality and self radiance on a national scale.
An 13 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT example of this model is the farm settlement scheme which was to reduce the rate of unemployment, increase food production and decentralisation of amenities.
3.2.2 Intersectional/Zonal Coordination Model This model try to foster coordination hitherto isolated in sectoral and zonal development programmes.
It was based on the premise that all sectoral and zonal rural development is well conceived and that effective coordination would make them attend rural development goals.
The demerit of this model includes: • it tends to establish a superordinate body charged with the responsibility for coordinating all rural development activities in the country.
• there is absence of popular development ideology.
• it leads to the establishment of ideal organisation of structures.
3.2.3 The Package Model The package model has its roots from diffusion’s theory of development in which innovations developed from outside are brought to the rural areas by a presumed beneficent change agent.
The modernisation theory takes off from the premise that rural development is derived essentially from the primitive, unproductive and resistant to change in values, institutions and technologies found in traditional societies.
Modernisation theorists are of the view that these primitive and traditional ways of doing things are characterised by inefficiency, low productivity and production inertia which tend to serve as hindrance to development.
The agricultural stagnation and increasing poverty in Africa are thus seen as an outcome of continue use of primitive and inefficient ways of doing things, outdated technology, land tenure system, small scale production and unproductive social values and institutions.
The third world countries can replicate the kind of agricultural production in Europe only if they adopt modern technology, better production methods, institutions and value systems.
The approach emphasizes that agricultural project should consists of the supply of a package containing an innovation and its supportive facilities to a specific project area.
For example, an improve variety of maize may be supplied with the particular fertiliser recommended for its growth, the herbicides, extension services, processing and storage 14 AEM 458 MODULE 1 facilities and marketing outlets with other facilities thought to be necessary for its success.
The feature of the model is as follows: • it is top bottom as the projects and their supportive facilities are not decided by the users.
• local participation in planning of the programme and restriction of benefits to a few who are able to participate.
• policy makers designs and implement development projects in isolation of the rural people which negate the principles of sustainable development.
• it is capital intensive; most of the rural development and agricultural development projects in Nigeria utilises this method e.g.
NAFPP.
(ADP) Agricultural Development Programme, Operations Feed the Nation (1976), (GR) Green Revolution, (RBDA) River Basin Development Authorities, The Farm Settlement Scheme (1960), The National Accelerated Food Production (NAFPP) (1972), Agricultural Development Projects ADPS (1972),The Nigeria Agricultural and Cooperative Bank (NACB) (1973),The Rural Banking Scheme (1973), Agricultural Credit Guaranteed Scheme (ACGS) (1978) Directorate of rural infrastructure (DFRRI) (1986)National Directorate of Employment (NDE) (1987) Directorate of Social Mobilization (MAMSER) (1987) National Agricultural Land Development Authority (NALDDA (1988) Better Life Programme for Rural Development (BLP) (1988) Food Security and Poverty Alleviation Programme (PAP) FADAMA and others.
3.2.4 Community Driven Development (CDD) This approach is new and fast gaining ground in Africa.
It is targeted towards poverty reduction.
The main focus of the approach centres on prosperity through local communities.
The goal is to move political, administrative and fiscal powers from top to the bottom.
It aims to build on social capital by harnessing community participation and also to improve socio-capital by strengthening incentives for participatory development.
The five key elements of CDD are: • empowering communities • empowering local governments • realigning the centre • improving accountability and • building capacity.
Each country may have to fashion its own process of CDD, 15 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT Three stages are important in CDD.
These are: • decentralisation initiation • scaling up consolidation • sequence that involves agenda.
Initiation deals with harmonisation and strengthening of all on-going efforts in community participation.
All existing uncoordinated efforts donor driven funds are to be pulled together to create investment fund.
The aim is to get resources and authority to spend social fund to as many communities and as quickly as possible.
Priority is also given to empowering communities over targeted scheme to reach the socially excluded.
In scaling up stage, efforts are made to make local government assume full responsibility for frontlines services delivery.
This is achieved by strengthening their capacity and accountability mechanism.
This stage is built around the principle of transferring responsibilities in stages from a social fund to local governments, and local government which performs well advances faster along the path of additional resources and responsibilities.
Consolidation is a stage for functioning political, administrative and fiscal arrangements and for further upgrading of local skills.
In this stage, decentralisation becomes fully operational where local government are already functioning well; donors try to switch their strategy from direct funding of communities to providing budget support to the central government for onward disbursement to local communities through various local governments.
4.0 CONCLUSION Rural development is essential for the development of any nation.
It integrates the communities into the life of the nation and enables them to contribute fully to the national progress.
There are several approaches and models to rural development and what is suitable for one country may not be suited for another.
It is therefore necessary for each country to develop or make use of the approaches or models that is suitable for her development.
5.0 SUMMARY You have learnt in previous unit, the objectives of rural development and now you have been taken through the problems or rural development which includes inadequate understanding of the rural 16 AEM 458 MODULE 1 community in terms of its structure, communication, decision making patterns, existence of factions, norms and values.
Also various approaches to rural developments have been looked at such as sectorial holistic and regional approach.
Sectorial deals with the development of one sector at a time.
Holistic deals with development of all sectors simultaneously while regional deals with the development based on classification into what is suited for a particular place or region.
All have their own characteristics.
Attempt was also made at explaining the four models of rural development peculiar to Nigeria which are the rural urban integration, intersectoral, package approach and community driven development models.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i. Enumerate the problems of rural development.
ii.
Explain the three approaches to rural development, together with their advantages and disadvantages.
iii.
Explain models of rural development commonly used in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, M.E.
(1984).
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
U.K.: Longman Book Publishers, pp.
52 -62.
Chukwuemezi, B.
(2000).
Issues in Community Development.
Nsukka: Mike Press, pp.
59 – 63.
Ekong, E.E.
(2003).
Rural Sociology an Introduction and Analysis of Rural Nigeria.
Uyo: Dove Educational Publishers, pp.
361 – 363.
Fracker,T.
(2000).
Rural Development in Third World.
New York: Harper and Row Publishers, p. 148.
Ijere, M.O.
(1992).
Leading Issues in Rural Development.
Enugu: Acena Publishers, pp.
109 – 110.
Jibowo, Gboyega (2000).
Essentials of Rural sociology .Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo Press, pp.
230 - 236.
Ladele, A.A. (2005).
Rural Developments Process and Practice: In Agricultural Extension in Nigeria.
S.F.
Adedoyin (Ed.)
AESON, pp.
139 -144.
Oleru, J.O.
(1995).
“Increasing Rural Developments in Nigeria”.
Nwanurobi C.O.
et al.
(Eds).
Innovation Approach to Rural Development in Nigeria.
Enugu: Auto Century Press.
17 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT MODULE 2 BASIC STRATEGIES INVOLVED IN PILOT PROJECT FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT Unit 1 Strategies for Rural Development Unit 2 Purchasing, Distribution of Inputs and Marketing of Commodities of Rural People UNIT 1 STRATEGIES FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Strategy in Rural Development 3.2 Agricultural Extension Strategy 3.3 Community Development Strategy 3.4 Integrated Rural Development 3.5 Participatory Action Research 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In rural development process, different strategies are being used to achieve the desire result.
These strategies are referred to as systematic, comprehensive and reliable tool aimed at bringing about desirable rural transformation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of strategy in rural development • explain agricultural extension strategy • describe community development strategy • explain integrated rural development • describe participatory action research.
18 AEM 458 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Strategy in Rural Development Rural development strategy refers a systematic, comprehensive and reliable tool aimed at bringing about desirable rural transformation.
A strategy for rural development is expected to produce results, hence it has been tested and found effective under certain circumstances and can be replicated under similar circumstances in another setting.
Strategy is a campaign plan indicating the main lines of action to be adopted in pursuit of a given set of objectives.
Development means a process of self determination and can only be what the people themselves consider it to be.
The people whose development is at stake must decide what the specific content, objectives and means of attaining the objectives should be.
Development must also be democratic because it is under this condition that people can freely express themselves.
Rural development in a contemporary context of deliberate policy action is essentially a transition of a rural society from an existing state to a desired state.
Therefore, the strategies employed in bringing the development of rural areas into reality are strategy of rural development.
3.2 Agricultural Extension Strategy Agricultural extension strategy was based on the premise that the cheapest materials in the rural areas are land and these resources can be developed through effective agriculture extension services.
This strategy aims at increasing agricultural productivity and welfare of rural farmers.
It helps farmers to increase their production by persuading them to adopt improved technical practices.
Agricultural extension develops skills, knowledge and attitudes in farmers and their families.
It finds solutions to the problems of the farmers by taking the problems into research for solution and the solutions back to the farmers.
It utilises various methods in teaching the farmers such as demonstration farm visits, group meeting and mass method through audio visual and printed materials.
Since farm families are closely linked together, agricultural extension incorporates programmes on home economics and in youth development using individual, group and mass methods.
There is a little difference between agricultural extension and community development both of them are educational programme and aims at developing people.
Agricultural extension concentrated only on agricultural development but indirectly concerned with rural problems such as health, nutrition and cooperatives.
It encourages related agencies to extend their services in rural areas while community development agencies endeavour to 19 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT provide some of these services to the rural areas.
The training received by the agents enables them to perform their different roles.
Agricultural extension as a strategy to rural development helps to improving the farmer’s productivity and changing the outlook of farmers towards their problems while its shortcoming as a strategy lies in its ineffectiveness in promoting agricultural development.
The main reasons for this are: • low ratio of extension agents to farmers who are to teach the farmers improved farm practices.
• inadequate credit facilities to purchase farm inputs • inadequate use of local leaders to assist extension agents in teaching farmers • inadequate motivation of extension on workers • inadequate funding of extension services by the government.
3.3 Community Development Strategy Community development is a social process by which people become more competent to control local aspects of economic and social change.
It can be define as a conscious and deliberate effort aimed at helping communities recognise their needs and to assume increasing responsibilities for solving their problems thereby increasing their capacities to participate fully in the life of the nation.
Community development emphasizes self-help by citizens and also initiates a people directed process that is based upon their own perception of their needs.
It involves local people in planning and the actions necessary to satisfy their needs, encourages the development of community as an integral whole and it provides technical and other services in ways which encourages initiatives.
It therefore uses the principles of initiative felt needs, self-help and citizen participation to achieve its objectives.
The concept of community development assumes that: • the local community has been overshadowed by a larger society as a result of long isolation, colonial domination and the consequent decline in community spirit • the local people are poor owing to an under development of both the available resources in their environment and their own individual potentials • people everywhere want better conditions of living and a richer economy and can develop the capacity to improve these things by themselves 20 AEM 458 MODULE 2 • many problems facing rural populations can be solved at the community level with local community resources and with outside intervention limited to education and technical aid • participation of people in decision on major changes taking place in their communities is desirable • local people do not see their problems in isolated package but as a whole hence community development is multipurpose in nature.
As a result of community development been perceived as a process by different organisation and institutions, six approaches have been developed namely: • community approach • the information self help approach • the special purpose problem solving approach • the demonstration approach • the experimental approach • the power conflict approach.
The community approach utilises holistic approach to community problems and it involves broad based participation, democratic procedures and indigenous leadership.
The special purpose problem solving approach focuses on a particular problem of the community and tries to solve it.
For instance, water, electricity and so on that are in common interest of the community populace.
The informational self help approach was of the view that the right kind of information applied by knowledgeable participants at strategic points in the life of a community can make a difference to the quality of living.
The experimental approach involves the application of a quasi-experimental design to community development activities.
This approach test and verify how a concept of particular community development effort can be transformed into theory that can be used by other communities.
The demonstration approach involves the display of methods that work or that other procedures will probably results into failure and lastly the power conflict approach which indicates that the action of social interveners and controllers of power is very important in community development.
For examples, if a group is advocating for poverty eradication in a community and power to effect such change is given to another group, they may be frustrated in achieving the change of reducing poverty in that community.
21 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT In Nigeria, the approaches to community development can be classified into two: • government community development and • local people’s community development approach.
Government community development approach is a multi-purpose approach which attempt at developing rural areas by coordinating the extension services of the various executive ministries by integrating the people, organises self-help and cooperative actions with the specialised services of the government and other voluntary agencies.
Here, community development has been seen as an umbrella organisation within which many varieties of local level programmes could be found.
Governmental community development approach can further be divided into three namely: • Extension • Project • Service.
The extension approach focuses on the teaching of local people on the improved methods and techniques of farming, healthcare, or reading and writing (agriculture, health and adult education).
The project approach is based on the initiative of the people.
It involves the provision of social amenities like postal agency dispensaries, town halls and the likes on the needs of the community.
Here, the benefiting community is expected to pay for part of the project.
Local people’s community development approach makes use of the principles of self help.
This is a case where people themselves through discussion, stimulation through demonstration and internal enlightened leadership, identify their needs and mobilise their own resources to meet such needs.
Examples include building of a town hall, new road, market stalls, community bank, police station, palace, maternity, dispensary and schools.
We therefore have many community development associations and community based organisations (CDAS and BOS) seeing to the welfare development of their community and associations.
Steps in Community Development Community development process usually follows the following procedures: • informed survey, fact finding and identification of community concerns 22 AEM 458 MODULE 2 • identification of a small group of leaders or interest groups who can serve as the initiating sets • identification of immediate community problems • sharing of the problems identified with community leaders for legitimation • diffusion of problems and definition of needs • security citizen’s commitment to act and identification of needed resources • approach of available internal resources and invitation of external aid where necessary • formulation of detailed plan • implementation of the action and evaluating • identification of problems arising, finding solution to it and planning for the continuation of the process.
The problems with using community development strategy are: 1 It is not easy for one person to be effectively trained in all sectors of rural development; hence community development agent may be ineffective 2 There is often no formal coordination between the agencies working at the local hence the change agent has no power is enforce cooperation by other development agencies.
3.4 Integrated Rural Development This strategy was based on the premise that a combination of factors not only the right technology and education but also access to physical inputs and attractive markets will get agriculture moving.
Integrated rural development is multipurpose in nature because it entails inter- connectivity of programme on education, health, agriculture, nutrition, cooperatives and the like and no one is treated in isolation but together.
The strategy contends that the key to improving the productivity of small scale farmers and the promotion of more effective government support is a package of reinforcing activities.
These activities include the provision of farm credit, extension agricultural inputs, reliable marketing facilities, assured agricultural product prices, rural public works and stronger village institution.
It becomes popular in the 70s because of the realisation that rapid economic growth does not guarantee availability or equitable access to social services and amenities.
The strategy apart from increasing agricultural production, also addresses the basic needs of the population.
It helps in modernisation of agriculture and also improves the quality of life through formation of farmer’s cooperative society.
Increase in agricultural productivity is dependent on rapid technological change and since agricultural 23 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT technology is location specific, it cannot just be transferred from area where it is developed to another area without being adapted to local ecological conditions.
Research and extension that will make this adaptation possible are required.
It helps in the mobilisation of human and materials resources for the creation of a healthy national economy whose benefit will be shared by all the rural people.
Various development sectors are considered together rather than in isolation and the relationship can be seen.
The strategy helps in motivation of rural people to participate actively in decision making process concerning their progress and their developmental activities.
The Directorate for Food, Road and Rural Infrastructure (DFRRI), Agricultural Development Project (ADP), University’s research farm such as Nsukka, Ibadan and Ife make use of this strategy.
Integrated rural development combines active participation of the people concerned with the establishment of an efficient institution and of administrative facilities supplying effective communication at all levels.
It should be headed by a coordinator and the administration of this strategy is important.
An integrated rural development council, with a top level administrator as the chairman.
The council members will be made up of top administrators from every ministry or organisation involved in such rural development project.
The functions of the committee are to: • facilitate communication • clarify the whole concept of integrated rural development • help obtain additional funding.
Corresponding rural development coordination councils should be set up at the state, zonal and local governments, local leaders should have the opportunity to serve in the committee.
Rural development is capital intensive and requires heavy process, thus public expenditure and accountability is therefore required in product management.
3.5 Participatory Action Research Participatory action research has many of its roots in psychology.
It build on the action research and group dynamics models developed by psychologist Kurt Lewin in the early to mid 1900s, as well as on the study of oral culture by such scholars as Millian parry.
It revolved around three sets of relationship between these groups and communities, and relationships between people and their physical environment.
It utilizes a systematic cyclical method of planning, taking action, observing and evaluating including self evaluation and critical reflecting 24 AEM 458 MODULE 2 prior to planning the next cycle.
Action research is a collaborative method to test new ideas and implanting actions for change.
It involves direct participation in a dynamic research process, while monitoring and evaluating the effects of the researchers’ actions with the aim of improving practice.
At its core, participatory action research is a way to increasing understanding of how a change in ones action or practices can benefit the community.
REFLECT PLAN CYCLE 1 OBSERVE ACTION REVISED PLAN REFLECT CYCLE 2 OBSERVE ACTION Fig.
2: The Participatory Action Research Process The participatory action research has four steps namely: plan, act, observe and reflect.
It proceeds through repeated cycles in which researchers and the community start with the identification of major issues, concerns and problems initiate research, originate action, learn about this action and proceed to a new research and action cycle.
There are five phases to be conducted within each research cycle.
Initially the problem is identified and data is collected for a more detailed diagnosis.
Collective suggestions of several possible solutions from which a single plan of action emerges and is implemented.
Data on the result of the intervention are collected and analysed.
The findings are interpreted in light of how successful the action has been.
The problem is reassessed and the process begins.
25 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT Essentially participatory action research is a research which involves all relevant parties to actively examining together current action (which they considered as problematic) in order to change and improve it.
They do this by critically reflecting on the historical, political, cultural economic and geographic and other contexts which make sense of it.
DIAGNOSING Identify or defining a problem SPECIFYING ACTION LEARNING PLANNING Identifying genera l Considering alternative findings courses of action EVALUATING TAKING ACTION Studyin g the Selecting a course of conseq uences of an action action Fig.
3: Phases to be conducted within a Research Cycle The role of researcher in action research method is to implement the action in such a way to produce a mutually agreeable outcome for all the participants; therefore, he is a planner, leader, teacher, facilitator, designer, listener, observer, synthesiser and report.
He nurtures the local leader to the point where they can take responsibility for the process and this point is reached when they understand the method and are able to carry on when the initiating researcher leaves.
In many occasions the role of researchers in action research is to facilitate dialogue and foster reflective analysis among the participants, provide them with periodic 26 AEM 458 MODULE 2 reports and write a final report when the researchers’ involvement ended.
Since participatory action research is carried out in real world circumstances, and involves close and open communication among the people involved, the researchers must pay close attention to ethical consideration in the conduct of his work such as the followings.
• making sure that relevant people are appointed into the communities and relevant authorities have been consulted and the principles guiding the work accepted by all.
• all participants must be allowed to influence the work and the wished of those who do not wish to participate must be respected.
The development of the work must remain visible and open to suggestion from others.
Permission must be obtained before making observations or utilising the documents produce for other purposes.
Researchers are explicit about the nature of the research process from the beginning including all biases and interests.
Researchers made about the direction of the research and possible outcomes are collective.
Researchers must accept responsibility for maintaining confidentiality.
The outside researcher and the initial design team must create a process that maximises the opportunities for involvement of all participants and there must be equal access to information generated by the process for all the participants.
Participatory action research is of importance because it is used in real life situations and focuses on solving problems.
It is used by social scientists for preliminary or pilot research especially when the situation is too ambiguous to frame a precise research question it is often used when the situation requires flexibility and it is also a holistic approach to problem solving rather than single methods for collecting data.
4.0 CONCLUSION Development as a process is a means to achieve desired change while development as a product is the actual change both in qualitative and quantitative dimensions on issues relating to every facets of human endeavour.
Rural development therefore entails the transformation of rural community into a socially economically politically, educationally, orderly and materially desirable condition with a view of improving the quality of life of the rural population.
27 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT 5.0 SUMMARY This unit focuses on the coordination and strategies used in rural development in Nigeria.
The strategies include community development, agricultural extension and integrated rural development strategy.
Community development is not concerned with any one aspect of life such as agriculture, business, health or education; it is concerned with the total community life and needs using participatory approach.
Agricultural extension strategy aims at improving the productivity of farmers and their farm families using individual, group and mass methods while integrated rural development utilises various disciplines in the planning and execution of his projects.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
What is rural development strategy?
a.
What is community development strategy?
b.
Mention the approaches to community development strategy ii.
Explain agricultural extension strategy of rural development and state the reasons why it has failed in some areas.
iii.
Why is integrated rural development strategy commonly used for some of rural development projects in Nigeria?
iv.
Explain participatory action research.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adams, M.E.
(1984).
Agricultural Extension in Developing Countries.
London: Longman Publishers, pp.
64 – 68.
Ekong, E. E. (1977).
“The Administration of Community Development in Nigeria: A Critical Appraisal on Suggested Alternative.” The Quality Journal of Administration Vol.
XI.
N0 3, pp.
154 – 155.
Ekong, E.E.
(2003).
An Introduction to Rural Sociology.
Uyo: Dove Educational Publishers, pp.
307 – 328.
Jibowo Gboyega (2000).
Essentials of Rural Sociology.
Abeokuta: Gbemi Sodipo.
Press, pp.
230 – 233.
Machethe, C.L.
(1995).
“Approaches to Rural development in the Third World: Lessons for South Africa.” An Unpublished M.sc Thesis of Michigan State University Department of Agricultural Economic, pp.
1 – 45.
28 AEM 458 MODULE 2 Williams, S.K.T.
(1985).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ife: University of Ife Press, pp.
16 – 22.
29 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT UNIT 2 PURCHASING, DISTRIBUTION OF INPUTS AND MARKETING OF COMMODITIES OF RURAL PEOPLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Farm Inputs and Production 3.2 Concepts of Marketing 3.3 Importance of Marketing 3.4 Problems of Rural Development 3.5 Problems of Agricultural Marketing as it Affects Rural People 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Agriculture is the major occupation of people in rural area they engage in crop, livestock, and fish production, majority of the males engage in these occupation with low percentage of women.
Women are prominent in processing and selling of the commodities produced by their male counterparts.
However, they are faced with numerous problems during production of crops and livestock among which are inadequate farm inputs which affects their output and poor marketing with its attendant’s effects on the income accruable to the farmers.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end this unit, you should be able to: • explain farm inputs and its impacts on agriculture • define marketing and its importance • explain trends in marketing of agricultural commodities in rural areas and the problems faced by the rural people in marketing their products.
30 AEM 458 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Farm Inputs and Production Farm inputs refer to materials that are used during the course of production in the farm to obtain results or output.
Majority of farmers in rural areas are peasant farmers practicing subsistence agriculture cultivating a small piece of land and mostly food crops are produced.
Agrochemicals are not often used; they make use of primitive tools, plant local and unimproved varieties of crops thereby resulting into low production which causes food shortages.
Science and technology has played an important role in the development of agriculture through the breeding of improved varieties of crops and animals that are early maturing and pests and diseases resistant.
Agrochemical such as pesticides, insecticides, fertilizers, production of farm implements such as tractors, ploughers, mowers, planters, ridgers and harvesters to better the farm production.
However, non-availability of these farm inputs at the appropriate time and at affordable price constitutes barriers to effective production of crops and livestock by farmers in rural areas.
Extension and rural development programmes succeed only when linked to research and the organised delivery of farm input.
Most of the farm inputs are supplied by agro marketing companies or subsidised public agro-marketing companies.
Private agro-marketing companies and government owned input supply agencies that are linked to ADP provide support in areas where agricultural extension operates often fails to meet the demand or farmers.
This is partly because their sales depots are far away from where most rural farmers live.
There are complaints by government – owned agencies of having short supplies from their headquarters and they have to plead with farmers to wait for weeks to replenish their stock.
Failure of these nature have often affected rural development activities when the farm inputs to be purchased by farmers are not available in time and agricultural activities such as planting, spraying even harvesting are time bound activities.
In order to solve this problem, it is important for inputs supply agencies to open up none distribution centres in rural areas and increase the stock of goods meant for sales to farmers.
These input supply agencies must reduce complex chain of command that causes delays in their communication process prior to actual release of supplies to buyers.
Hoarding by middlemen and unfaithfulness of the company should not be tolerated and the cost of farm inputs should be subsidised so as to make it affordable to the users.
Rural people can form cooperative society and purchases in bulk the farm inputs.
31 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT 3.2 Concept of Marketing Broadly a market can be define as an area or region over which buyers and sellers interact to establish the price of a defined commodity over a specify period of time.
Market facilitates business activities and can be used for answering basic economic problems like what to produce where to produce and how to distribute the product.
Market can be defined with respect to a space, location time and product.
With respect to space a market is define as a geographical area covered by marketing activities at a defined time.
In respect to location we talk of market in terms of their name and location.
For instance, Ketu market in Lagos and Dugbe market in Ibadan.
Market can also be defined in respect to the products or conditions involved e.g.
cocoa market, cattle market and grain market.
Some markets are held daily, weekly or fortnightly and may be located in rural areas or urban cities.
The essence of market is that it enables buyers and sellers to strike bargain and exchange to take place.
Marketing can be said to involve all the process that occurs from the time the goods are produced until it finally reach the ultimate users or consumers.
In terms of agricultural products, this includes everything that happens to the farm products after it leaves the farm gate till it finally gets to the final consumer.
It involves such activities as assembling transporting, grading processing, packaging, labelling advertising, financing and storage, The aim of marketing is to create utility for the goods.
There are three types of utility that can be created.
• Form utility – This involves changing the form of one thing to another to increase satisfaction desirable e.g.
yam to yam flour, cassava to garri and maize grains to corn flakes.
• Time utility – This is the marketing of goods and services available in good condition when it is needed and • Space/partial utility – This is the transporting of commodities from one place to another.
3.3 Importance of Marketing a. it supplies the urban population with food in quality and form wanted.
b. it serves as a source of foreign exchange for exporting countries.
The revenue that is obtained from exporting food is used to finance development programmes.
c. it serves as an indication of consumer preferences through prices they are ready to pay and farmers will react to it accordingly.
32 AEM 458 MODULE 2 d. creates employment to marketing agents and supporting staff.
e. it generates income to farmers thus raising their standard of income.
f. stimulates research into techniques of food (crop and livestock) preservation and preparation of various food items.
g. marketing ensures supply of seasonal commodities and enables food to be available year round.
h. encourages the provision of basic social amenities such as roads, markets and storage facilities.
Marketing is usually carried out by marketing agencies and they are bodies whether individuals or group cooperative, government department or corporation there are involved in marketing of agricultural products.
They carry out marketing functions and other marketing services.
The marketing agencies include the following: a. on farm collectors or country buyers b. wholesales c. retailers d. marketing boards e. cooperative society f. middlemen 3.4 Problems of Rural Development a. lack of commitment to rural development programmes by the government b. policy associated problems in designing and implementation to the beneficiaries.
c. lack of systematic and coordinated implementation of programmes (resulting in duplication of efforts by governmental and non governmental agencies.)
d. lack of community empowerment as some of the rural development projects that are top driven viewing small farmers irrational and incapable of making progress on their own initiatives.
e. high level of corruption f. poor statistical base for effective planning g. lack of proper planning, monitoring and evaluation.
h. role conflict may arise where the change agent is expected to fulfil the desires of the sponsoring agency rather than what the community wants.
i. inadequate understanding of the rural community in terms of its structure, communication, decision making patterns, existence of factors, norms and values by the change agent.
33 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT j. lack of follow up as many rural development programmes went into comma, immediately after the expiration of the initial period planned for the programme.
3.4 Problems of Agricultural Marketing as it Affects Rural People The characteristics of agricultural product as it affects marketing lies in their seasonality, bulkiness, perishable ability, small scattered of products and non-consumable nature of agricultural products in raw form.
Seasonality - agricultural commodities are always seasonal because of their dependence on weather thereby constituting addition tasks for the marketers in storing them to add more value to it.
Most of agricultural products are bulky or heavy therefore difficult to transport.
Bulkiness incurs additional cost to the cost of production e.g.
yam, cassava, potato and sugarcane.
Vegetable crops are highly perishable thus creates an addition burden to the marketers in the sense that they have to be transported as quickly as possible to the consumer.
They get spoil within some few days thereby causing shortage for the farmers.
Also, small scattered units of farms pose problems for collecting and assembling of their wares.
Non consumable nature of some agricultural commodities in raw form brings in the need to process it to another form before it can be purchased.
There is usually lack of processing plants in the rural areas as most of the processing plants require electricity.
One of the characteristics of the rural areas is lack of good motorable road.
This affects the farmers in that it add more to their costs of production and when perishable goods are unable to get to the market it leads to loss of income.
There is lack of efficient handling packaging and processing facilities in rural areas, this makes the crop producers to sell their products immediately after harvesting even at a ridiculous price.
Apart from the above, another problem is instability of prices.
Prices of agricultural commodities are usually manipulated by speculations with adverse effect on both the consumers and the producers.
Price instability often debars producers from producing more.
A rural development programme must take into account all of the above and other variables if it is to succeed.
Farmers in rural areas should be encouraged by government to construct cribs, barns and rhumbus for proper storage of farm produce and by granting them loans.
Government must provide facilities such as silos and cold stores in rural farming society.
Government must buy excess produce during peak periods and stored them for future use during the period of food shortages.
34 AEM 458 MODULE 2 Government must establish processing facilities industry in the rural faming communities.
This is to encourage wealthy and multinational corporations to establish processing facilities in rural areas.
New feeder roads should be constructed to link rural areas and rehabilitate the existing ones that are due for rehabilitation.
Marketing channel should be well organised to make produce available in the market.
Agricultural produce should be price well to encourage farmer to produce more.
4.0 CONCLUSION Farming is a business that is dependent upon markets, farm supplies transportation and other services which are available in varying degrees in each community.
To reduce poverty, improve food security and socio economic condition of rural people majority of whom are farmers, there is need for efficient distribution and supply of farm inputs, and adequate supply of goods and services to the market as rural areas are characterised with low storage and processing facilities and most of the agriculture facilities and most of the agricultural crops cannot be stored for too long without processing.
5.0 SUMMARY Poor marketing and inadequate farm input has been identified as one of the major problems facing the development of rural areas.
Inadequate supply of farm inputs such as fertilizers discourages farmers from using it and when it is delayed it can have negative effects on the productivity of the farmers.
Farm input must be available and affordable to the users at the appropriate time.
As a way forward, government policy and institutional intervention must be directed at reducing the risks that the private sectors face in rural market, improving road and other infrastructure, developing and extending credit and loans to agro-inputs dealers and users are critical in stimulating input supply sector and in effective utilisation of improved farm input by the rural dwellers.
Marketing in rural areas are faced with problems of poor road network, poor storage facilities and processing facilities.
Effective rural development programme must take these into cognisance and ensure that the road is motorable and there is adequate storage and processing facilities.
When farmers produce in excess, the excess must be purchased by the government.
Government should encourage wealthy and multinational companies to establish processing facilities in rural areas.
Farmers should be encouraged to construct cribs, barns and rhumbus for proper storage of farm products.
Existing roads linking rural areas should be rehabilitated and new ones should be opened.
35 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Distinguish between market and marketing ii.
Enumerate the problems of marketing in rural areas.
iii.
For efficient production of agricultural commodities farm inputs must be available and affordable at appropriate time discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adegeye, A.J.
& Dihoh, J.S.
(1985).
Essentials of Agricultural Economics.
Ibadan: Impacts Publishers, pp 164 – 182.
Addision; H & Maunder, (1973).
Agricultural Extension.
A Reference Manual.
(Abridge ed.).
Rome FAO, p. 53.
Jonas, N.C., Franklin, M., Isaac, E. & Chance, N (2008).
“Farm input Marketing in Western Kenya, Challenges and Opportunities”.
African Journal of Agricultural Research Vol .3 (3), pp.
167 – 173, hHp//www academic journals.org/ AJAR.
ISSN 1991 – 637 X @ 2008 Academic Journal 10.
Natural Resources and Biodiversity Institute Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives.
Rajadamnoen Nok Ave., Bangkok 10200.
Four Attributes of an Ideal Pilot Project by Mike Cohn’s Blog - Succeeding with Agile : mountaingoat software, pp.
1-5.
Examples of Potential Pilot Projects (2006).
By Agricultural Pilots Project, August 2006 WSU-UW Policy Consensus Center, pp.1-6 Including Persons with Disabilities in Water and Sanitation Project: Mali (www.make- development inclusive.org), p.3.
ADB (2001b).
Report and Recommendation of the President to the Board of Directors on a Proposed Loans to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the Second Small-Scale Water Resources Development Sector Project, Pilot Project.
p.14.
Golub, S. (2003).
Non-State Justice Systems in Bangladesh and the Philippines.
Paper Prepared for the United Kingdom Department for International Development.
Available: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/intjusforpoor/Resources/Golub Non State Justice Systems.pdf.
36 AEM 458 MODULE 3 MODULE 3 PILOT PROJECT BENEFICIARIES Unit 1 Training of Beneficiary, Participation Agents and Extension Staff of Government and Non- Government Organisation UNIT 1 TRAINING OF BENEFICIARY, PARTICIPATION AGENTS AND EXTENSION STAFF OF GOVERNMENT AND NON- GOVERNMENT ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concepts of Training and its Importance 3.2 Characteristics of Training 3.3 Training of the Beneficiary 3.4 Training of Participating Agents 3.5 Training of the Extension Staff of Government and Non- Governmental Organisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The organisation and management performance of any project on rural development depends to a large extent, on the tasks it has to perform and the environment in which it operates.
As the environment is changing rapidly, the tasks of extension organisation also have to change, thus the need to organise training for the extension staff and the local people who are the recipients.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the term training • discuss training in relation to staff development • explain the need for training of local people.
37 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concepts of Training and its Importance Training is the process of applying appropriate educational methodology to those situations in which improved performance can be achieved through effective learning.
Training can be referred to as the acquisition of the art of utilising knowledge and skills, it involves a kind of sausage.
Training enables the agencies, organisation communities to achieve their objectives.
Training is essential to have a technically and efficient employees who can find a technical answers to the problems of health, food production, literacy and environmental improvement.
It enables the change agents to know how to relate with his clients who see him as a role model.
It equally exposes the agents to situation on ground and how to meet the needs and challenges of the people.
Training improves the economic and social conditions of rural people, thus, assisting them to become active and productive group members and leaders.
3.2 Characteristics of Training The essential characteristics of training are: a. Participatory - every trainer is a trainee and vice-versa.
b. On-going – the training is conceived as a continuous process and it is designed and carried out within the context of any project action to improve the production, income and social condition of the beneficiaries.
c. Pragmatic and problem solving – the training is based on solving immediate and recognised problems.
d. Types of training – in-service, on the job, on site training and learning by doing through self or group.
e. Reality exposure - the trainers and the trainees are to be exposed to the realities of the rural people and their environment.
f. Cooperation – it promotes dialogue and promotion on equal terms between staff and the beneficiaries.
3.3 Training of Local People or the Beneficiary a.
Certain general subject matters which aim at enhancing beneficiary participation through efficient group formation and action should be given to the beneficiaries.
The training areas must include group dynamics, shared leadership, planning of group activities, savings and credit, accounting, cooperative management, marketing, production, storage, processing, monitoring and evaluation as well as negotiating and bargaining.
38 AEM 458 MODULE 3 b. Specialised training should be given according to the type of ongoing rural development project and individuals felt needs of the groups or community.
In rural areas, training should be given on agriculture and nonfarm activities.
On agriculture, training can be on crop production, fishery, forestry, soil and water conservation and marketing, farm management and the likes while training on nonfarm activities include processing, weaving tailoring, pottery, production of fishing and building materials, barbing and so on.
c. Training could also be given in areas of home economics, health and community development.
For example, good nutrition, first aid, childcare, maternal mortality management, leadership and village development.
Functional literacy classes can be organised for rural adult, men and women to enable them analyse their problems, plan actions and also to reduce their dependency upon literate villagers or group members.
d. The opportunities that can be obtained from training by local people include: provision of advice and consultation between group members, group promoters and technical officers.
Information is given on a subject by a specialist or by a knowledgeable and experienced farmer.
It exposes them to many varieties of media such as audio visual aids, radio films, slideshows, and projector.
Demonstrations are organised jointly with group members and written extension materials such as news letter that are given during training can be use for future references.
Training equally facilitates inter-group exchange visits and enhances increased productivity.
3.4 Training of Participation (Group Promoters) Project Staff and Project Coordinator The training of participatory agents is crucial to the successful implementation of the programme of rural development.
It aims at introducing the field workers to the approaches and procedures of rural development.
It helps in developing favourite’s attributes, motivations and team spirit.
It enables them to experiment.
They are also taught the basic technical topics which are needed for group guidance such as group dynamics and participatory development and how to develop themselves on the training contents, methods and materials.
The group promoters must undergo management training consisting of project planning, methods of production, planning and implementation, transfer of appropriate technology, marketing, communication techniques, leadership, team building, record keeping and report writing.
The coordinator needs to be trained as early as possible by the 39 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT implementing agency in all the above listed areas and in any other fields related to the job.
At the inception, training workshop should be organised for group promoters and other project staff.
Training must be given for at least three weeks in the area or very near the project area with not more than 30 participants, this is to familiarise them with the terrain and what they are expected to do.
The curriculum should be pragramatic and include lecture presentations.
The group promoters after their first training should be given about 2-3 months to carry out field action on the project area.
They will learn about team work, carry out household surveys and how to solve problems met on the field.
After this is the follow up training of participation agents and it includes the followings: • periodic monthly review and evaluation meetings for group promoters and other staff to evaluate their performance, identity and solve work problems and prepare work plans • field action workshop • refresher courses in such subject like new rural development policies and programmes on innovative income generating activities and credit schemes • issue of periodic project newsletter • exchange visits of group promoters and officials of their own and similar participatory projects.
Why Do We Need to Train Staff?
The staffs are to be trained because of the following reasons: • proper execution of the project • effective management of the resources available for the project • get them well conversant with the principles and methodology of implementing the project • impart the with the necessary skills required for effective implementation • create avenue for easy monitoring and evaluation of the project.
The Areas of Training The areas of training of the staff depend on the nature, design, scope and other characteristics of the project itself.
40 AEM 458 MODULE 3 It generally includes the following: • the design • the mobilisation and sensitisation • implementation • co-ordination, sharing of responsibilities, recording of each activities etc.
• monitoring • maintenance of the project • group formation and maintenance of the group to ensure sustainability of the project.
How the Training should be Carried Out a.
The training should be carried out in accordance to the design and scope of the project.
b.
The training should also be carried out at different levels based on level of participation and scope of the responsibility given.
There should be identification of different levels of staff and categories of participants, level of agents that will be required for effective, adequate and impactful training.
c. The training may be carried out through the use of group or mass method.
This may include the use of some printed materials, visual aid, and some electronic gargets e.g.
the use of Microsoft PowerPoint presentation, flit charts, calendars, etc.
The type of the training will also depend on the literacy level of the participants.
d. There should be provision of a training guide/manual for easy understanding and for reference purposes.
e. It must be carried out in a conducive environment with little or no interference.
The training must have some little incentives for the participants to serve as motivation in the process.
3.5 Training of Governmental and Non-Governmental Organisations Staff as well as Local Leaders This type of training aims at familiarising those involved in the project with the approaches and procedures of the project, the problems militating against the rural people from having access to extension delivery services and ways of solving it.
Most of the times, the officials and local leaders are de-trained and then re-trained to perform their functions effectively as a change agent for rural development.
This is achieved through exchange of experiences, seminars, workshop and symposium.
41 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT The area of training needs of extension agents in Nigeria whether government of non-government include: • technical subject matter related to their field.
For instance, agriculture and rural development • theory and principles of teaching, methods of imparting information and motivation people to use it • customs, attitudes and values of rural people • research techniques • principles and methods of administration and supervision • history, procedures, policies and organisation of the agencies providing the extension services • national plans for rural development and extension work • programme planning and evaluation • means of communication especially of research results • special attempts to individuals or groups whenever necessary.
The methods of identifying training needs of extension staff are the job description, organisation and operational analysis and critical incident technique.
A job description shows the duties and responsibilities of a given position; organisational analysis indicates where training is to be placed and this studies the entire organisation including its objectives, resources and their allocation.
Operational analysis deals with what an employee must do to perform a job effectively, it focuses on the tasks while the critical incident techniques is a set of procedures for collecting direct observations of behaviour in order to solve practical problems and develop psychological principles.
The training opportunities for governmental and non-governmental staff include: • organising training courses for group promoters and other project staff • participation in field workshops • partaking in briefing sessions with the use of promotional materials • project coordinating committees • programme monitoring and evaluation • Intra and inter country seminars related to the objectives and issues of the project.
42 AEM 458 MODULE 3 4.0 CONCLUSION Training of beneficiaries, participation agents, coordinator as well as extension staff of governmental and non-governmental agent is essential for the success of any project that is directed towards development and improvement of the people.
Trained personnel must be available to effectively carry out the objectives of the programme as many problems call for a team approach and training.
Trainees will do better themselves when they learn and appreciate the contributions of others.
Training is essential for our extension staff to keep pace with the rest of the world.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has covered a number of issues on training.
Training is the process of applying appropriate education methodology to those situations in which improve performance can result from effective learning.
The characteristics of training are participatory, ongoing, pragmatic and problems solving, reality exposure and promotion of cooperation.
The training that are usually giving to the rural people are the ones which can benefit them either socially or economically, training are usually given to local peoples on areas of agriculture and non-farm activities, functional literacy, health and community development, and on general subject matters that can improve their standards of living.
Training that is given to the participation agents enables them to experiment innovative ways of poverty eradication and rural development and introduce them to approaches and procedures of rural development while training that are given to governmental and non- governmental staffs familiarises them with the approaches and procedures of the project.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT i.
Define the terms training and mention four of its objectives ii.
Why is it necessary to give training to the beneficiary of a programme iii.
Highlight the training need areas of an extension staffs of governmental and non- governmental organisation.
43 AEM 458 EXTENSION STRATEGIES IN PILOT RURAL DEVELOPMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Anyanwu, C.N.
(1992).
Community Development: The Nigeria perspective.
Ibadan: Gabesthe Educational Publisher, pp.
138 - 152.
F.A.O.
(2003).
Participatory Development: Guidelines and Beneficiary Participation in Agricultural and Rural Development.
Rome: FAO, pp.
42 -45.
Van den Ban, A.W.
& Hawkins, H.S.
(1997).
Agricultural Extension.
USA: Blackckwell Science Inc., pp.
218 – 245.
Williams, S.K.T.
(1985).
Rural Development in Nigeria.
Ife: University of Ife Press, pp.
97 – 104.
44
