 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COURSE CODE: CHS401 COURSE TITLE: Reproductive and Adolescent Health 1 CHS 401: REPRODUCTIVE AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developer: Dr. (Mrs.) C.O.
Agbedia Department of Nursing Science, College of Health Science, Delta State University, Abraka.
Unit Writer: Dr. (Mrs.) C.O.
Agbedia Department of Nursing Science, College of Health Science, Delta State University, Abraka.
Programme Leader: School of Science & Technology, National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator: School of Science & Technology, National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 2 Course Code: CHS 401 Course Title: Reproductive and Adolescent Health Course Developer/Writer: Dr. (Mrs.) C.O.
Agbedia Department of Nursing Science, College of Health Science, Delta State University, Abraka.
Course Editor: Programme Leader: School of Science & Technology, National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator: School of Science & Technology, National Open University of Nigeria Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 3 CHS 401: REPRODUCTIVE AND ADOLESCENT HEALTH (4 UNITS C) COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA 4 CHS 401 COURSE GUIDE Contents …………………………………………………………………………………….. 2 Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………….
3 Course Aims ………………………………………………………………………………….
3 The Course ………………………………………………………………………………….. 4 Course Aims ………………………………………………………………………………….
4 Course Objectives …………………………………………………………………………….
4 Working through the Course …………………………………………………………….
… 4 Course Material ……………………………………………………………………………….
4 Study Units …………………………………………………………………………………… 4 Text Books …………………………………………………………………………………….
5 Assessment …………………………………………………………………………………… 5 Tutor Mark Assignment ……………………………………………………………………….
6 End of Semester Examination ………………………………………………………………… 8 Summary ……………………………………………………………………………………… 8 5  Introduction The rapid changes in health, technological advances, knowledge explosion, demographic changes and advance medical science demands that health workers be educationally prepared to provide effective maternity and reproductive health care across the continuum of setting – from hospital or clinic to home or community.
The course you are about to study is reproductive and adolescent health and is taught in 5 modules.
Reproductive and adolescent health is designed in such a way that you will learn to care for clients/patients with reproductive health issues.
Manage patients before, during and after labor.
Demonstrate understanding of principle and technique of family planning.
Demonstrate ability to take delivery with assistance of a qualified health care provider.
The Course This course, reproductive and adolescent health is divided into five modules.
Module I lays the foundation for reproductive and adolescent health and provides you with knowledge of basic concepts and terminologies in maternity nursing.
Review of the anatomy and physiology of the reproductive systems are done here.
It also deals extensively on the health and nutritional needs during pregnancy Module 2 deals with signs of pregnancy, the physiological changes, the minor discomfort of pregnancy and abortion and its issues.
Health conditions that can threaten pregnancy are also discussed.
It also focuses on high risk women and infants.
Module 3 deals with the challenges of labor process and the care of patients in labor.
Module 4 focuses on sex and sexuality.
The unit on reproductive infections deals extensively on sexually transmitted infections, with special emphasis on HIV/AIDS.
The final unit deals with counseling youth and youth friendly services.
Module 5 deals with the principle and techniques of family planning.
Course Aim The goal of this course (Reproductive And Adolescent Health) is to provide you with the necessary knowledge and the therapeutic skills needed for effective management and care of patient with pregnancy, labor and during puerperium.
Understand the management of youth friendly services Course Objectives In addition to the aims above, this course set to achieve some objectives.
After going through this course, you should be able to: Understand the basic concept and terminologies in Maternity services Understand the anatomy and physiology of the reproductive systems Know certain health conditions that can threaten pregnancy.
Understand the labor process and the care of patient in labor.
Understand problems associated with sexually transmitted infections Know the investigations and treatment of couples with infertility.
Understand the role of the midwife in the care of patient with pregnancy, labor and during puerperium Understand the Management of youth friendly services 6 Working through the Course This course involves that you would be required to spend lot of time to read.
The contents of this material are very dense and require you spending great time to study it.
This account for the great effort put into its development in the attempt to make it very readable and comprehensible.
Nevertheless, the effort required of you is still tremendous.
I would advice that you avail yourself the opportunity of attending the tutorial sessions where you would have the opportunity of comparing knowledge with your peers.
The Course Material You will be provided with the following materials; Course guide Study units.
Study Units The units covered on this course are; MODULE 1 REVIEW OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM UNIT 1 Review of Male/Female Reproductive System UNIT II Fertility UNIT III Health and Nutrition during Pregnancy MODULE 2 PREGNANCY UNIT I Signs of Pregnancy and Physiological Changes UNIT II Common Discomforts in Pregnancy UNIT III The Antenatal Visit UNIT IV Abortion UNIT V High Risk Women and Infants UNIT VI Fetal Health MODULE 3 THE PROCESS OF LABOUR UNIT I Abdominal examination UNIT II Labor Process UNIT III Abnormal Labor UNIY IV The Postpartum Visit and Examination MODULE 4 SEX AND SEXUALITY UNIT I Sexuality UNIT II Sexually transmitted Infection UNIT III Counseling Adolescents on Reproductive issues MODULE 5 FAMILY PLANNING UNIT I Hormonal Contraception UNIT II Injectable Contraception UNIT III Intrauterine Devices UNIT IV Condom and Sterilization Text Book s 7 The course comes with a list of recommended textbooks, which though are not compulsory for you to acquire or indeed read, are necessary as supplements to the course material.
• Brunner & Suddarth’s (2004) Medical Surgical Nursing.
(10th ed) Lippincott Wilkins • Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
• Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall • Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. Assessment There are two components of assessment for this course.
The Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA), and the end of course examination.
Tutor Marked Assignment The TMA is the continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total score.
You will be given 4 TMA’s to answer.
Three of these must be answered before you are allowed to sit for the of the course examination.
The TMA’s would be given to you by your facilitator and returned after you have done the assignment.
End Of Course Examination This examination concludes the assessment for the course.
It constitutes 70% of the whole course.
You will be informed of the time for the examination.
It may or not coincide with the university semester examination.
Summary This course intends to provide you with the necessary knowledge and skills needed for effective management of patients with reproductive issues.
MODULE 1 8 REVIEW OF ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM UNIT 1 REVIEW OF MALE/FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Obstetrical Terms 3.1 The Male Reproductive System 3.1.1 Characteristics and functions of the Male Reproductive System 3.2 The Female Reproductive System 3.2.1 Characteristics and functions of the Female Reproductive System 3.3 The Menstrual Cycle 3.4 Fetal Development 3.5 Birth Defects 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 9  MODULE 1 UNIT 1 The Review of Male/Female Reproductive Organs 1.0 Introduction Providers of maternity and family planning services must have knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of the reproductive organs of the human male and female.
An understanding of human male anatomy is basic to understanding the process of conception.
It is also essential for understanding the principles of family planning and reasons for infertility.
This unit focuses on the review of anatomy and physiology of the male and female reproductive organs 2.0 Objective On completion of this unit the learner will be able to: • Learn the various terminologies used by those involved in maternity care.
• Label the following on a diagram of the external female genitalia: Mons pubis Clitoris, Labia majora, and minora, urethral opening, vaginal opening, Bartholin glands Perineum.
• Label the following on a diagram of the internal female reproductive organs: Vagina Uterus Cervix: internal os and external osFallopian tubes: isthmus, ampulla, infundibulum ovaries.
• Describe the characteristics and/or functions of the organs indentified above.
• Label and state the characteristics and functions of the following on a diagram of the male reproductive system:Penis ,Urethra ,Scrotum, Testes ,Epididymis, Prostate gland, Bladder • Name two female sex hormones.
• Define menstrual cycle.
3.0 Obstetrical Terms All professions have certain words that help people in the profession to communicate with each other.
The following words are used by those involved in maternity care.
They should be memorized.
Ammenorrhoea Absence of menstruation Antenatal/Antenatal/Antepartum Before the birth of the fetus/during pregnancy Antepartum Haemorrhage Bleeding during pregnancy or before the birth of the fetus (APH) Embryo The developing baby from the time of fertilization to 11 weeks’ gestational age (Some authors say 12 weeks.)
Estimated Day of Delivery The approximate date the baby is due.
The date is calculated 10 (EDD) (Or Estimated Day of from the first day of the last normal menstrual period.
Confinement EDC).
The EDD marks the beginning of the 40th week of pregnancy.
Fetus The developing baby from the 11th or 12th week of pregnancy until birth Fertilization The process by which a sperm unites with an ovum and a pregnancy begins.
Gestation Pregnancy Gravida A woman who is pregnant or who has been pregnant Nulligravida A woman who has never been pregnant and is not pregnant now.
Multigravida A woman who has been pregnant more than once.
Primigravida A woman who is pregnant for the first time Intrapartal/intrapartum During labor or at the time of birth Labor/Parturition The process of giving birth Maternal Mortality Rate The number of maternal deaths that occur as the result of being pregnant or giving birth during the time 100,000 babies are born alive.
In some countries this rate is calculated per 1,000 live births, or 10,000 live births, instead of 100,000 live births.
Maternal deaths are often thought of as direct or indirect.
A direct maternal death is one that is caused by obstetric complications such as bleeding to death from a postpartum haemorrhage death is one that results from a disease that worsened when the mother became pregnant, such as diabetes.
Para- A woman who has given birth to a baby beyond the stage of viability (usually 20 weeks’ gestation) Nullipara A woman who has never given birth to a baby who reached the stage of viability Primipara A woman who has delivered one baby who reached the stage of viability 11  Multipara A woman who has delivered two or more babies beyond the stage of viability Parturient A woman in labor Postnatal/postpartum After birth Postpartum Haemorrhage (PPH) Excessive bleeding after the birth of a baby Puerperium The six week period following the birth of a baby 3.1 The Male Reproductive Organs The male reproductive organs are divided into external and internal genitalia.
The external genitalia consist of the penis and the scrotum.
The internal male reproductive organs are shown on the following diagram: Figure 1 Male Reproductive Organ 3.1.1Characteristics and Functions of the Male Reproductive Organs Penis This is the male organ of orgasm, reproduction and urination.
Part of the urethra goes through the centre of the penis.
The tip of the penis (the glans) contains a small opening, the urethral opening, through which urine and semen are expelled.
Scrotum.
This is a wrinkled, sac-like pouch behind the penis which contains the testes (testicles).
It is located outside the body because sperm production requires a temperature lower than that inside the body.
12  Testes -These structures lie within the scrotum produce and sperms and male hormones.
The left testis is usually lower than the right and the left scrotal sac is lower and larger than the right one.
Epididymis –They are small, twisted tubes leading from the bottom of each testis.
Sperm mature in these tiny tubes.
Vas Deferens -Two tubes which are a continuation of the epididymis.
They transport sperm as far as the urethra.
Seminal Vesicles –They lie at the bottom of the bladder secrete a thick, milky substance which aids in transporting sperm.
Cowper’s Glands (bulbo-urethral) -They are two small glands below the prostate that secrete an alkaline substance to protect sperm from vaginal and urethral acidity.
Prostate Gland -A structure about 3.5 cm in diameter that surrounds the neck of the bladder and the urethra, and produces a fluid that accompanies sperm during ejaculation.
Semen -Semen is a thick, milky substance consisting of sperms plus secretions from the epididymis, seminal vesicles, prostate gland and Cowper’s glands.
When a man ejaculates, 2 to 5 ml of semen is left in the vagina.
Each ml of semen contains an average of 70.
3.2 The Female Reproductive Organs The female reproductive organs consist of the external genitalia (also known as the vulva) and the internal organs.
The internal female reproductive organs are shown below: 3.2.1 Characteristics and Functions of Selected Organs/Structures The External Genitalia Mons Pubis A pad of fatty tissue covered with hair directly over and above the (Mons veneris) symphysis pubis.
The articulation between the pubis bones.
Clitoris A small, elongated, sensitive body situated above the labia minora.
It becomes erectile during sexual excitement.
13  Figure 2 Female Reproductive Organ Labia Majora Two long folds of skin (lips) extending from the mons pubis to the perineum.
The outer part of the lips is covered with hair.
Their size and appearance depends on the amount of fat within them.
Both the labia majora and the labia minora help keep pathological organisms out of the vagina.
Labia Minora Two thin folds of tissue between the labia majora.
The bottom edges of the labia minora form the top edge of the perineum.
Labia minora vary greatly in size and shape.
It is common for one to be larger than the other.
Urethral Opening A small opening below the clitoris through which urine passes.
The opening is often invisible to the eye.
Vaginal Opening The entrance to the vagina.
It is located between the labia minora and below the urethra.
It varies in size and shape.
Bartholin’s Glands The small glands located about 4 o’clock and 8 o’clock on either side of the vagina.
Their mucus secretion during sexual excited helps lubricate the vagina.
Gonococci and other bacteria in the gland can cause an abscess.
14 Perineum The area between the vagina and rectum.
It stretches as the baby’s head appears at the vaginal opening.
The Internal Genitalia Vagina A canal about 10-15 cms in length that has three functions: It is the canal through which the menstrual flow passes out of the body.
It is the structure which receives the erect penis at sexual union.
It serves as the birth canal during delivery.
The upper end of the vagina is called the fornix and is divided into anterior, posterior and laternal fornices.
It is through the thin walls of the fornices that other pelvic organs can be palpated.
Uterus The uterus (womb) is a hollow, muscular organ that has three functions: It prepares itself monthly for the reception of the fertilized ovum.
If the ovum is not fertilized, menstruation occurs.
It holds the fetus during pregnancy.
Its muscles contract to push the fetus through the birth canal during labor.
The upper 2/3 of the uterus is known as the corpus or body and the lower 1/3 is known as the cervix.
The part of the corpus above the Fallopian tubes is the fundus.
The cervix is about 2.5 cm long.
The top part of the cervix that can be seen on speculum examination.
The external os can be irregular in shape.
The wall of the uterus has two layers: Endometrium An inner lining which is lost each month during menstruation.
Once pregnancy occurs, the endometrium is called the decidua.
Myometrium The thick, smooth muscle layer of the uterus.
In labor the myometrial contractions open the cervix and expel the fetus and placenta.
They also control bleeding from the placental site.
The cervix contains only about 10 percent muscle.
The blood supply of the uterus comes from the uterine and ovarian arteries.
The body of the uterus may tilt forward (anteverted), backward (retroverted), or it may not tilt at all.
The position and height of the uterus depend on the uterine ligaments.
The main ones are the broad, round, and uterosacral ligaments.
15 Fallopian Tubes The Fallopian tubes are two hollow, muscular canals on either side of the uterus.
They serve as a passageway for the ova to the uterine cavity.
Each tube is divided into 4 parts: the interstitial portion (within the uterine wall), the the isthmus (the narrow portion next to the uterus), the ampulla (the widest part) and the infundibulum (the funnel shaped opening at the end).
Within the tube are cilia (small hair-like projections) which direct the ova into the uterus.
The muscles in the tube contract rhythmically to move the ovum along the tube.
Fertilization of the ovum by the sperm usually takes place in the ampullar portion.
Rhythmic contractions of the tube are strongest and most frequent during transport of the fertilized ovum.
The tubes are richly supplied with blood vessels.
Ovaries The ovaries are two organs up to 5 cm in length.
They are usually found below each Fallopian tube.
The ovaries are responsible for the development and expulsion of the ova and for the production and release of the ovarian hormones.
Each ovary is close to the outer edge of the tube making it easy for the ovum to be picked up after ovulation.
At puberty there are between 200,000 and 400,000 egg cells in the ovary.
Most of the time the ovary releases only one egg each month.
About 400 eggs are ovulated during the life of a healthy woman.
3.3 The Menstrual Cycle The onset of menstruation is also called menarche, and is of great importance to the health worker because it signals the beginning of the fertile period in a woman’s life.
It is not known why the young girl’s body begins to change.
However, it is known that these changes are caused by chemicals produced in the brain, which induce the release of the sex hormones.
The two most important sex hormones are oestrogen and progesterone.
Oestrogen and progesterone produce changes in the following parts of the body: the breasts, the skin (appearance of pubic and axillary hairs),the uterus, the ovaries.
The breasts are stimulated by oestrogen and progesterone to grow in size and become capable of producing milk.
The skin is stimulated to grow hair in certain areas.
The ovaries are stimulated to produce the eggs.
Approximately once a month, the lining of the uterus is shed producing a “period” of bleeding which usually lasts 2 – 6 days.
This is called a menstrual period.
It is caused by the complete withdrawal of progesterone and oestrogen from the blood.
Shortly after the monthly bleeding period, the lining of the uterus begins to replace itself.
At the same time, at about 12 – 16 days after the first day of the period, an egg is released into the uterus.
The release of the egg is called ovulation.
If sexual intercourse takes place close to the time when ovulation 16 has occurred the egg can become fertilized by the man’s sperm.
This fertilized egg forms a new baby.
The fertilized egg attempts to bury itself within their lining of the uterus.
If the egg is not fertilized by a man’s sperm, the endometrium is shed again, following by a menstrual period.
Occasionally more than one egg is released and fertilized.
In this case, twin or triplets may be produced.
Most women experience irregularity in their cycles as they approach the age of 50.
Some women begin to experience changes as early as 35 – 40 and others as 55 – 60.
The time during which the older woman is experiencing these longer cycles is called the climacteric.
Menopause occurs when a woman has had her last bleeding episode, 3.4 Fetal Development After puberty one egg (ovum) each month grows and matures.
At ovulation it is released from the ovary and falls into the abdominal cavity.
Pregnancy begins when the egg travelling in the Fallopian tube is met by sperm.
The male sperm and the female ovum contribute equally to the development of the fetus, The sperm is decisive in whether the baby will be a girl or a boy.
The growth and development of the fetus in the uterus is divided into two stages; the embryonic stage and the fetal stage.
Embryonic stage starts at the moment of fertilization (when the sperm meets the ovum) and continues until all the body’s systems have been developed (about 11 weeks after fertilization).
The fetal stage is from the end of the embryonic stage to the birth of the baby.
Upon fertilization the embryo is so small that it can barely be seen by the human eye.
It begins to grow immediately.
One cell becomes two, two become four, four become eight, eight become sixteen, sixteen become thirty-two, and so on.
This early growth continues as the embryo moves through the tube and into the uterus.
The embryo attaches to the new placenta by a small stalk which becomes the umbilical cord.
Within the umbilical cord are three blood vessels which bring oxygen and nutrients from the mother’s body to the embryo, and waste products are eliminated.
During these first few weeks, groups of cells in the embryo begin to specialize.
Each of the body’s system is formed by the specialization of certain cells.
It is during this period that many birth defects begin to happen as a result of abnormal growth of some of the specialized cells.
If the birth defects are severe, many of these embryos die and are spontaneously aborted.
This is also the period when some drugs can cause congenital defects in the fetus.
The Fetal Stage The fetal stage of growth and development is a process of increase in size and weight.
The organs that began developing in the embryonic stage continue to grow and mature, and there is less room in the uterus and the fetus is no longer able to stretch out.
Instead the fetus pulls its knees in toward the abdomen.
At the age of three months the embryo is complete.
All the organs and the arms, legs, feet, hands and ears have formed, the embryo looks very much like a human baby.
The fetal brain begins 17 functioning early.
At the beginning of the second trimester, the arms of the fetus reach their full length and the sex of the baby is easily seen and mothers feel their babies move inside them.
This is because the movements of the fetus become stronger and the wall of the uterus thinner.
3.5 Birth Defects Birth defects affect approximately six percent of all newborns.
Drugs, hormones, radiation, environmental pollution, and infectious agents are among the factors that cause congenital anomalies.
For example German measles during the first trimester of pregnancy may cause birth defects.
Drugs that may damage the developing embryo and fetus are known as teratogens.
Hence, drugs in the first trimester should be avoided unless indicated.
Research on smoking in pregnancy has consistently shown that infants of smoking mothers weigh less than infants of non-smoking mothers.
The difference in weight is in direct proportion to the number of cigarettes smoked each day.
Alcohol quickly enters the blood stream and passes through the placenta.
Chronic alcoholism can result in developmental delays and malformations of the heart, head, face and extremities.
Infants born to mothers who are alcoholics go through withdrawal symptoms once they are born.
4.0 Conclusion Menstrual cycle is the period of time between the first days of one period of bleeding to the first day of the next period of bleeding.
Usually this is between 4 – 6 days.
Menstrual cycles are usually irregular initially at the onset of menstruation.
Information about fetal growth and development is important so that the midwife can understand the origin of some birth defects and can be able to describe for the mother-to-be what her baby looks like at various times during pregnancy.
5.0 Summary The consequences of the menstrual cycle on a woman’s life are extremely important.
Fertility is based on the menstrual cycle and the woman’s sexual activity.
The hormones that influence the menstrual cycle are the same hormone produced by the placenta during pregnancy and the same hormones used in birth control pills.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment With the aid of a diagram describe the anatomy and physiology of the uterus 7.0 References And Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1998.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Science Series).
18 UNIT II FERTILITY Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Factors Associated with Infertility 3.1 Causes of Male Infertility 3.2 Causes of Female Infertility 3.3 Investigations 3.3.1 History and Physical Examination 3.3.2 Laboratory Investigations 3.3.3 Radiological Studies 3.3.4 Male – Female interaction Studies 3.3.5 Basal body temperature 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 19 UNIT II FERTILITY 1.0 Introduction Infertility is the condition in which matured male and female partners could not achieve pregnancy after regular unprotected sexual intercourse for at least one year.
This problem may come from either the male or the female or both partners.
2.0 Objective On completion of this unit the learner will be able to: Define infertility Identify causes of infertility in the male and female Describe the treatment for both the male and female 3.0 Factors associated with infertility These include; Cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, sexual promiscuity, drug abuse, and sexually transmitted diseases.
Central Nervous System (CNS) depressants and narcoleptic drugs are capable of causing erectile dysfunctions.
Other diseases such as diabetes mellitus, renal failure, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury and cardiopulmonary disorders could be seen as causes capable of damaging the reproductive organs.
3.1 Causes of Male Infertility: The causes of male infertility can be classified into three categories: pre-testicular, testicular and post-testicular causes.
Pre-testicular Causes: • These are primarily genetic, pituitary and systemic metabolic disorders.
• Genetic disorders include Klinefelter’s syndrome (chromosomal pattern XXY, gynecomastia, small testes, and eunochoidism) or reinfenstein’s syndrome (chromosomal pattern 46 XY; reduced testosterone; gynecomastia; eunochoidism; azoospermia; hypospadias).
• Pituitary disordes; Such disorders include hypothyroidism, pan-hypopuitarism, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
• Systemic disorders such as neoplasm, diabetes mellitus, hepatic and renal diseases.
20 • Other causes include fever, malnutrition, x-rays, tight pants, etc Testicular Causes: These are the conditions in which the testes suffer direct damage.
They include the following • Disorders of the testes such as cryptorchidism, varicocele, obstruction of the ducts (due to infection).
• Genital infections e.g.
gonorrhea, syphilis, warts • Immunologic disorders such as allergic orchitis, autoimmune infertility.
• Semen disorders such volume/motility disturbances, • Formation of abnormal or immature sperm with variations in the size and shape of the head.
• Chemicals and drugs that inhibit gonadotropin or disturb normal spermatogenesis include Nitrofurantoin, Methotrexate, Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, Post – testicular causes: These include: • Congenital and therapeutic destruction of the epididymis or vas deferens, • Sexual problems such as ejaculatory incompetence, erectile dysfunction, decreased libido, penile deformity and extreme obesity.
3.2 Causes of Female Infertility Functional Causes: these include any defects or malfunctions of the hypothalamic-pituitary- ovarian axis that alter the complex hormonal interactions which determine the normal functions of the reproductive tract.
They are: • Gonadothropin insufficiency caused by infections, neurological diseases or tumors of the hypothalamus or pituitary gland.
• Hypothyroidism • Endometrial adhesions • Chronic cervicitis with abnormal mucus secretion Anatomical Causes: These include; Ovarian Factor: Ovarian failure may be caused by premature menopause or ovarian dysgenesis.
Uterine Factors: These include congenital absence of uterus, bi-cornuate or double uterus, 21 Tubal Factors: such as are abnormal tubal transport mechanism as seen in cases of uterus- tubal obstruction , uterine fibroids, etc.
Cervical Factors: Abnormal or excessive production of thick cervical mucus which is impenetrable to sperm, thus making it difficult for the sperm to enter into the uterus.
Psychological Factors: as a result of stress and emotional instability.
3.3 Investigations They include; Patient’s history, Physical examination, Laboratory investigation, and Radiological studies 3.3.1 History and Physical Examination: If male patient, the following are assessed: • Inquiry about psycho-sexual problems such as premature ejaculation, impotence, fear and anxiety during intercourse, etc.
• Previous operations, such as herniorrhaphy, orchidopexy, orchidectomy, prostatectomy, vasectomy, etc.
• Past illnesses, such as varicocele, mumps, sexually transmitted diseases like gonorrhea, syphilis, venereal warts.
Genital herpes, etc.
• Use of drugs like Nitrofurantoin, Cyclophosphamide, Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, • If he indulges in smoking, alcohol intake, obesity, or work in a hot environment.
Also find out if patient wears tight pants and/or has hot baths very frequently.
If female patient, assess • Is menses regular, irregular, painful, painless, etc?
• Views and reaction to sex?
• Had she undergone surgeries in the past such as hysterectomy, uterine evacuation, tubal ligation?.
• Past medical history; Is there any history of sexually transmitted diseases (STD), HIV/AIDS, urinary tract infection (UTI), salpingitis, pelvic inflammatory diseases, etc 22 • Is he taking any family planning pills?
Which of them?
When did she start using such contraceptives?
How often is she using them, etc.
3.3.2 Laboratory investigations: Semen analysis This is the major investigation in the male.
Semen analysis includes measurement of sperm concentration, motility and morphology.
It also tells us about the measurement of seminal plasma, and presence of anti-sperm antibodies.
It also determines the quantification and identification of non-spermatozoid cells.
The problem here is that of oligospermia (lower the sperm concentration) or azoospermia, 3.3.3 Radiological studies: This include; Hystero-salpingography (HSG), Rubbin’s Insufflations Test and Endoscopy • Rubin’s Insufflations Test: This of blowing air carbon (IV) oxide into the tube to establish patency.
It irritates the phrenic nerve, causing referred pain to the shoulder if one or both tubes are patent.
If the patient feels no pain, it indicates that the tubes are blocked.
• Hysterosalpingography: This shows any obstruction or abnormality of the fallopian tubes and uterine cavity.
uid cannot pass through the tubes, the diagnosis of tubal blockage is confirmed.
• Endoscopy: This is visualization of the internal organs by means of special instruments called endoscropes.
3.3.4Male – Female Interaction Studies: These include post-coital test (Sim’s Huhner Test) and immunologic or antibody testing.
• Post-coital (Sim’s Huhner) Test: Helps to examine the cervical mucus in relation to sperm motility and penetration It is usually done 2-4 hours after coitus.
• Immunologic or antibody testing helps to identify spermicidal antibodies in the sera of the female 3.3.5 Basal Body Temperature: the Basal Body Temperature (BBT) is a graphical representation of the body temperature, usually in the mornings, in order to ascertain the time of ovulation.
A sustained elevation in body temperature, post-ovulation until immediately before the onset of menses signifies the appropriate time of ovulation 4.0 Conclusion 23 Infertility is the condition in which matured male and female partners could not achieve pregnancy after regular unprotected sexual intercourse for at least one year.
This problem may come from either the male or the female or both partners, therefore both must be investigated before treatment is commenced.
5.0 Summary Infertility can be caused by a wide range of causes which can be classified as functional, anatomical and psychological causes.
6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Discussed the classification of infertility 7.0 References and Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1998.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Science Series).
Adishi, M. A.
A Hands-on Guide in Fertility and Remedies.
DELSU Printing Press, Abraka, 2009.
24  UNIT III HEALTH AND NUTRITION EDUCATION DURING PREGNANCY Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Exercise and Activity 3.1 Personal Hygiene 3.2 Care of the Breast 3.3 Drugs 3.4 Family Planning 3.5 Danger Signs 3.6 Preparation for Labor and Birth 3.7 Preparation for Home Delivery 3.8 Breast Feeding 3.9 Beliefs and Practices 3.10 Nutrition 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 25  UNIT III HEALTH AND NUTRITION EDUCATION DURING PREGNANCY `1.0 Introduction The midwife has a great opportunity for helping women prepare physically and emotionally for the birth of their babies.
The following information on health and nutrition should be given during pregnancy .
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: • Identify physical activities that are appropriate.
• Describe personal hygienic measures that should be encouraged.
• Describe the care of the breasts during pregnancy to help the promotion and establishment of lactation breast-feeding.
• List six foods rich in proteins, two in calories, and five in iron.
• Give the reason why drugs of all kinds should be discouraged.
• List five danger signs that pregnant women should be aware of.
3.0 Exercise and Activity Most sporting activities can be continued to some degree.
Some may need to be discontinued after the 20th week because falling on the abdomen could cause the placenta to separate from the wall of the uterus (abruptio placenta).
Pregnant women are often told to get 8 hours of sleep each night and minutes in the afternoon.
However, sleep needs vary from person to person.
Some women will need 6 hours of sleep while others will need nine.
Pregnant women should be encouraged to sleep and rest as much as they need.
The fatigue felt in the first trimester of pregnancy is normal.
It is probably caused by a change in the metabolic rate.
The second trimester of pregnancy is often the one in which a woman is full of energy, but fatigue frequently returns in the last trimester.
Women should be encouraged to rest in the side-lying position.
This keeps the weight of the baby and the amniotic fluid off the inferior vena cava, the main blood vessel returning blood from the legs to the heart.
The side- lying position also helps to prevent oedema (swelling in the legs).
Heavy physical work in pregnancy increases requirements of energy and proteins.
3.1 Personal Hygiene All women can be encouraged to take a daily bath when pregnant.
However, water is scarce in many developing countries and this practice may not be possible.
When a bath is taken soap can be used on all parts of the body including the genitalia.
There is no reason for a woman to avoid washing her hair during pregnancy or in the first few weeks following the birth of the baby.
26 Washing one’s hair does not give the mother colds, infections or other sicknesses.
Underwears should be changed them daily.
Loose cotton underwears should be encouraged since nylon keeps the area around the genitalia wet.
This moisture encourages the growth of bacteria.
3.2 Care of the Breasts During pregnancy, the breasts and nipples should be examined to detect retracted nipples.
This is important in all primigravida and women who have had difficulty in establishing breast-feeding in the past.
If the nipples are retracted the woman should be taught to pull out the nipples from the base of the areola with oil on her fingers.
3.3 Drugs Some pregnant women take drugs while they are pregnant, such as, antenatal vitamins, iron pills, laxatives, pills to prevent nausea and vomiting, medicine for heartburn, analgesics for headaches, and medicine for colds or other illnesses.
Drugs of all kinds should be discouraged during pregnancy, particularly during the first trimester when the organs of the baby are developing and deformity may result.
However, it sometimes is necessary to take medication for anaemia, infections and to treat some diseases 3.4 Family Planning Towards the end of the pregnancy it is almost always appropriate for the midwife to talk about family planning.
The available methods should be discussed with women who wish either to space or limit the number of children in their family.
The midwife should explain the effectiveness of each method; how each is used; common side effects and dangerous complications.
3.5 Danger Signs At the first antenatal visit the midwife should discuss the signs that can mean something serious may be happening with the pregnancy.
Pregnant women should contact the midwife immediately if any of the following occur: Bleeding o Severe headaches, sports before the eyes or blurred vision o Swelling of the hands and face o Fever or chills o Severe abdominal pain o Frequent vomiting or vomiting beyond the first trimester In the first trimester bleeding may be a sign of abortion (miscarriage), ectopic pregnancy or vaginitis.
Fever and chills usually mean infection.
Any infection or fever should be investigated and treated unless it is thought to be caused by a virus.
Viral infections are not helped by antibiotics.
Vomiting that lasts beyond the first trimester of pregnancy may be a symptom of hyperemesis gravidarum or hydatidiform mole.
27  3.6 Preparation for Labor and Birth.
The process of labor should be explained in words that the woman can understand.
The use of diagrams or models may be helpful.
Each woman should be helped to choose the place of birth that is safest for her.
When any of the following conditions are present, the mother should be encouraged to deliver in an adequately equipped hospital or maternity unit: • Adolescent or elderly primigravida.
o Weight of less than 38 kg.
o complications such as , heart disease, diabetes or active tuberculosis.
o Past obstetrical complications including, Caesarean section or serious postpartum haemorrhage.
o Present obstetrical complications, such as pregnancy-induced hypertension, antepartum haemorrhage, hydramnios, malpresentation, or premature labor.
o Past fetal complications, including stillbirth or neonatal death.
3.7 Preparation for Home Delivery The pregnant woman should keep the room clean for delivery.
Where there is no electricity, a lamp should be kept ready for night delivery.
In the absence of piped water, water should be stored for washing the hands, boiling the instruments, and cleaning the baby and mother.
Clean utensils for boiling the water and instruments should be handy.
Clothes for the baby and mother and some washed pieces of cloths should be ready.
The TBA, relative, friend or the person who is going to conduct the delivery should keep a delivery pack ready.
The latter should contain a sterilized blade, tincture of iodine, sterilized string, cotton swabs and gauze pieces.
3.8 Breast-feeding Breast-feeding should be encouraged in all women because it is important to the health and survival of the baby.
Discussions about breast-feeding should begin in the antenatal period.The midwife should discuss any popular beliefs that would keep a woman from breast-feeding.
Continued breast-feeding may lengthen the time between births.
This benefits both mother and child.
3.9 Beliefs and Practices All women hear stories about what may be harmful to them or to their developing babies during pregnancy.
For instance, some mothers believe that if they raise the arms above their heads while they are pregnant, a knot will form in the umbilical cord.
This is not so.
Fortunately, most of these beliefs are not harmful.
However, some practices may be dangerous.
There are also beliefs, practices and taboos on certain foods considered to be harmful to the mother and to fetal development.
The midwife must be aware of these local beliefs and practices so that they may discourage mothers from participating in those that may be harmful.
3.10 Nutrition 28 Dietary habits and practices in families are time-old and based on beliefs, customs, taboos, and on availability and purchasing capacity.
However, better knowledge about nutrition may change attitudes and practices if the family understands the benefits.
The midwife should know the local food beliefs and practices before advising on diet.
In some societies, foods are considered “hot” and “cold”, while others view foods as good or bad for the baby or for the establishment and continuation of lactation.
Economically disadvantaged families should be told about local foods that are nutritious but cheap.
All pulses, beans, legumes, milk, meat, and fish are good sources of proteins.
Oils and butter-oil are the best sources of calories.
Green leafy vegetables, coarse sugar, cereals and pulses provide iron, and yellow fruits (like mango and papaya), green leafy vegetables, carrots, liver, milk and butter supply Vitamin A.
The midwife should arrange nutrition demonstrations and arrange mothers’ classes where locally available foods rich in protein, calories, Vitamin A and iron are identified, discussed, and nutritive values vis-à-vis cost are explained.
4.0 Conclusion Pregnancy is a time when women are eager to learner about their bodies and their developing babies.
Giving information in a concerned manner can influence the health of both the mother and the baby.
5.0 Summary There are divers’ beliefs and practices that may be harmful to the mother and to fetal development.
The midwives must be aware of these local beliefs and practices so that they may discourage mothers from participating in those that may be harmful.
They should not discuss customs that are not harmful.
6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Discuss the importance of hygiene in prgnancy 7.0 References and Other Resources McNeil, R. T. & Anderson, M. E. Health education for tropical schools.
London, Collins, 1965.
Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 29  MODULE 2 PREGNANCY UNIT I SIGNS OF PREGNANCY AND PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Signs of Pregnancy 3.1 Possible Signs 3.2 Probable Signs 3.3 Positive Signs 3.4 Physiological Changes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 30  MODULE 2 PREGNANCY UNIT I SIGNS OF PREGNANCY AND PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES 1.0 Introduction When a woman becomes pregnant, changes occur in her body.
These changes lead to signs and symptoms that help the midwife suspect or diagnose a pregnancy.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: • Give one reason why each of the following is only a possible sign of pregnancy: amenorrhea, breast changes, discoloration of the cervix, nausea and vomiting, frequent urination, fatigue • List three probable signs of pregnancy.
• List three positive signs of pregnancy • List two effects of pregnancy on the body 3.0 Signs of Pregnancy The signs and symptoms are classified as possible signs, probable signs, and positive signs.
3.1 Possible signs The following signs and symptoms are called possible signs of pregnancy because they are usually associated with pregnancy, but are also signs and symptoms of other conditions.
These are: Amenorrhea Enlargement of the breasts, breast tenderness, nipple pain Discoloration of the cervix Nausea with or without vomiting Fatigue Amenorrhea, for example, is not a certain sign of pregnancy because it may occur during lactation.
When a woman stops taking the birth control pill amenorrhea may occur, as well as in women under unusual stress, women who are obese, women who move to a different climate, or in women with chronic disease such as severe anaemia.
Also, certain women menstruate only three or four times per year.
Therefore, absence of menstruation is not a reliable sign of pregnancy in these women.
Early in pregnancy women often have tender breasts and pain in the nipples.
Breasts frequently increase in size and the veins just beneath the skin are often visible.
The nipples become large, more erect and colostrums can often be expressed by gentle massage.
The glands in the nipples become larger and can be felt on the areola.
These changes can also be found in women with certain kinds of pituitary tumours, in women taking certain tranquillisers and in women with imaginary pregnancies (pseudocyesis).
31 During pregnancy the vaginal mucosa and cervix often have a blue or purple appearance.
This is because of venous congestion.
The vagina and cervix also appear this way when women take the birth control pill, and in the premenstrual period.
(Women with irregular cycles can have amenorrhoea in addition to these changes).
Nausea and vomiting may occur in early pregnancy.
They are not definite signs of pregnancy because they are symptoms of conditions, such as gastrointestinal disturbances, urinary tract infections, infective hepatitis, drug toxicity and imaginary pregnancy.
Frequent urination occurs in the first trimester of pregnancy because the enlarging uterus puts pressure on the urinary bladder.
Frequent urination is also a symptom of urinary tract infection, nervousness or psychological disturbances.
Fatigue is frequently found in pregnant women but is not a reliable sign since anaemia, malnutrition and other diseases are also associated with fatigue.
3.2 Probable Signs Other signs that indicate a pregnancy may be present are: Enlargement of the abdomen Changes in the size, shape and consistency of the uterus Outlining the fetus These signs, too, can mean a condition other than pregnancy and, therefore, are not called positive signs of pregnancy.
For example, an enlarged abdomen can be due to abdominal tumours, ascites, obesity and pseudocyesis.
A large tumour of the uterus can be mistaken for a baby.However, the probable signs usually mean a pregnancy is present.
For this reason they are called probable signs.
3.3 Positive Signs The positive signs of pregnancy are those that diagnose pregnancy with certainty.
These are: The presence of fetal heart sounds Fetal movement felt by the health care practitioner Presence of a fetus shown on X-ray or ultrasound Fetal heart sounds can usually be heartd with a foetoscope at 18-20 weeks of pregnancy.
Fetal movement is a positive sign only when felt by the health practitioner because women have occasionally identified intenstinal activity as movement of a baby.
3.4Physiological Changes The Hormones of Pregnancy Hormones are chemicals produced by the body that cause changes in certain body tissues.
The specific tissue that is changed by a hormone is called a target tissue.
Pregnancy produces several hormones that cause the body to adapt to the pregnancy.
Two of these are the same hormones that play important roles in the menstrual cycle: Oestrogen and progesterone.
There are other hormones that are involved in pregnancy, but oestrogen and progesterone are especially 32 important.
During pregnancy, oestrogen and progesterone are produced by the placenta and the ovaries.
The Uterus As the fetus grows, the uterus enlarges.
During the course of pregnancy it increases in length from about 10 cms to over 40 cms.
The volume of the uterus increases from a few milliliters to several litres.
As this enlargement occurs, the uterus moves from the pelvis into the abdomen.
The Skin Changes in the skin during pregnancy are due to the effects of hormones and the enlarged uterus.
Increased blood flow to the skin is due to the effect of oestrogen on the small blood vessels.
This may cause the skin to feel warm to touch.
Areas of the skin (especially the palms of the hands) may appear reddened.
Small red marks resembling spiders may appear in fair-skinned women on the upper parts of the body.
These marks are called spider angiomas.
A hormone called MSH causes the skin to become darker in some areas.
The effect of this hormone is noticed more in women with light complexions.
MSH stimulates certain cells to produce a dark pigment.
This often occurs in the area around the eyes and cheeks (called chloasma) and in a line between the umbilicus and the symphysis pubis (called the linea negra or “black line”).
The nipples and the areola usually become darker.
The genital area may also darken.
These darkened areas of skin will lighten after pregnancy but may not go away completely.
Digestive System Of all the systems in the body, it is the digestive system that accounts for most of the common discomforts of pregnancy.
Throughout the digestive tract, smooth muscle is responsible for moving food along.
Progesterone is thought to cause relaxation of smooth muscle.
The placenta produces large amounts of progesterone during pregnancy.
Thus, smooth muscle of the digestive system becomes considerably relaxed during pregnancy.
This causes food to remain longer in the different parts of the digestive system.
Constipation is common in pregnancy and may result from the decreased motility.
Stool remains in the large intestine longer.
This allows more water to be reabsorbed, making the stool harder and more difficult to excrete.
Progesterone also affects smooth muscle in the oesophagus, and may cause the food in the stomach to move back up the oesophagus.
Since food in the stomach is mixed with stomach acid, the pregnant woman may experience a burning sensation, “heartburn”, when this occurs.
On the other hand the relaxation of smooth muscle may have a beneficial effect on food absorption throughout the digestive system.
Since food moves at a slower rate, the pregnant woman may actually absorb more nutrients from the same amount of food.
This allows the body to take greater advantage of all the food consumed.
Stomach secretions may be reduced during pregnancy.
This may explain why peptic ulcers are rare in pregnancy or, if already present, may improve.
33 Production of saliva in the mouth is usually unaffected by pregnancy.
Occasionally, however, increased production of saliva is noticed.
Sometimes the amount of saliva is so great (ptyalism) that the pregnant woman must carry a container with her.
Ptyalism usually improves as pregnancy progresses.
In general, both appetite and thirst are increased during pregnancy.
Many women find themselves craving certain foods in particular.
“Pica” is the term used to describe a craving to eat non-food items such as clay, coal, ice, soap and others.
The Renal System Pregnancy also affects many kidney functions.
The blood flow to the kidneys is increased, as is the glomerular filtration rate (the time it takes to filter a substance out of the blood).
The kidneys seem to save some sodium, calcium and water for the pregnant body.
The pregnant woman tends to have a decreasing ability to excrete water.
This is particularly true for the woman with pregnancy-induced hypertension.
Glucose is more readily excreted by the kidneys, even in the absence of diabetes mellitus.
For this reason a trace of glucose in the urine can be a normal finding during pregnancy.
During pregnancy the position of the baby has a significant effect on urine flow, which is greatly reduced when a woman is lying on her back.
This is probably due to compression of the renal blood vessels by the enlarged uterus.
Women with oedema should be encouraged to sleep on their sides.
The Blood Pregnancy has a significant effect on the volume of blood circulating in the body, a woman’s haematocrit (the percentage of red blood cells to plasma) may fall without anaemia being present.
This is a normal occurrence at about the 30th week of pregnancy.
The haematocrit usually rises again after the 34th week.
The number of white blood cells is also increased.
When a non-pregnant woman has a significant increase of white blood cells, it may be a sign of an infection somewhere in the body.
However, during pregnancy, such an increase may be normal.
The plasma contains several substances that enable the blood to clot in the event of injury.
Some of these are present in increased amounts during normal pregnancy.
This may be a safety measure to assure minimal blood loss after the delivery of the placenta.
The Cardiovascular System Changes in the blood vessels, this is, the veins, arteries and capillaries, are the result of the hormones of pregnancy, the increase in blood volume and the enlarging uterus.
Progesterone probably relaxes the walls of the blood vessels and the increase in blood volume probably “stretches” them even more.
The enlarging uterus is known to have significant effects on the veins below mid-abdomen.
Some women develop varicosities or bulges in the veins of the legs and vulva.
These varicosities may become large and twisted.
When a pregnant woman lies on her back in the last trimester, the baby, amniotic fluid and uterus press on the large vein (vena cava) that carries blood from the legs to the heart.
This prevents blood in the lower body from flowing to the heart at its usual rate.
When this happens, the heart cannot fill properly and the brain 34 receives less blood.
This may cause dizziness, nausea, and even fainting unless the woman rolls on the her side.
If she stands up suddenly from a sitting or back-lying position, the effect may be even greater.
The baby, amniotic fluid and uterus also press on veins in the lower abdomen.
This additional pressure further decreases the flow of blood in the legs.
This allows a portion of the blood to leak into other tissues.
Thus, the feet and lower legs of a pregnant woman are often swollen, especially if the woman must stand or sit for long periods of time.
Oedema in the lower legs and feet is usually a normal variation of a healthy pregnancy.
Oedema may also occur in the hands and face.
The midwife must determine whether oedema in the hands and face is normal or whether it is the result of high blood pressure.
The Respiratory System Though the rate of respiration does not change during pregnancy, the total amount of oxygen consumed by the pregnant woman is increased, as is the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood.
This should not be surprising because new tissue needs more oxygen.
It is not unusual for the pregnant woman to experience shortness of breath.
This may be due to the growing uterus decreasing the space in the abdominal cavity.
However, some pregnant women experience shortness of breath long before the uterus becomes large.
The cause may be anaemia, associated heart disease or respiratory tract infection.
The Breasts The breasts change early in pregnancy.
Both oestrogen and progesterone prepare the breasts for the nutritional needs of the baby.
Some of the first signs of pregnancy may be a tingling sensation in the breasts along with an increase in size and fullness.
Some women have breast tenderness or pain in the nipples.
The veins in the skin of the breasts may be more easily seen.
The nipple and the areola increase in size and may darken in colour.
Small raised glands, called Montgomery’s tubercles, may appear around the nipple.
These glands secrete an oily substance that keeps bacteria away.
The milk-secreting cells and the ducts that carry milk become fully developed during pregnancy.
The breasts may secrete milk long before the baby is born.
Weight Gain in Pregnancy Normal weight gain in pregnancy, vary from 5-17 kg depending upon the size of the mother, her diet and her health.
Weight gain in pregnancy is due to the growth of the fetus and placenta as well as increases in amniotic fluid, blood volume, protein storage, breasts, uterus, and tissue fluids.
Maternal Posture As the fetus and uterus grow and the joints of the pelvis soften, the woman may naturally assume a lardotic posture, in which the shoulders are pulled back, the head lifted higher and the pelvis is further forward.
Discomfort in the pelvic joints may cause or increase the walk with a side-to- 35 side swing.
This may cause or increase the lower back pain that many pregnant women experience.
Emotional Changes The emotional changes of pregnancy are not as easily noticed as the physical changes, but they are just as important.
These emotional changes are probably caused by a combination of factors.
Some of the factors which might influence a woman’s emotions are: • Body changes due to pregnancy • Social and personal circumstances of the pregnant woman • Acceptance of the pregnancy by the family and friends • Whether the pregnancy was planned or unplanned • The hormones of pregnancy Emotional changes in pregnancy vary from woman to woman and may they depend on social and cultural customs.
4.0 Conclusion Knowing the signs of pregnancy, the midwife can provide the women with appropriate health care.
They will also be able to suspect conditions other than pregnancy when the available information does not seem to “fit” the possible signs and symptoms of pregnancy.
5.0Summary The probable, possible and positive signs of pregnancy help the midwife suspect or diagnose a pregnancy.
The physiological changes in pregnancy are due to the hormones of pregnancy and the growing fetus.
It also affects social relationships, financial conditions, and the health of the family as a whole.
6.0Tutor Marks Assignment Discuss the probable, possible and positive signs of pregnancy 7.0 References and Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 36  UNIT II COMMON DISCOMFORTS IN PREGNANCY Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Backache 3.1 Constipation 3.2 Difficulty in breathing 3.3 Dizziness and faintness 3.4 Nutrition supplements 3.5 Oedema of the ankles 3.6 Flatulence 3.7 Frequent urination 3.8 Heartburn 3.9 Haemorrhoids 3.10 Itching skin 3.11 Leg cramps 3.12 Nausea and vomiting 3.13 Pelvic joint pain 3.14 Ptyalism 3.15 Varicosities 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 37  UNIT II COMMON DISCOMFORTS IN PREGNANCY 1.0 Introduction Certain minor discomforts often disturb women during pregnancy.
These discomforts are “minor” because they do not endanger either the mother or the fetus.
Some discomforts that occur most often are discussed.
Measures to prevent, minimize or relieve each discomfort are suggested.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: • Give the reason that each of the following may occur during pregnancy: Backache Constipation Dizziness and Fainting Oedema Frequent urination Heartburn Nausea and vomiting Ptyalism Varicosities • Identify measures that may give relief from each of these discomforts.
3.0 Backache (2nd and 3rd trimesters) Possible causes • Excessive lordosis (forward curving of the spinal column) to balance the weight of the fetus • Relaxation of the pelvic ligaments due to the effect of the pregnancy hormones Treatment Low shoes Periodic rest in side-lying position Decrease amount of walking Avoiding strain particularly from bending and lifting 38 3.1 Constipation Possible causes o Decreased muscular contraction by the smooth muscle of the bowel due to progesterone o Pressure of the growing uterus on the lower bowel o Tension or anxiety o Insufficient foods high in roughage o Lack of physical activity o Poor intake of fluids Treatment Increase intake of foods high in roughage, and fresh fruits and vegetables Increase fluid intake Avoiding tension, anxiety Good bowel elimination habits 3.2 Difficulty in breathing (Dyspnea; 3rd trimester) Possible causes Pressure on the diaphragm by the enlarged uterus Anaemia Treatment Propped-up or semi-sitting when resting or sleeping Decrease physical activity Treatment of anaemia with iron and folic acid 3.3 Dizziness and faintness Possible causes Anaemia Malnutrition Fatigue Pressure of the enlarged uterus on the inferior vena cava when lying flat on the back (hypotensive syndrome) Inability of the blood vessel walls to respond quickly to position changes due to relaxation of the walls, because of the increased progesterone 39 Treatment 3.4 Nutrition supplements Avoiding prolonged standing/walking and physical fatigue Keeping head low when dizzy or feeling faint Avoiding lying flat on the back in the last trimester Turning body to side-lying position before getting up after resting or sleeping.
3.5 Oedema of the ankles (Not associated with pre-eclampsia; 3rd trimester) Possible causes Fluid in tissue due to poor return of blood from lower extremities caused by pressure of the uterus on the abdominal wall Treatment Avoiding prolonged standing/walking Bed rest for 24 hours (Elevation of the legs for 1-2 hours during the day is rarely enough when oedema is present) Side-lying position for rest or sleep 3.6 Flatulence (Gases; throughout pregnancy) Possible causes Undesirable bacterial action in the intestines Anxiety or tension Gas-forming foods Treatment Small but frequent meals Unhurried meals Avoiding foods which are gas-forming, such as beans, corn and dairy products.
3.7 Frequent urination (1st and 3rd trimester) Possible causes Pressure on the bladder from the uterus Treatment Decrease fluid intake before going to sleep (Fluid intake should not be severely restricted as this practice can lead to bladder infections) 40 3.8 Heartburn (3rd trimester) Possible causes Relaxation of the cardiac sphincter (the muscle between the stomach and the oesophagus) that allows gastric juices to enter the oesophagus Treatment Eating bland foods Eating small meals frequently Sleeping in a semi-sitting position 3.9 Haemorrhoids (Piles; 3rd trimester) Possible causes Constipation Treatment Prevention or relief of the constipation Gently push the haemorrhoids back into the rectum Cold or warm compresses or analgesic ointment applied to the haemorrhoids 3.10 Itching skin (3rd trimester) Possible causes Hormones present during pregnancy Stretching of abdominal skin Relief and prevention measures Daily bath Local application of talcum powder Increases fluid intake Soft, cool clothes 3.11 Leg cramps (2nd and 3rd trimesters) Possible causes Pressure of the enlarged uterus on a nerve in the lower extremeties Prolonged standing/walking Insufficient calcium intake 41 High level of serum phosphorus, usually from processed milk Measures for prevention or relief Increase milk intake if the diet is low in calcium Decrease in intake of processed milk if mother is drinking 3 to 4 glasses of each day 3.12 Nausea and vomiting (Morning sickness; 1st trimester) Possible causes Emotional factors (in majority of women) Hormonal changes due to the pregnancy Pyridoxine deficiency (Vitamin B ) 6 Treatment Avoiding tea or coffee in the morning Avoiding odour and sight of foods that cause nausea and vomiting Eating small, frequent, light meals Helping in resolution of emotional problems 3.13 Pelvic joint pain (3rd trimester) Possible causes Relaxation of the pelvic joints and ligaments due to the hormones of pregnancy Separation of the symphysis pubis Treatment Avoiding lifting heavy objects Avoiding prolonged standing or walking Maternity girdle 3.14 Ptyalism (Excessive salivation; 1st and 2nd trimesters) Possible causes: unknown Treatment: unknown 3.15 Varicosities (Legs and/or vulva; 2nd and 3rd trimesters) Possible causes Relaxed blood vessel walls due to progesterone.
The walls of the veins dilate so that blood return from the lower extremities is slowed Pressure of the uterus on abdominal veins 42  Treatment (Leg varicosities) Avoiding long periods of standing Wearing flat shoes Wearing supportive stockings or bandages Elevating the legs when sitting Treatment (vulva) Put a menstrual pad or foam pad inside panties to provide pressure and support 4.0 Conclusion Most of the common discomforts of pregnancy occur in more than one trimester.
Some occur throughout the pregnancy.
The timing of the discomforts can be often related to what is happening in the mother’s body.
5.0 Summary While the discomforts do not endanger the life of the mother or the baby, they should not be ignored.
They can affect the mother’s attitude toward the pregnancy and her ability to cope with it.
The midwife should be able to anticipate the occurrence of the discomforts and provide guidance on preventing or minimizing their effect.
6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Discuss briefly the causes and treatment for the following discomforts in pregnancy Backache Constipation Oedema Frequent urination Heartburn Ptyalism 7.0 References and Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 43 UNIT III THE ANTENATAL VISIT Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Booking/Registration 3.1 Other problems during the present pregnancy 3.2 Physical Examination 3.3 Pelvic Examination 3.4 Abdominal Examination 3.5 Fetal Heart Sounds 3.6 Laboratory tests 3.7 Health and Nutritional Education 3.8 Frequency of Antenatal Visits 3.8.1 Subsequent Antenatal Visits 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 44  UNIT III THE ANTENATAL VISIT 1.0 Introduction The goal of antenatal care is a safe delivery of the baby.
The components of a first antenatal visit are outlined below.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the unit the learner will be able to: • Give one reason why pregnant women should avoid; medications smoking, alcoholic drinks • Give three reasons why nutritional assessment is an important part of the first antenatal examination.
• State the value of eliciting each of the following: previous obstetric history ,height, weight ,anaemia, oedema on feet, height of uterus, fetal heart sounds if heard.
• Give 2 reasons why each of the following should be checked: blood pressure ,weigh, urine at each antenatal clinic 3.0 Booking/Registration On the first visit a mother’s record for the visit is filled in and general data gathered.
Basic information, such as patient’s full name, birth date, and address are obtained.
History Taking The purpose of history taking is to identify any condition that puts the mother or baby “at risk”, that is, makes them more likely to become sick or die because of pregnancy or childbirth.
The expectant mother should be helped to feel relaxed and welcome especially those that are shy or have difficulty in expressing herself.
When possible, information should be obtained in private.
Technical terms which the woman does not understand should be avoided.
The following information should be obtained at the first visit; Personal information This information is obtained so that the midwife can better understand the patient and her family.
Enquire about her residential address so that you can trace her home on your visit.
If the patient has a telephone, ask for the phone number.
Ask for the woman’s age/birth date to know whether or not age puts her in a high-risk group.
Ask for the highest grade she has completed in school.
This will help to identify the best way to communicate with her.
Ask for the name of her husband or the father of the baby.
Identify the age of this person and whether or not the person is available for emotional and financial support.
Ask her about her occupation, and that of the baby’s father.
This information can identify possible social and financial problems as well as environmental factors that can be harmful to the growing fetus.
For example, women who have a heavy physical work load during pregnancy are 45 known to deliver lower birth weight babies than women who do not.
Sometimes it is helpful to know for how long a couple have been married.
This information may help to identify the stability of father or how many children by other marriages.
Personal medical and surgical history This is to identify previous illnesses and operations that may influence the present pregnancy.
A history of serious illness may require referral to a physician.
Nutritional assessment Malnutrition before and during pregnancy adversely affects the baby’s birth weight and subsequently the infant’s, as well as the mother’s own, nutritional status.
While enquiring about the diet it is important to find out about the food beliefs, practices, customs in the family In some places food taboos for cultural and religious reasons will cause women to avoid foods that might be helpful to them.
Other questions that may be asked are; What food do you eat every day?
How many times do you eat each day?
Family medical history This history identifies diseases or conditions that tend to run in families such as certain anaemias and bleeding disorders.
A family history of twins should also be noted.
Family history is also important for identifying areas for health counseling.
For example, a woman whose family members have had much heart disease should be told about the importance of exercise, good nutrition, and not smoking in order to lessen her chances of having a heart problem.
Obstetrical history Information obtained should include the number of times the woman has been pregnant, the number of full-term and premature babies, abortions, living children, the birth weight of each baby, the length of the labor and any problems that happened during the pregnancy, birth or puerperium.
Babies with congenital abnormalities or mental retardation should be noted as well as the place of delivery.
This information is important because many conditions in pregnancy are likely to recur each time a woman is pregnant.
The length of the first labor rarely predicts the length of later labors.
Almost always, subsequent labors are faster and easier than the first one.
A woman who has had a Caesarean section in her last delivery must have a hospital confinement as there may be a danger of uterine rupture.
Drug history This should include information about medications, smoking and alcohol intake.
Medicines taken during the first 10 weeks of pregnancy can cause congenital anomalies.
Women who smoke more than 10 cigarettes per day while pregnant have babies whose birth weights are about 46 200 grams less than women who do not smoke.
The more cigarettes smoked each day, the smaller the baby.
The safe level of alcohol that can be consumed during pregnancy is not known.
However, the greater the exposure, the greater the risk.
Recent use of birth control Ask about the birth control method used recently.
The EDC can be difficult to identify if a woman does not have a spontaneous menstrual period after she stops taking the birth control pill.
Careful examination should be made to check for the presence of an IUD.
If a woman becomes pregnant with an IUD in place, the IUD should be removed.
Pregnant women with an IUD in place should be told to be watchful for bad smelling discharge, low abdominal pain and fever.
These symptoms are associated with severe pelvic infection and fetal death, and require immediate medical attention.
The pregnancy may continue normally with an IUD in place, and it will be expelled with the placenta at delivery.
3.1 Other problems during the present pregnancy The midwife also needs to know what physical symptoms the patient has had.
Headaches These occur often in the first trimester.
They usually do not mean anything serious, but a referral to a physician may be needed.
Headache that are not serious are often caused by sinusitis, eye- sight problems, or everyday stress and strain.
The midwife should ask the following questions to determine if a referral is needed: • How long do the headache last.
• Are they getting worse • What medicine is being taken for relief • Are dizziness, nausea, sports in front of the eyes, or blurred vision present when the headaches occur • Do they go away with bed rest Most headaches get better with mild, pain-relieving tablets.
Whenever headaches are becoming worse, are not relieved with simple medicine, or are combined with other symptoms, the pregnant woman should be seen by a physician.
Nausea and vomiting Many women have nausea and occasional vomiting in their first trimester of pregnancy.
When it lasts beyond 20 weeks it should be considered abnormal.
Severe nausea and vomiting may be a symptom of hyperemesis gravidarum, hydatidiform mole, infections of the gastrointestinal tract, hepatitis, and, rarely, intestinal obstruction.
Vaginal bleeding Bleeding in the first trimester may occur in 10 percent of normal pregnancies and is usually not significant when the amount is small and no abdominal pain is present.
Heavy bleeding, particularly associated with cramps in the abdomen or pain in the back, is often a 47 symptom of abortion.
If a woman is bleeding heavily but does not have any pain, she is said to be experiencing a threatened abortion.
Abortion is inevitable when pain and dilation of the cervix are present along with the bleeding.
Bleeding in the first trimester may also be a sign of ectopic pregnancy or hydatidiform mole.
Bleeding in the last trimester is usually due to placenta praevia or abruptio placenta.
Anaemia Anemia during pregnancy is often due to inadequate food supplies.
Diseases like malaria, tuberculosis, hookworm and schistosomiasis also cause anemia.
Severe anemia contributes to complications and deaths in both mothers and newborn.
Stillbirths and low birth weight babies also occur more frequently with women that are anemic.
Malaria Malaria during pregnancy can endanger the life of the mother as well as cause intrauterine growth retardation, abortions, premature labor and intrauterine death.
It is also a major cause of anemia during pregnancy.
In areas where malaria is always present (endemic), suppressive drugs may be given to prevent repeat attacks.
Rubella and other viral infections Rubella infection (German measles) during early pregnancy causes congenital anomalies.
Enquire whether the woman had a rash, fever and painful small swellings at the back of the head.
The midwife should record any episode of symptoms include fever, chills, diarrhoea, limb and joint pain and the like.
High blood pressure Women with high blood pressure before pregnancy are more likely to deliver small babies and experience worsening of the disease process.
Heart disease Certain kinds of heart disease worsen during pregnancy and may even threaten the mother’s life.
However, women with severe heart disease are likely to have low birth weight babies and premature labor.
Kidney disease Kidney disease such as nephritis or phyelonephritis involves poor kidney function.
Babies born to mothers with kidney disease are usually small.
Pregnancy is not known to worsen kidney disease.
Venereal disease The more serious diseases during pregnancy are syphilis, gonorrhea and herpes simplex type II.
Syphilis can cause stillbirth and congenital syphilis in the infant.
Gonorrhea can cause severe conjunctivitis in the newborn (ophthalmia neonatorum) which may result in blindness.
Herpes can cause death or mental retardation.
Gonorrhoea is harmful to the baby, when the baby comes in contact with Neisseria gonorrhoea as it passes through the birth canal.
Silver nitrate is the drug most often recommended to prevent newborn blindness from gonorrhoea (ophthalmia neonatorum) because it remains effective for a time and remains stable even in extreme 48 temperatures as long as the ampule is not opened.
Data is now available to show that erythromycin (0.5 percent) and tetracycline (1 percent) drops or eye ointment is also effective.
Phlebitis Women who have a history of phlebitis and cord-like veins have a 12 percent chance of having them reappear while they are pregnant.
Sometimes blood clots can dislodge and cause the death of the mother.
Convulsions Most convulsive disorders are caused by epilepsy.
Epilepsy can worsen in pregnancy.
Phenytoin, the drug most commonly used to treat epilepsy, has been known to cause mental retardation and developmental problems in babies who were in utero when their mothers took the drug.
Tuberculosis While this disease has no bad affects on pregnancy when recognized and treated early, active disease must be treated during pregnancy with drugs not known to be harmful to the fetus.
If the mother is an active case the newborn should be put on isoniazide prophylaxis till the time the mother is non-infective.
Then the baby should be vaccinated with BCG.
Diabetes mellitus Diabetes mellitus is dangerous for both the mother and her baby.
Babies of diabetic mothers are likely to be large, sometimes weighing more than 4500 grams.
These babies are likely to need delivery by Caesarean section.
When vaginal delivery occurs, damage to both mother or baby can result.
After birth these babies may have hypoglycaemia (low blood sugar) which if severe, can lead to brain damage and present incidence of congenital anomalies, particularly cardiac problems.
Immunization with tetanus toxoid Tetanus in newborns is common in many developing countries.
Sometimes the woman also develops tetanus after delivery.
The mortality rate in neonatal tetanus is very high.
Prevention is possible with two injections of tetanus toxoid at an interval of two months during the second half of pregnancy.
Radiation Exposure to X-rays or other radiation during early pregnancy may cause birth defects.
Ask whether she visited the hospital during early pregnancy for X-ray.
Drug addiction Drug addicts deliver babies with the same drug addiction.
These babies have an increased risk of being mentally retarded and developmentally delayed.
3.2 Physical Examination A complete physical examination at the first antenatal visit is desirable but not always possible.
The following elements are the most important.
Height Short stature may be associated with a small pelvis.
It is most important when chronic disease or malnutrition is also present, or the height is significantly different from that of the general population.
Women with shorter height might produce low birth weight babies.
49 Weight The pre-pregnant weight, when known, should be recorded at the first antenatal visit.
Women who are underweight at conception should gain.
Those with very low weight (chronically malnourished) before pregnancy, deliver low birth weight babies.
In some countries the figures are 38-40 kgs.
Those whose weight gain is insufficient deliver low birth weight babies.
3.3 Pelvic examination The size of the uterus can also be estimated in a pelvic examination.
A pelvic examination in the first trimester is a valuable guide for identifying the age of the baby.
The size is recorded in weeks as 8-week size or 10 to 12-week size.
Later in pregnancy fundal height measurement increase every week between 18th and 36th week of gestation.
The rate of growth depends on the weight of a full-term baby.
Examination of the pelvis after 32 weeks of pregnancy should be performed at the antenatal visit to identify the woman who may need a Caesarean section.
The cephalo-pelvic disproportion is a problem in many countries.
Women who have cephalo-pelvic disproportion should have a well-supervised labor in a hospital or maternity centre with a The midwife in attendance.
3.4 Abdominal examination This examination is performed at each visit during the last trimester of pregnancy to identify the presenting part.
Abdominal examination can also be used to identify the lie, position, and whether or not engagement has occurred.
When the expectant mother does not know her last menstrual period, abdominal examination early in pregnancy can help identify the approximate age of the fetus.
Relating the height of the fundus to finger breadths above the symphysis, or finger breadths above or below the umbilicus can help the midwife decide when the baby might be born.
3.5 Fetal heart sounds The baby’s heart beat can usually be heard with a foetoscope between 18 and 20 weeks of gestation.
Normal fetal heart sounds range from 120-160 beats per minute.
They increase when the baby moves.
The presence of fetal heart sounds in the normal range reassures the midwife that the baby is alive.
3.6 Laboratory Tests Urine examination for albumin More than a trace of albumin in the urine suggests pregnancy-induced hypertension (pre- eclampsia), kidney disease, or urinary tract infection.
Blood examination Haemoglobin should be estimated when there are clinical signs of anaemia.
When possible, tests for syphilis and the RH factor should be done.
The blood should be examined for sugar if diabetes is suspected.
Pregnancy tests Confirmation of pregnancy is possible through both urine and blood tests.
50 3.7 Health and Nutrition Education Health education can be done individually or in groups.
Topics for discussion include: diet, personal hygiene, discomfort, preparation for delivery, breast-feeding, care of newborn care and family planning.
3.8 Frequency of Antenatal Visits The recommended frequency of return visits is as follows: • Every 4 weeks until the 28th week of pregnancy • Every 2 weeks from the 28th to the 36th week of pregnancy • Weekly after the 36th week 3.8.1 Subsequent antenatal visits Return visits for antenatal care are scheduled to evaluate the health of both the mother and the baby.
These visits give the midwife an opportunity to identify problems, provide health education, and make referrals when necessary.
It is advisable that each expectant mother comes to the clinic at least once every trimester.
Maternal Assessment Once the record has been carefully reviewed, an up-to-date assessment of mother and fetus should be done.
The assessment of the mother consists of four parts: Evaluation of Blood Pressure Compare all blood pressure readings with the mother’s blood pressure at her first antenatal visit or a recent non-pregnant blood pressure.
Remember the criteria for identifying mild and severe pre-eclampsia as well as chronic and gestational hypertension.
If a blood pressure evaluation occurs before the 20th week, think of hydatidiform mole as well as chronic hypertension.
Always recheck a blood pressure that is significantly elevated.
Evaluation of Weight Gain Compare the weight today with the pre-pregnant weight to identify the total weight gain the weight at the last antenatal visit so that sudden, excessive weight gain or poor weight gain can be noted.
Evaluation of Urine for Sugar and Protein Glucosuria can be normal in pregnancy.
It can also be a sign of diabetes.
When glucosuria is present, blood sugar tests should be performed when possible.
Proteinuria can also be normal or a sign of pathology.
A trace of protein in the urine usually means that the urine is mixed with vaginal discharge and is not significant.
When a trace of protein is present in urine but no symptoms of pregnancy induced hypertension are present, the urine should be carefully examined again at the next voiding.
If the amount of protein at the second testing is 1+ or greater, a diagnosis of pregnancy-induced hypertension is made.
Proteinuria can also mean a urinary tract infection (bladder or kidney infection), kidney disease, or heart disease.
A microscopic urinalysis can diagnose urinary tract infection.
51  4.0 Conclusion The first visit is important for identifying women needing special antenatal care or referral for delivery.
This visit also gives the midwife a chance to become acquainted with the expectant mother and convince her of the value of antenatal care.
Good antenatal care can make the difference between life and death for both mother and baby.
5.0 Summary Return antenatal visits are important for continuing evaluation of both mother and baby.
The midwife must be alert to the development of new problems and a worsening of old problems.
Care must be given in an atmosphere of kindness, concern and support.
6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Give 2 reasons why each of the following should be checked: blood pressure ,weigh, urine at each antenatal clinic 7.0 References and Other Resources Ojo O.
A.
& Briggs, E. B.
A Textbook for midwives in the tropics.
London, Edward Arnold, 1996.
52 UNIT IV ABORTION Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Definition 3.1 Types of Abortion 3.2 Incidence of Induced Abortion 3.3 Abortion Methods 3.4 Other Techniques 3.5 Sex Selective Abortion 3.6 Unsafe Abortion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 53 UNIT IV ABORTION 1.0 Introduction Abortion has a long history and has been induced by various methods including herbal abortifacients, the use of sharpened tools, physical trauma, and other traditional methods.
Contemporary medicine utilizes medications and surgical procedures to induce abortion.
The legality, prevalence, and cultural views on abortion vary substantially around the world.
In many parts of the world there is prominent and divisive public controversy over the ethical and legal issues of abortion.
Abortion and abortion-related issues feature prominently in the national politics in many nations, often involving the opposing "pro-life" and "pro-choice" worldwide social movements.
Incidence of abortion has declined worldwide, as access to family planning education and contraceptive services has increased.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: • Define abortion • Enumerate the types of abortion • Discuss the methods of abortion 3.0 Definition Abortion is the termination of a pregnancy by the removal or expulsion from the uterus of a fetus or embryo, resulting in or caused by its death.
An abortion can occur spontaneously due to complications during pregnancy or can be induced, in humans and other species.
In the context of human pregnancies, an abortion induced to preserve the health of the gravida (pregnant female) is termed a therapeutic abortion, while an abortion induced for any other reason is termed an elective abortion.
The term abortion most commonly refers to the induced abortion of a human pregnancy, while spontaneous abortions are usually termed miscarriages.
3.1 Types of abortion Spontaneous abortion Spontaneous abortion (also known as miscarriage) is the expulsion of an embryo or fetus due to accidental trauma or natural causes before approximately the 22nd week of gestation; the definition by gestational age varies by country.
Premature births and stillbirths are generally not considered to be miscarriages.
The most common cause of spontaneous abortion during the first trimester is chromosomal abnormalities of the embryo/fetus, accounting for at least 50% of sampled early pregnancy losses.
Other causes include vascular disease (such as lupus), diabetes, other hormonal problems, infection, and abnormalities of the uterus.
Advancing maternal age and a patient history of previous spontaneous abortions are the two leading factors associated with a greater risk of spontaneous abortion.
A spontaneous abortion can also be caused by accidental trauma; intentional trauma or stress to cause miscarriage is considered induced abortion or feticide.
54 Induced abortion Reasons for procuring induced abortions are typically characterized as either therapeutic or elective.
An abortion is medically referred to as therapeutic when it is performed to: • save the life of the pregnant woman • preserve the woman's physical or mental health • terminate pregnancy that would result in a child born with a congenital disorder that would be fatal or associated with significant morbidity An abortion is referred to as elective when it is performed at the request of the woman "for reasons other than maternal health or fetal disease.
"[13] 3.2 Incidence of Induced Abortion The incidence and reasons for induced abortion vary regionally.
It has been estimated that in 1995 approximately 46 million abortions were performed worldwide.
Of these, 26 million are said to have occurred in places where abortion is legal; the other 20 million happened where the procedure is illegal.
Abortion rates also vary depending on the stage of pregnancy and the method practiced.
3.3 Abortion Methods Historically, pregnancies were terminated through a number of methods, including the administration of abortifacient herbs, the use of sharpened implements, the application of abdominal pressure, and other techniques.
Gestational age often determine which abortion methods are practiced.
• Medical abortions They are non-surgical abortions that use pharmaceutical drugs, and are only effective in the first trimester of pregnancy.
Medical abortions comprise 10% of all abortions.
Combined regimens include methotrexate or mifepristone, followed by a prostaglandin (either misoprostol or gemepros.
Misoprostol can be used alone, but has a lower efficacy rate than combined regimens.
In cases of failure of medical abortion, vacuum or manual aspiration is used to complete the abortion surgically.
• Manual Vacuum aspiration (MVA)/ electric vacuum aspiration (EVA) • Manual Vacuum aspiration (MVA) abortion consists of removing the fetus or embryo, placenta and membranes by suction using a manual syringe, while electric vacuum aspiration (EVA) abortion uses an electric pump.
These techniques are comparable, and 55 differ in the mechanism used to apply suction.
In the first 12 weeks, suction-aspiration or vacuum abortion is the most common method Dilation and evacuation (D&E) • Dilation and evacuation (D&E) is used from the 15th week until approximately the 26th, and it consists of opening the cervix of the uterus and emptying it using surgical instruments and suction.
• Dilation and curettage (D&C) The term D and C, or sometimes suction curette, is used as a euphemism for the first trimester abortion procedure, whichever the method used It is the second most common method of abortion, and also is a standard gynecological procedure performed for a variety of reasons, including examination of the uterine lining for possible malignancy, investigation of abnormal bleeding, and abortion.
Curettage refers to cleaning the walls of the uterus with a curette.
The World Health Organization recommends this procedure, also called sharp curettage, only when MVA is unavailable 3.4 Other techniques These are; • The use of prostaglandin to induce abortion in the second trimester.
• Injecting the amniotic fluid with hypertonic solutions containing saline or urea Abortions can be induced by this method after after the 16th week of gestation, • Intact dilation and extraction (IDX) (also called intrauterine cranial decompression), which requires surgical decompression of the fetus's head before evacuation.
IDX is sometimes called "partial-birth abortion, • Hysterectomy abortion is a procedure similar to a caesarean section and is performed under general anesthesia.
It requires a smaller incision than a caesarean section and is used during later stages of pregnancy • Use of herbs with abortifacient properties have been used in folk medicine: tansy, pennyroyal, black cohosh, and the now-extinct silphium The use of herbs in such a manner can cause serious side effects.
• Trauma to the abdomen.
The degree of force, can cause serious internal injuries without necessarily succeeding in inducing miscarriage.
Both accidental and deliberate abortions of this kind can be subject to criminal liability.
• Forceful abdominal massage • Misuse of misoprostol, • Insertion of non-surgical implements such as knitting needles and clothes hangers into the uterus.
These methods are rarely seen in developed countries where surgical abortion is legal and available 56 3.5 Sex-selective abortion Sonography and amniocentesis allow parents to determine sex before birth.
The development of this technology has led to sex-selective abortion, or the targeted termination of female fetuses.
It is suggested that sex-selective abortion might be partially responsible for the noticeable disparities between the birth rates of male and female children in some places.
The preference for male children is reported in many areas of Asia, and abortion used to limit female births has been reported in Mainland China, Taiwan, South Korea, and India In India, the economic role of men, the costs associated with dowries, and a common Indian tradition which dictates that funeral rites must be performed by a male relative have led to a cultural preference for sons.
The Indian government passed an official ban of pre-natal sex screening in 1994 and moved to pass a complete ban of sex-selective abortion in 2002.
3.6 Unsafe abortion The World Health Organization (WHO) defines an unsafe abortion as being "a procedure ... carried out by persons lacking the necessary skills or in an environment that does not conform to minimal medical standards, or both."
Unsafe abortions are sometimes known colloquially as "back-alley" abortions.
This can include a person without medical training, a professional health provider operating in sub-standard conditions, or the woman herself.
Unsafe abortion remains a public health concern today due to the higher incidence and severity of its associated complications, such as incomplete abortion, sepsis, hemorrhage, and damage to internal organs.
WHO estimates that 19 million unsafe abortions occur around the world annually and that 68,000 of these result in the woman's death.
Complications of unsafe abortion are said to account, globally, for approximately 13% of all maternal mortalities, with regional estimates including 12% in Asia, 25% in Latin America, and 13% in sub-Saharan Africa A 2007 study published in the The Lancet found that, although the global rate of abortion declined from 45.6 million in 1995 to 41.6 million in 2003, unsafe procedures still accounted for 48% of all abortions performed in 2003.
Health education, access to family planning, and improvements in health care during and after abortion have been proposed to address this phenomenon 3.7 Abortion debate Abortion debates, especially pertaining to abortion laws, are often spearheaded by groups advocating one of these two positions.
In the United States, those in favor of greater legal restrictions on, or even complete prohibition of abortion, most often describe themselves as pro- life while those against legal restrictions on abortion describe themselves as pro-choice.
Generally, the pro-life position argues that a human fetus is a human being with the right to live making abortion tantamount to murder.
The pro-choice position argues that a woman has certain reproductive rights, especially the choice whether or not to carry a pregnancy to term.
4.0 Conclusion An abortion can occur spontaneously due to complications during pregnancy or can be induced, in humans and other species.
57 5.0 Summary In both public and private debate, arguments presented in favor of or against abortion focus on either the moral permissibility of an induced abortion, or justification of laws permitting or restricting abortion.
Debate also focuses on whether the pregnant woman should have to notify and/or have the consent of others in distinct cases: a minor, her parents; a legally married or common-law wife, her husband; or a pregnant woman, the biological father.
6.0 Tutor marked assignments Discuss methods of abortion 7.0 References and other resources Sedgh, Gilda ( 2007).
"Legal Abortion Worldwide: Incidence and Recent Trends".
International Family Planning Perspectives 33 (3).
http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/journals/3310607.html.
Retrieved 2009-07-27.
Department of Reproductive Health and Research, World Health Organization (2003)" lRetrieved 2009-04-07.
NB: 58  UNIT V HIGH RISK WOMEN AND INFANTS Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 High Risk Pregnant Women 3.1 High Risk Women in Postpartum 3.2 High Risk Infants 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 59  UNIT IV HIGH RISK WOMEN AND INFANTS 1.0 Introduction In pregnancy, certain women are more likely than others to develop complications.
These women are said to be “at risk”.
The first pregnancy, multiple or frequent pregnancies, pregnancy early or late at the reproductive age, and malnutrition in women are among the risk factors which increase the chances of poor pregnancy outcome, (sickness or death for either mother or baby).
Included in the “high risk” group are women with chronic disease, women who have a poor obstetrical history, and women who develop a serious complication in the present pregnancy.
When more than one risk factor is present in the same individual, the chances of poor outcome are increased.
Babies born to women in this group are more likely to be born prematurely, sick, deformed, or retarded.
The babies are also more likely to be stillborn or die in the neonatal period.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: 1.
Define high risk women and infants.
2.
List eight conditions which identify pregnant women at high risk.
3.
List three conditions which identify women at high risk during labor.
4.
List five factors which put the mother at high risk during the post-partum period 5.
List five conditions in the newborn which are of high risk and how to manage them.
3.0 High Risk Pregnant Women A pregnant woman should be considered as high risk if one or more of the following conditions are present; • Age- 17 years or under, or above 35 years of age.
• Elderly primipara – above 30 years of age and multipara – more than four pregnancies.
• Previous history of: o Abortion or stillbirth o Loss of child within one month of delivery o Caesarean section o Prolonged labor lasting more than 24 hours o Baby weighs less than 2.5 kg 60 • Height 145 cm or less.
• Weight of less than 38 kg before pregnancy or less than 42 kg at 34 weeks of pregnancy.
• Severe anaemia.
• Toxaemia of pregnancy – signs such as oedema, high blood pressure and albumen in urine.
• Unusually large uterus.
• Vaginal bleeding during pregnancy.
• Abnormal presentation during the last month of pregnancy.
• Diabetes, hepatitis or heart disease.
Age Adolescent pregnancy before 17 years of age has bad effects on the health of the mother and baby.
This is because the pelvic bones of girls below 17 years of age are neither still in the process of development more importantly they are not mature physically nor physiologically to undergo the stress and strain of pregnancy and labor.
Labor may become prolonged or obstructed resulting in rupture of the uterus or vesico-vaginal fistulae.
These young mothers are prone to deliver low birth weight babies.
When a woman is pregnant for the first time after the age of 30 years she may experience difficult labor because of stiffness of the pelvic ligaments and rigid perineum.. After 35 years of age, women are more prone to pregnancy-induced hypertension, postpartum haemorrhage and abnormal presentation.
Parity The woman who already has had 4 deliveries (grand-multipara) is more likely to get anaemia and malnutrition due to depletion of her nutritional stores.
The incidence of post-partum haemorrhage is high in multiparous women.
Past History The previous obstetrical history should be carefully assessed critically, noting any conditions which can put her at risk during the present pregnancy.
If a woman had a stillbirth in the immediate past pregnancy, perhaps due to foeto-pelvic disproportion or tight cord round the baby’s neck, she may deliver a stillborn baby and need a Caesarean section.
Such women are high risk and they should be examined often during the current pregnancy and advised to deliver in hospital.
If three or more of the last pregnancies ended in abortions, then the causes of the abortions should be investigated and treated.
The death of an infant within one month of birth is generally due to feeding problems, birth trauma, infection, low birth weight or prematurity.
Such conditions may occur again in the next infant; hence, such women who lost their babies within one month of delivery should be watched carefully during the present pregnancy.
If the previous labor was prolonged for more than 24 hours, the cause for this should be determined.
Severe malnutrition 61 Measurements like height and weight of women is utilized in screening high risk mothers.
Those women who are stunted, whose weight is very low before pregnancy, or whose pregnancy weight gain is poor are prone to delivering low birth weight babies.
Nutrition supplementation during pregnancy can reduce the incidence of low birth weight babies of severely malnourished women.
Severe anaemia Severe pallor can be detected at antenatal examinations.
Anaemia in pregnant women causes growth retardation in the fetus and the baby is born with low birth weight.
Severe anaemia in mothers leads to premature labor.
Toxemia Toxaemia is harmful to the fetus as well as to the mother.
The fetus may be aborted or born with low birth weight.
Oedema on the face and fingers may be associated with raised blood pressure and albumin in the urine.
The mother can developed convulsions.
Anaemia and toxaemia must be are detected and treated to prevent adverse consequences to the mother and the baby.
Large abdomen A large fetus, multiple pregnancies (twins) or hydramnios should be suspected when abdominal examination reveals an over-distended uterus.
Vaginal bleeding Women with a history of antepartum haemorrhage are more prone to postpartum haemorrhage, hence it is important that these women are managed in the hospital.
First trimester bleeding may end in an abortion.
Bleeding after 20 weeks can be due to abruptio placenta or placenta praevia.
Abnormal presentation Abnormal presentation, such as brow, face or prolapse of the cord or a hand breech or transverse lie, predispose a pregnant woman to high risk, such woman should be advised to deliver in hospital in order to avoid prolonged labor, rupture of the uterus or stillbirth.
Premature rupture of membranes and prolapse of the cord can occur in abnormal presentations such as breech or shoulder.
Diseases Heart disease and diabetes during pregnancy are hazardous to pregnant women and the growing fetus.
The diabetic woman is more prone to pregnancy induced hypertension.
Her big-size baby can cause prolonged labor.
An infant of a diabetic mother often suffers from metabolic problems after birth.
Labor A woman with any of the following in labor; profuse vaginal bleeding, premature rupture of the membrane, prolonged labor (more than 24 hours) is in the high risk group.
Premature rupture of 62 the membranes should be watched carefully as this can lead to infection of the amniotic fluid and thus infection to the baby and the mother.
Premature rupture of membranes can occur in abnormal presentations such as breech or shoulder, and there are chances of prolapse of the cord.
3.1 High Risk Women in the Postpartum Period Any woman with any of the under listed conditions are high risk during the early postpartum period.
Complications may occur in high risk women immediately or sometime within a week of the delivery.
These are: • Premature rupture of membranes • Prolonged labor • Multiparity • Twin delivery • Delivery of large baby • Hydramnios • Postpartum haemorrhage in the previous delivery • Antepartum haemorrhage in the present pregnancy 3.2 High Risk Infants A newborn is at risk if he/she has any one or more of the following conditions: • Pre-term birth • Low birth weight • Premature rupture of membranes • Asphyxia • Intense jaundice • Hypothermia • Delivery conducted by untrained attendant Infants are at high risk when they are born before term, or born at term but have a low birth weight.
Their resistance to infections is low at such time.
The newborn is prone to diarrhoea, pneumonia, conjunctivitis, or skin infections if the membranes ruptured early and the liquor amnii is infected.
Prolonged labor, cord around the neck and a heavy dose of sedatives given to the mother before delivery are the commonest cause of asphyxia.
The fetal respiratory centres in the medulla are depressed due to the sedatives or lack of oxygen.
Asphyxiated babies have a poor Apgar score and may develop cerebral palsy, mental retardation or epilepsy.
Jaundice by the third day of life is physiologically normal in the newborn.
It is mild and lasts for a week.
However, if there is blood group incompatibility such as Rh and ABO, or enzyme deficiency in red cells jaundice may occur on the first or second day.
Babies who have jaundice from first or second day are at risk.
The newborn develops hypothermia when the room temperature is low and the baby is not sufficiently covered up.
Rectal temperature below 36 63 degrees C is considered as hypothermia.
These babies should be well covered as they may die because of the very low body temperature.
4.0 Conclusion The midwife, can reduce maternal and infant mortality and morbidity to a large extent by detecting high risk women and infants and providing special care and referring them to the hospital in time.
5.0 Summary The first pregnancy, multiple or frequent pregnancies, pregnancy early or late at the reproductive age, and malnutrition in women are among the risk factors which increase the chances of poor pregnancy outcome.
6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Enumerate 4 conditions each that might make a baby or the mother at risk 7.0 References and Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 64  UNIT VI FETAL HEALTH Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Fundal Height 3.1 Unusual Growth Patterns 3.1.1 Low Fundal Height 3.1.2 High Fundal Height 3.1.3 Management of Abnormal Growth Patterns 3.2 Fetal heart Sounds 3.2.1 Locating/Listening to Fetal heart Sounds 3.3 Fetal Movement 3.4 Diagnosing Fetal Death 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 65  UNIT VI FETAL HEALTH 1.0 Introduction At each antenatal visit the baby must be evaluated for health as well as for growth.
The growth is measured using fundal height.
Fetal health is evaluated by examining the abdomen to determine the position of the fetus before listening for the fetal heart beat.
The foetoscope is designed to be placed on or against the examiner’s head so that the bones or his/her skull can help conduct the fetal hearth sound.
Fetal movement; this is the activity of the fetus in the uterus.
2.0 Objective At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: • Describe the procedure for measuring fundal height using a centimeter measuring tape.
• Know the usual time of quickening.
• Give the range of normal fetal heart sounds.
• State the gestational age when fetal heart sounds should be heard with a foetoscope.
• On a drawing of the maternal abdomen, mark the area where fetal heart sounds are most likely to be found early in pregnancy.
3.0 Fundal Height The height of the uterine fundus is used for assessing fetal growth.
However the fundal height varies according to (i) the period of pregnancy (ii) growth of the baby.
The uterine fundus is known to grow approximately 1 cm per week between the 18th and 36th week.
For example, at 28 week’s gestation, the fundal height should measure between 26 and 30 cm (28 plus or minus 2 cm) from the pubic symphysis, if the baby is growing well.
Abdominal landmarks can also be used to assess the period of gestation.
A level of one centimeter or a finger above the pubic symphysis represents 3 months of pregnancy and every month after that its position increases by about the width of four reaching the level of the navel by the 5th month of pregnancy and xiphisternum on the 9th month.
The uterus is palpable after three months of pregnancy.
Before measuring the height of fundus ask the woman to empty her bladder.
To measure the fundal height with a centimeter measuring tape, place one end of the tape directly over the symphisis until the top of the fundus is reached.
The border of the symphysis must be felt each time a measurement is made because its location varies from woman to woman.
It is important to be exact when locating the upper border of the symphysis and the top of the uterus.
3.1 Unusual Growth Patterns If the height of the fundus is unusually large or small the midwife must first be sure of the gestational age of the baby.
The following may be helpful: • Review the menstrual history, Is the mother sure of the date of her last normal menstrual period, Was the last menstrual period normal, When was the EDC (Expected 66 Date of Confinement) Calculation of the EDC is as follows: (i) To the date of the last menstrual period (LMP) add 7 days and count forward 9 calendar months, e.g., if the last menstruation was on 3 March, add 7, which comes to 10 March and count 9 months ahead from 10 April: that will come to 10 December which will be the approximate date of delivery, or (ii) add 7 days to the last menstruation date and count back three calendar months.
• Review the birth control method history Has either partner used a birth control method since the last normal menstrual period?
When was this method stopped?
Was it used correctly and consistently?
• Identify the date of quickening, When did the mother first feel the baby move?
Movement is most likely to occur at 16-18 weeks’ gestation.
3.1.1 Low Fundal Height When the fundal height is consistently less than expected for a given period of gestation, or when it remains the same for a month (excluding the time after 8 months of pregnancy), the examiner should consider the possibility of the following: • Wrong dates- Intrauterine growth retardation (no growth or slow growth of the baby in the uterus).
This is the most common cause of low fundal height.
• Transverse lie -Transverse lie can often be found by examination and palpation of the abdomen.
In many cases the baby appears to be below the umbilicus (See Fig.
1.)
Fig.
1.
Palpation in transverse lie.
• Oligohydramnios (decreased amniotic fluid) Decreased amniotic fluid is associated with urinary and gastro-intestinal abnormalities in the fetus.
When oligohydramnios is present, the midwife may not be able to feel amniotic fluid when palpating the abdomen.
67 • Fetal death -Absence of fetal movement usually makes the expectant mother suspicious that something has happened to her baby.
The midwife should listen carefully to fetal heart sounds.
If they are not heard, the fetus is probably dead.
However, there is a possibility of error when the patient is obese or when polyhydramnios is present.
Fetal heart sounds should be confirmed by two different examiners.
Accuracy of the fundal height measurement is increased when the same person measures each time.
Each midwife must perform the procedure using the same technique.
There can be incorrect recording if the bladder was full at previous examination.
3.1.2 High Fundal Height When the fundal height is consistently much higher than expected, the examiner must consider the possibility of the following: 1.
Wrong dates.
2.
Polyhydramnios (too much amniotic fluid) Polyhydramnios is more likely to occur in pregnancies involving more than one fetus, major malformations, diabetes mellitus.
The diagnosis is usually based on finding a large abdomen and a feeling of a larger than usual quantity of fluid around the fetus.
It may not be possible to feel the fetus.
Most of the time the cause of polyhydramnios is unknown and the baby is born without problems.
However, polyhydramnios is associated with: • Diabetes in the mother • Fetal anomalies such as anencephaly, spina bifida, tracheo-oesophageal fistula • Intrauterine infections such as syphilis • Severe and chronic anaemia in utero, such as erythroblastosis fetalis 3.
Multiple pregnancies Twins can be identified by finding two heart beats.
The examiner must listen for 60 seconds and should find at least ten beats’ difference between the heart beats.
If two different fetal heart beats are heard, two examiners should listen at the same time with foetoscopes on different parts of the mother’s abdomen.
As the fetal heart beat is heard, each examiner moves a finger in rhythm with the heart beat.
If the fingers move together, one baby is present.
If the fingers move at different intervals and if the fetal heart rate difference by two examiners is more than 10, more than one baby is present.
4.
Maternal diabetes mellitus This disease in frequently associated with large fundal heights because babies of diabetic mothers can be very large.
5.
Large baby Some babies are healthy yet much larger than average.
3.1.3 Management of abnormal Growth Patterns 68 • The midwife must always be concerned when the growth of the fetus is not within norm and refer the expectant mother to a centre where special antenatal testing can be done.
• Expectant mothers should be encouraged to deliver in a hospital or clinic where special support for small or sick babies is available.
• Women with babies having growth problem should be seen more frequently.
Special attention must be given to good nutrition.
• The plan of care should be written clearly on the mother’s chart so that everyone involved is aware of the problems and the steps that are to be taken 3.2 Fetal heart sounds Fetal health is evaluated by counting fetal heart sounds with a foetoscope.
The normal fetal heart beats from 120-160 times each minute.
Bradycardia (slow heart beat less than 90 times each minute) or tachycardia (fast heart beat more than 160-170 times each minute) may mean that the baby is in distress.
When the fetal back is found, the foetoscope is placed over it so that the heart sounds can be heard easily and clearly.
It may be difficult to determine the fetal positon when the pregnant woman is obese, or has polyhydramnios.
3.2.1 Locating /Listening to Fetal Heart Sounds 18th- 20th week of pregnancy Fetal heart sounds can usually be heard by foetoscope between 18th- 20th week of pregnancy.
To listen, place the foetoscope directly above the upper border of the symphysis pubis.
Listen for the fetal heart beat.
If nothing is heard, move toward the umbilicus slowly to the left side of the midline and move down toward the symphysis.
If the heart beat is still not heard, move one centimetre to the right of the midline and move up toward the umbilicus.
Finally, listen in the middle of each lower quadrant.
At this stage of pregnancy, the fetal heart sounds are rarely found far from the midline.
(See Fig.
2.)
Fig.
2.
69  After the 24th week of pregnancy, Fetal heart sounds can be found on either the lower right or lower left side of the mother’s abdomen.
Place the foetoscope in the middle of one of the lower quadrants.
(Position 1 or 2).
If no heart beat is heard, place the foetoscope in the middle of the other quadrant.
If no fetal heart sounds are heard, place the foetoscope in the middle half-way between the umbilicus and the upper border of the symphysis pubis (Position 3).
If the fetal heart tones are still not heard, place the foetoscope directly over the umbilicus (Position 4).
Then try the left and right flanks at the level of the umbilicus (Position 5 and 6).
Finally, place the foetoscope in the midline of each upper quadrant (Positions 7 and 8).
See Fig.
3.)
Fig.
3.
Foetoscope examination of the pregnant woman after the 24th week of pregnancy.
Once the fetal heart sounds are located, count the beats for at least 15 seconds.
Multiply this number by 4 to get the number of beats per minute.
Record your findings.
Listen for a full minute if you find an irregular heartbeat, bradycardia or tachycardia.
The fetal heart rate should increase with fetal movement.
Therefore, slowing of the fetal heart after fetal activity is normal.
3.3 Fetal Movement It is used to assess the viability of the baby.
Decreased fetal movement is thought to be most important in women with high-risk pregnancies.
3.4 Diagnosing Fetal Death 70 When the baby dies, the mother is usually the first to know.
She will often feel that “something is wrong”.
If the baby dies early in the pregnancy, the symptoms of pregnancy disappear.
Other signs are; the breasts go back to their normal size, the mother suffers nausea and vomiting, there will be no fetus movement.
The mother loses weight or stops gaining weight.
The midwife is unable to hear fetal heart sounds.
When fetal death occurs, most women will go into labor within one month of the death of the baby.
4.0 Conclusion Assessment of growth and health of the fetus is one of the main responsibilities of those who care for pregnant women.
Accurate and continuous evaluation of the baby in- utero provides the midwife with information that should lead to the best possible care for women and their infants.
5.0 Summary Abdominal landmarks can also be used to assess the period of gestation.
A level of one centimeter or a finger above the pubic symphysis represents 3 months of pregnancy and every month after that its position increases by about the width of four reaching the level of the navel by the 5th month of pregnancy and xiphisternum on the 9th month.
6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment On a drawing of the maternal abdomen, mark the area where fetal heart sounds are most likely to be found early in pregnancy.
7.0 References and Other Resources Ingalls, A. J.
& Salerno, M. C. Maternal and child health nursing.
4th ed.
St Louis, Mosby, 1999.
71 MODULE 3 THE PROCESS OF LABOR UNIT I ABDOMINAL EXAMINATION Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Palpation of the Abdomen 3.1.1 The Lie 3.1.2 The Presentation 3.2 Activities involved in the examination of the Abdomen 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 72 MODULE 3 THE PROCESS OF LABOR UNIT I ABDOMINAL EXAMINATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: • Define the following: Transverse lie Longitudinal lie Presenting part • Identify two ways to diagnose a transverse lie.
• Give two reasons for palpating the abdomen at each examination after the 32nd week of pregnancy.
• Describe the technique for palpating the abdomen (Leopold’s Manoeuvre) in late pregnancy.
3.0 Palpation of the Abdomen Before examining the abdomen the woman is asked to empty her bladder to avoid discomfort and it allow better assessment of fetal parts.
The examination of the abdomen of the pregnant woman to determine lie and presentation is called Leopold’s Maneuvers.
This is done to identify (a) The Lie (b) Presentation 3.1.1 The Lie Lie refers to the relationship between the spine of the baby and the spine of the mother.
The lie of the baby is either longitudinal or transverse.
When the lie is longitudinal, the spine of the baby is parallel (in the same direction) to the spine of the mother.
When the lie is transverse, the spine of the baby is perpendicular (at right angles) to the spine of the mother.
The lie is longitudinal in both cephalic and breech presentation.
In a transverse lie the baby’s shoulder is usually over the pelvic inlet.
This condition is also referred to as a shoulder presentation.
However, a baby in a transverse lie can also be resting with its back in the fundus.
See Fig.1 A transverse lie can result from any of the following: a.
An unusual relaxation of the abdominal wall that allows the uterus to fall forward and prevents the baby from entering the birth canal b. Prematurity c. Placenta praevia d. A contracted pelvis Full-term babies cannot be delivered vaginally when they are in a transverse lie.
Without intervention, both mother and baby will be at risk 73  3.1.2 The Presentation This refers to the part of the baby that lies nearest the cervix during a vaginal examination.
If the lie is longitudinal, the presenting part is either the head or the breech.
Head presentation can be vertex, brow, or face.
In transverse lie the presenting part is the shoulder.
When the presenting part is the brow, the forehead appears at the internal cervical os.
When the face comes first, the head is hyper extended so that the back part of the baby’s head (occiput) is in contact with the fetal back.
The mouth, nose, cheek bones and the ridges of the eyes can be felt.
This presentation may resemble a breech since the anus resembles the mouth and the ischial spine resembles the cheek bones.
3.2 Activities involved in the examination of the abdomen Four activities are involved in the examination of the abdomen of the pregnant woman.
These are; to determine lie and presentation.
Each answers a different question.
The activities may be performed in any sequences.
1.
Identifying the presenting part, This done by extending the thumb and middle finger of one hand and place them on the lower abdomen immediately above the symphysis pubis.
Gently but firmly press into the abdomen and feel for shape, size, and consistency.
This is to differentiate between the breech and the head.
(See Fig.
3.)
Fig.
3.
Identifying the presenting part If the fetal part feels round and hard, the head is in the pelvis.
When the head is found in the pelvis, the conclusion is that the lie is longitudinal and the presentation is cephalic.
74 2.
Identify the part of the baby’s body that is in the fundus This is done by placing the palms of both hands on either side of the fundus, and palpate for shape, size, consistency and mobility.
See Fig.
4.
If the fetal part feels irregular and soft and is not readily moved from side to side between the two hands, the breech is in the fundus.
If the fetal part feels round and hard and is easily moved from side to side, the head is in the fundus.
If neither is felt, the baby is probably in a transverse lie.
Fig.
4.
Identify the part of the baby’s body that is in the fundus 3.
Identify the back This is done by placing the hands on either side of the abdomen at the level of umbilicus.
Support the uterus with one hand, gently palpate the other side with the other hand looking for the fetal back.
The fetal back is smooth whereas the small parts are small, movable, and irregular.
See Fig.
5.
Fig.
5.
Where is the back?
75 4.
Has engagement occurred?
Facing the patient’s feet, See Fig.
6) gently move your hands down the sides of the baby toward the symphysis pubis.
Feel for the cephalic prominence.
The cephalic prominence is the forehead when the baby’s head is flexed and the occiput when the head is extended.
Fig.
6.
Has engagement occurred?
4.0 Conclusion The midwife must be able to identify both the lie and the presenting part so that babies can be delivered under the safest possible conditions.
5.0 Summary The examination of the abdomen of the pregnant woman to determine lie and presentation is called Leopold’s Manoeuvre.
This is done to identify (a) The Lie (b) Presentation 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Enumerate the four activities that are involved in the examination of the abdomen of the pregnant woman.
7.0 References and Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. UNIT II 76 LABOR PROCESS Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The Course of Labor 3.2 Signs of True Labor 3.3 Mechanisms of Labor 3.4 Assessment of Labor 3.5 The Stages of Labor 3.6 Cares during Labor 3.7 The use of Eneama in Labor 3.8 Support measures that may help relieve the pain of labor 3.9 Pain Medication 3.10 Positions for Labor 3.11 Examination of the Placenta 3.12 The Immediate Care of the Newborn 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources UNIT II 77 LABOR PROCESS 1.0 Introduction Labor is the process by which the baby and the placenta are pushed out of the uterus and brought into the world.
Labor is an emotional experience as well as a physical one.
Each culture has rules that pregnant women are expected to follow during labor and birth.
These rules include who is allowed to be present, what position the mother will deliver in, what sounds are acceptable, who will deliver the baby and what happens to the baby when it is born.
Definitions of terms Effacement is the process by which the cervical canal becomes short and thin.
Dilatation is the process by which the cervix opens so that the baby’s head can pass through.
Braxton-Hicks contractions are usually irregular and painless uterus contractions 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: • Describe the assessment of a new patient in labor • List five factors to be considered before giving pain medication to women in labor.
• Describe the mechanism of labor • List four signs of placental separation 3.0 Before Labor Begins Two to three weeks before labor begins, the cervix starts to efface and dilate.
Effacement is the process by which the cervical canal becomes short and thin.
Dilatation is the process by which the cervix opens so that the baby’s head can pass through.
The cervix also moves from a posterior position to an anterior position in the vagina.
It can dilate as much as 5cm before true labor begins.
In most cases, however, the cervix will dilate true labor begins.
In most cases, however, the cervix will dilate only one to 2cm.
Effacement before labor usually varies from 50-80percent.
78 Some mothers having their first baby will experience lightening, the dropping of the fetus into the true pelvis, about two weeks before labor begins.
When this happens, the uterine fundus stops pressing against the diaphragm.
Breathing becomes easier, but some discomfort may now be felt in the lower abdomen, groin and thighs.
Urinary frequency may occur due to pressure of the baby’s head on the urinary bladder.
Some mothers feel the uterus contracting during the last weeks of pregnancy.
These contractions are called Braxton-Hicks contractions.
They are usually irregular and painless, but may, on occasion, come every three to four minutes and can cause discomfort.
However, the cervix does not dilate or efface with Braxton-Hicks contractions.
For this reason they are called “false labor” contractions.
“Bloody show”, blood-tinged mucus coming from the vagina, often appears 24- 48hours before labor begins.
Bloody show is a combination of mucus and blood from the cervix.
As the cervix effaces and dilates, the mucus that “plugged” the cervix to help protect the baby from infection is torn away from the sides of the cervix, causing tiny blood vessels to rupture and bleed giving the mucus a pink or dark brown colour.
3.1 The Course of Labor There are a number of theories explaining why and how labor starts.
Investigators feel that when the baby reaches a certain point of maturity, it somehow signals the uterus to begin contracting.
The signal is thought to be a chemical reaction that begins in the membranes.
The contractions of labor push the baby toward the birth canal.
These contractions are rhythmic and involuntary.
At the beginning of labor they often cause pain or discomfort in the lower part of the back.
The midwife can feel the contractions by placing a hand on the abdomen of the laboring woman.
When a contraction begins, the abdomen becomes hard.
It softens when the contraction relaxes.
Because most of the muscles of the uterus are in the fundus, the contractions are easiest to feel in the fundal area.
79 Contractions decrease the flow of blood of the placenta.
Muscle fibres in the uterus are arranged around blood vessels in the uterus in a manner similar to the number “8”.
The blood vessels are in Between each contraction there is a period of relaxation that allows the blood to flow again through the blood vessels so that oxygen and nutrients can reach the baby.
As labor progresses, the contractions increase in frequency, duration (length) and intensity.
The frequency of contractions (how often they occur) is determined by timing the beginning of one contraction to the beginning of the next one.
The duration is measured from the beginning of the contraction.
It is Intensity refers to the strength of the contraction.
It is measured by touching the fundus of the uterus to feel how hard it is.
A common practice for determining the intensity of the contraction is to compare by touch the firmness of the fundus with the firmness of your lips, nose, chin and forehead in that order.
The intensity is labeled: 1+ firmness (comparable to the feel of your lips; a mild contraction) 2+ firmness (comparable to the nose) 3+ firmness (comparable to the chin) 4+ firmness (comparable to the forehead, a strong contraction) Most labors begin with contractions occurring every 10-15minutes, lasting approximately 30 seconds and of mild intensity.
As labor progresses, the contractions become more frequent and last longer until, in the last part of the first stage of labor, the contractions may occur every two minutes and last as long as 90 seconds.
Most, but not all women, experience labor in this manner.
Some will at the very beginning have strong, three minutes contractions that last for 60 seconds.
Others will begin with mild contractions every two or three minutes.
Many variations exist and are considered normal.
Progress toward birth is usually made when the contractions are frequent and strong.
Other signs of progress include an increase in bloody show and spontaneous rupture of the membranes.
When not ruptured artificially, the 80 membranes are most likely to break at the end of the first stage of labor or early in the second stage.
Sometimes, however, the membranes will rupture before labor begins or early in labor.
Many birth attendants feel that the bag of waters should be left intact (membranes not ruptured) as long as possible to protect the presenting part and the umbilical cord.
Others believe that rupture of the membranes stimulates uterine contractions and, therefore, will artificially rupture membranes early in labor.
However contractions do not always increase after the procedure, nor is it always desirable to make the contractions stronger.
Intact membranes also protect the fetus from infection.
3.2 Signs of True Labor A vaginal or rectal examination to evaluate the dilatation of the of the cervix is the only way to know if woman is in labor.
False labor produces no changes in the cervix.
True labor causes the cervix to dilate and efface.
Below are some differences between true and false labor.
False Labor True Labor • Pain decreases or goes away • Pain not relieved with walking and with walking or after an increases after an enema is given enema is given • Contractions are irregular or • Contractions become stronger and do not get close together longer, and more frequent • No bloody show • Bloody show 3.3 Mechanisms of Labor Before birth can occur, the fetus must fit through the bony pelvis.
This involve seven changes of position; 1.
Engagement This occurs when the presenting part is almost at the ischial spines.
In a primigravida, engagement may occur before the start of labor.
In a multipara 81 engagement usually occurs during labor.
Engagement occurs with the mechanisms of flexion and descent.
2.
Flexion As the baby pushes against the cervix and the pelvic floor, its chin touches its chest making its head as small as possible.
If the baby does not put its chin on its chest, a wider part of the head must try to fit through the pelvis 3.
Descent This occurs throughout labor.
The baby moves down through the mother’s pelvis.
This is possible because of (1) fundal pressure on the presenting part and (2) contractions of the abdominal muscles when the mother pushes, descent occurs.
4.
Internal Rotation Internal rotation occurs when the baby’s head reaches the level of the ischial spines.
5.
Extension The baby’s head passes under the pubic arch as labor continues.
When the baby’s head reaches the perineum, it “extends”.
The occipital is born first; then the anterior fontanelle, forehead, eyes, nose, mouth and chin.
6.
Restitution and External Rotation After the baby’s head is born, it turns 45 degrees (restitution) to the right or the left and then 90 degrees (external rotation).
The shoulders turn to an anterior-posterior position so they can come under the public arch.
Lateral flexion is the term that describes the way the baby’s body is born.
After the shoulders are born, the baby bends its head, chest and trunk upwards to fit through the birth canal.
3.4 Assessment of labor The assessment of the patient should include: 1.
Information about the progress of labor a.
When did the contractions begin b.
Have the membranes ruptured 82 c. Was bloody show present 2.
History of bright red bleeding since labor began.
3.
Evaluation of the contractions now: frequency, strength, duration.
4.
Fetal heart sounds 5.
Blood pressure, pulse, respiration, temperature 6.
Abdominal examination to identify: a. presentation b.
Position c. Engagement d. Fundal height measurement e. Fetal size and estimating fetal weight 7.
Vaginal or rectal examination to identify: a. Dilation b. Effacement c. Station d. Presentation 8.
Urine examination for: a.
Protein b. Glucose c. Ketone bodies (in cases with prolonged labor) (Urine examination is not carried out routinely: only when indicated) 9.
Haematocrit or haemoglobin 10.
Evaluation of the mother’s emotional state: a.
The reaction to pain b.
Her response to the people present to give her support c. Her feelings about the progress of labor 3.5 The Stages of Labor Labor is divided into three stages: 83 1.
The first stage lasts from the first true contration until the cervix is 10cm (completely) dilated.
This stage is divided into three phases.
a.
The early phase (latent phase) b.
The active phase c. Transition 2.
The second stage lasts from complete dilation to the birth of the baby.
3.
The third stage lasts from the birth of the baby to delivery of the placenta.
• First stage of labor The early phase of the first stage begins with the first true contraction and ends when the cervix is about 4cm dilated.
In early labor contractions are usually mild to moderate in intensity.
As time passes they increase in both frequency and duration.
During this period the midwife should listen to fetal heart sound every 30 to 60 minutes.
In normal labors the blood pressure, respiration and pulse should be checked every two hours.
Temperature should be checked every four hours.
Vaginal examinations should be performed to be sure that labor is progressing normally.
This is done on admission to the hospital or whenever the membranes rupture during labor to make sure that the umbilical cord has not prolapsed.
The vaginal examination provides information about cervical dilatation and effacement.
It also allows the midwife to identify the station of the presenting part.
Station refers to how far down the birth canal the baby has moved.
It is measured by relating the presenting part to the ischial spines.
If the presenting part has reached the spines, it is at a minus one (-1) station and so on.
If the presenting part is one centimeter below the spines, it is at a plus one (+1) station.
Whenever the presenting part is above the ischial spines, it is at a minus station.
When below the ischial spines, it is at a plus station.
Crowning occurs at a +5 station.
84  Active Labor The Active phase of labor begins when the cervix is about 4cm dilated.
At this time the contractions occur every three to four minutes, last 60 seconds and have increased in strength.
Fetal heart sounds during the active phase should be checked every 15 minutes and the pulse taken every hour.
Physical and emotional support should continue.
Transition Transition is the last part of the first stage of labor.
It usually begins at 7 to 8cm dilatation.
At this time the contractions are very strong, may occur every two minutes and can last as long as 90 seconds.
The transitional phase of labor is often easy to identify because of changes in the mother’s behaviour.
She may become restless, less talkative, or more irritable.
An increase in bloody show as well as spontaneous rupture of the membrane is likely to occur.
• Second Stage of Labor The second stage of labor begins when the cervix is 10cm dilated.
At his time the mother often feels rectal pressure and wants to push with each contraction.
In the second stage the midwife must continue to evaluate the progress of labor and well-being of both mother and baby.
Emotional and physical care must continue.
Fetal heart sounds should be checked every five to ten minutes.
Slowing of the heart rate is common at this time due to pressure of the baby’s head or a knot in the umbilical cord around the baby’s neck that tightens as the baby descends through the birth canal.
If the baby has had no problems, the heart rate does not go below 90 beats per minute during a contraction and 85 returns to normal soon after the contraction ends, there is no need to hurry the birth.
If the heart rate is very slow and/or does not return to normal between contractions or returns to normal slowly, it is often advisable to deliver the baby as quickly as possible.
The second stage of labor should last no more than two hours.
Progress toward birth is shown if the presenting part continues to descend.
The appearance of the presenting part at the vaginal opening indicates that delivery is about to occur.
The Delivery Room This is a room in the maternity clinic or hospital that is used for the actual delivery purposes.
Generally, primigravidas can be moved into this room when approximately 4cm of the baby’s head is visible.
It is more difficult to know when to move multigravidas because of fast labors and should be moved at 8cm.
The Birth The people allowed to be present at the birth should be chosen according to cultural norms and the wishes of the mother.
As the baby’s head appears at the vaginal opening, the midwife should tell the mother how much to push.
The baby’s head and shoulders should be delivered very slowly to decrease the risk of brain damage to the baby and to prevent lacerations to the mother.
The midwife can encourage the mother to push, then to pant, alternating these activities until the head is delivered.
The head can be supported as it turns to the side after it is born.
The face can be wiped gently and mucus can be aspirated from the mouth and nose with a soft rubber tube or bulb syringe, or with gauze wrapped around the little finger.
As soon as the baby’s head is born, feel at the neck for the umbilical cord.
If the cord is around the baby’s neck loosely, it can be left alone or slipped over the head.
If it is tight around the neck, the cord should be clamped twice, cut between the clamps and unwound.
The shoulders are ready to deliver when the head turns to one side (external rotation).
The mother can be asked to push down.
First one shoulder and then the other is born.
Slow delivery of the shoulders is important to avoid maternal tears.
Great force should not be used on the baby since damage can be caused to 86 nerves in the neck.
The force that pushes out the shoulders should come from the mother bearing down and/or from uterine contractions.
Once the head and shoulders are born, the rest of the body slips out easily unless there is a major deformity of the baby’s back or abdomen.
Episiotomy is not performed routinely, it is most helpful when the fetal heart sounds are slow and the baby needs to be delivered quickly.
As soon as the baby is delivered it can be given to the mother, dried, and placed against her skin to minimize the loss of heat.
• The Third Stage of Labor This occurs when the placenta separates from the uterine wall.
Signs of placental separation include: • A “gush” of blood from the vagina • Lengthening of the umbilical cord • A rise of the uterine fundus in the abdomen • Firmness of the uterus Many techniques have been suggested to encourage delivery of the placenta.
These include massaging the fundus and gently traction of the umbilical cord.
While the mother pushes, the midwife can pull lightly on the umbilical cord.
If the placenta does not deliver within thirty minutes, the mother can be asked to get into squatting position to push, or the placenta can be removed manually.
If the baby is put to the mother’s breast immediately, this helps placental separation as the uterus contracts.
Placental separation usually occurs within ten minutes of the end of the second stage.
Occasionally, the placenta may not be expelled as expected in this case the placenta should be manually removed after a certain period of time because a large but invisible blood clot can form behind the placenta, leading to symptoms of shock.
Once the placenta has been delivered, oxytocic drugs are given to prevent haemorrhage.
Two kinds of drugs are used: ergot drugs and oxytocin.
Ergot drugs cause the uterus to contract continually.
Oxtocin causes the uterus to 87 contract and relax alternately.
Both drugs can be given intramuscularly.
Ergot drugs should not be given before the placenta is delivered because they have been known to cause the cervix to contract and “trap” the placenta.
If the placenta does not deliver, oxytocin given intramuscularly will usually expel the placenta without the danger of “trapping”.
• The Fourth Stage of Labor The fourth stage of labor is a name given to the two hours following the delivery of the placenta.
Close observation of the new mother at this time is important.
Care of the mother should include: a.
Measurement of blood pressure, pulse and respiration every 15 minutes b. Palpation of the uterus every 15minutes to be sure that it is firm and at the proper location.
Immediately after birth the uterus can be found halfway between the symphysis and the umbilicus.
However, shortly afterwards it rises to about the level of the fundus and usually descends one finger below the umibicus in each of the first foru postpartum days).
c. Observation of the flow of blood from the vagina particularly during massage of the uterus to be sure that haemorrhage is not occurring d. Keeping the bladder empty so that the uterus can contract e. Offer nourishing liquids and/or food f. Encouraging rest and sleep except for the mother who is excited about the birth and needs to relive her labor and delivery by talking about it.
g. Keeping mother and baby together when culturally appropriate.
3.6 Cares during Labor Care given to women during labor should include: a.
Monitoring the condition of the mother b.
Monitoring the condition of the baby c. Providing the mother with praise, encouragement and information d. Preventing infection e. Avoiding accidents/complications f. Providing physical comfort 88 g. Meeting physiological needs h. Recording information i.
Ensuring adequate intake of fluids by mouth The beginning of labor is often a time of both excitement and fear.
This is particularly true for the mother who will deliver away form her home.
A different environment, separation from her family in some instances, and the maternity centre’s focus on technical aspects of care can be an extra source of stress.
The midwife must do everything they can to decrease the laboring woman’s anxiety and increase her ability to relax.
A warm greeting, acceptance of the woman’s feelings and behaviour, and concern for the kind of births she wants are important.
Throughout labor the patient should be encouraged to empty her bladder at least every two hours.
Adequate amounts of nourishment, particularly fluids, are important because the laboring woman is working hard.
Solid food is not digested well and may be vomited as labor progresses.
3.7 The use of eneama in labor In some palaces it is common to give an enema to the woman early in labor.
The reasons for given eneama: a.
To hurry labor b.
To give the baby more room as it passes through the birth canal c. To have a cleaner delivery Enemas have never been proven to speed labor.
Nor is the baby held back by a rectum full of faeces unless a faecal impaction from severe constipation is present.
Studies show that laboring women are more likely to have more faecal material expelled at the time of birth if they have had an enema than if they have not had one.
It must also be noted that: a.
An enema is a very uncomfortable procedure for most laboring women b.
Many women have diarrhea or a bowel movement in early labor and do not need an enema because their rectums are already empty of faeces.
89 In some areas it is also common to shave all or part of the mother’s public hair before the baby is born.
This practice is supposed to lessen the chance of infection and make it easier to rather than decreased when the public hair is shaved because the superficial layer of skin that is removed with shaving is more susceptible to bacteria than intact skin.
When the pubic hair grows back, it often itches and is uncomfortable.
Pubic hair needs to be shaved only in unusual situations.
Throughout labor the midwife should be a continual source of comfort and support to the expectant mother.
All procedures should be explained and performed with gentleness.
Information about progress of labor, praise, reassurance and encouragement should be offered.
Fear can cause both mental and muscular tension.
This causes pain which causes fear and a circle repeats itself.
The fear, tension, pain cycle should be avoided.
Women in labor have been shown to appreciate the following: a. Bodily or physical care b.
The presence of a caring person c. Acceptance of their behaviour d. Information and reassurance of a safe outcome for themselves and their babies.
3.8 Support measures that may help relieve the pain of labor include: b.
Position change c. Relaxation and breathing exercises d. Fanning e. Back rubs f. Heat of cold to the lower back g. Abdominal rubs h. Leg massage i.
Hand holding j.
Change of soiled linen and clothing 90 k. Cool cloths to the face l. Cleaning of the mouth m. Oral fluids 3.9 Pain medication Pain medication may be given to women.
Most drugs for pain can cause respiratory depression.
Therefore, drugs must be used carefully.
Before giving pain medication to a woman in labor the midwife should think about the following: a.
When delivery of the baby is expected b.
The effectiveness of the presence of support persons (family, friends, The midwife) c. How much pain the mother has d. The mother’s wishes e. How much other medication has been given f. The gestational age of the baby (Premature babies may be particularly depressed when pain medication is given) No one knows for sure at what point in labor it is safest to give pain medication.
Some people say that these drugs should not be given if the birth is expected within an hour.
Most pain medication can be given intravenous or intramuscular.
Some birth attendants feel it is best to give small, frequent doses of medicine intravenous because medicine given by this route is excreted faster.
3.10 Positions for Labor The position that women assume in labor are often prescribed by culture.
Some women lie down; others sit, squat or walk.
As long as the patient is healthy, the pregnancy is at term, and the presenting part fits tightly against the cervix, there is no medical reason why the laboring woman should not use the position she finds the most comfortable.
3.11 Examination of the placenta Once the placenta is delivered it should be examined to see that no parts are missing.
To examine the placenta, place it on a flat surface.
Separate the 91 membranes so that the maternal side of the placenta can be seen.
Look for areas that seem to be missing a piece.
Usually the cord is in the centre, but it is sometimes found at the side.
Examine the cord for knots.
Look at the end of the cord and count the number of blood vessels.
There should be two arteries and one vein.
When only one artery and one vein are present, the baby may have some internal abornormalities.
After the placenta is delivered the midwife should look for lacerations that may need to be repaired.
Careful inspection of both labia, the area around the clitoris, the vagina and the perineum is necessary to avoid missing a bleeding laceration.
Usually, lacerations are repaired only when they are bleeding.
3.12 The Immediate Care of the Newborn Suction As soon as the baby’s head is born the nose and mouth are clear of mucus.
Healthy newborns are able to clear both to mouth and the nasal passages by themselves and suction is done only when the baby is depressed or the amniotic fluid is meconium stained (green in colour).
Amniotic fluid is green when the rectal sphincter of the baby relaxes and faeces pass into the fluid.
This happens when the baby is asphyxiated due to lack of oxygen.
If the newborn inhales the tiny pieces of faeces present in the meconium-stained fluid, severe pneumonia can occur.
The Apgar Score The most frequently used system to assess the new baby at birth is the Apgar score.
The scoring system was developed by an anaesthesiologist who wanted all babies to be given attention as soon as they were born.
Her scoring system puts babies into one of three categories: healthy, mildly or moderately depressed, or severely depressed.
The baby is given a score after its heart rate, respiration, muscle tone, reflex irritability, and colour are evaluated at one minute of age and again at five minutes of age.
92 Apgar Scoring System Sign 0 1 2 Heart rate Absent 100/min 100/min Respiratory Absent Slow or irregular Good; crying effort Muscle tone Flaccid Some flexion of Good flexion, extremities active motion Reflex Absent Grimace Cough, sneeze, irritability cry Colour Blue or pale Body pink, Completely pink extremities blue The most important of the five signs is the heart rate.
It should be evaluated first.
The rate can easily be counted by feeling the pulsations in the umbilical cord, by placing the fingers under the baby’s left breast, or by auscultating the heart.
A heart rate of more than 100 beats per minute is reassuring.
The baby receives 2 points when its heart beat is more than 100.
A heart beat of below 100 beats per minute means that the baby needs stimulation and closes supervision.
This baby would receive one point.
When no heart beat is present immediate cardio-pulmonary resuscitation should be given without any other evaluation.
No points are given.
Respiratory effort is evaluated by watching the baby’s chest for breathing movements.
Respiratory effort is always good, 2 points, no points are given when respiration is absent.
Muscle tone is good, 2 points, when the baby resists, attempts to straighten its arms or legs.
If muscle tone is weak, one point is given.
No points are given when the baby is limp.
93 Reflex irritability can be tested by ticking the baby’s nose.
A grimace, slight movement of the muscles of the face, gets one point, while a cough, sneeze or cry gets 2 points.
Colour is the least important item evaluated.
Most babies are born with some cyanosis of the hands and feet.
Therefore, even healthy babies are usually given only one point for colour.
A baby that is blue or pale is given no points.
A baby with a score of 0 to 3 is severely depressed and needs resuscitation and constant supervision.
If the Apgar score is 4 to 6, the infant is in fair condition and usually will do well with stimulation and constant supervision.
The infant with a score of 7 to 10 is in good condition.
A baby with a good heart rate and good respirations will almost always have good muscle tone, reflexes and colour.
But a baby with a heart rate of less than 100 often has breathing problems and therefore will be limp, hyporeflexic, and pale or cyanotic.
Stimulation is usually not necessary from babies with Apgar scores of 7 to 10.
Babies with lower scores can be stimulated by vigorous rubbing of the baby’s back or by flicking the soles of the baby’s feet.
Newborns with low Apgar scores at one and five minutes should be reevaluated at 10 and 20 minutes of life.
Warmth After birth, the baby’s body should be immediately dried of amniotic fluid.
This is because a low body temperature in newborn babies can lead to death.
It can also cause low blood sugar level.
The baby can then be handed over to the mother, placed in a warmer, or given to a relative to hold.
Other techniques to keep the baby warm include: a.
Covering the baby’s head with a cap b.
Avoiding drafts 94 c. Waiting until the baby’s temperature is stable (usually about four hours) to give the first bath.
Care of the Cord Plastic clamps, rubber bands, and string are often used for tying the baby’s cord.
The cord should be tied or clamped about 2cm from the umbilicus and cut about one centimeter beyond the tie or clamp.
The material used to tie and cut the cord should be sterile.
The umbilical cord need not be covered with a dressing or a binder since this delays drying of the cord and predisposes the baby to infection of the umbilicus.
Warmth and moisture encourage the growth of bacteria.
Good hand washing technique is particularly important.
Care of the Eyes The baby’s eyes should be cleaned with swabs dipped in clean water and then treated with an approved medication to prevent ophthalmia neonatorum.
Silver nitrate is used for treating eye infections caused by gonococcus and other organisms.
Identification Babies not born at home should be properly identified to prevent confusion 5.0 Conclusion All infants need time to adjust to the physiological changes experienced in the move from the uterus into the world.
As long as the baby is healthy, the mother can beencouraged to keep her baby with her unless other practices are required by the culture.
6.0 Summary Progress toward birth is usually made when the contractions are frequent and strong.
Other signs of progress include an increase in bloody show and 95 spontaneous rupture of the membranes.
The Apgar Score is the most frequently used system to assess the new baby at birth.
6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Discuss how you would examine the placenta.
7.0 References and Other Resources Mayes, M. Handbook of The midwifery.
7th ed.
Revised by Vera da Cruz.
London, Bailliere Tindall, 1967.
Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 96 UNIT III ABNORMAL LABOR Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Types of Abnormal Labor 3.1 Causes of Prolonged Labor 3.2 Management of Prolonged Labor 3.3 Evaluation of Prolonged Labor 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 97  UNIT III ABNORMAL LABOR 1.0 Introduction A vaginal birth usually depends on: a.
The ability of the uterus to contract often enough and strongly enough to dilate the cervix and the ability of the mother to push down in the second stage.
b.
The size and shape of the mother’s pelvis and the amount of resistance of the soft tissue (cervix, vagina and the muscles of the pelvic floor).
c. The size, presentation and position of the baby These three factors are often called the powers, the passage and the passenger: the three Ps.
Abnormal labor would arise because of problems in the three.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: 1.
Define prolong labor 2.
List five causes of a prolonged labor after the latent phase.
3.
Describe the role of the midwife in the management of prolonged labor.
3.0 Types of Abnormal labor Precipitate Labor Prolonged Labor 98 Precipitate delivery also refers to an uncontrolled birth.
A precipitate labor is defined as one that last less than 4 hours and are usually due to unusually strong contractions, a large pelvis and non-resisting soft tissue.
They are dangerous because the mother may have serious tears of the cervix, vagina and perineum, or even a ruptured uterus.
The baby may suffer brain damage because of the trauma to the head, or lack of oxygen.
The lack of oxygen is due to the strong, frequent contractions that interfere with the blood supply in the uterus.
Prolonged Labor; this occurs when the latent phase is prolonged and there is little or no progress in cervical dilatation and effacement.
It is characterized by contractions that are five or more minutes apart, and of mild moderate intensity and the cervix is less than 4cm dilated.
The most serious cause is foeto-pelvic disproportion, inability of the fetus to pass safely through the birth canal because of mechanical problems.
3.1 Causes of a prolonged labor • Too much sedation • An unprepared cervix (no dilatation or effacement when labor begins) • An abnormal fetal position • Foeto-pelvic disproportion • The fetus is too large to pass through the pelvis 3.2 Management of Prolonged Labor Management of prolonged labor must include evaluation of the fetus and the mother in addition to the continued evaluation of the progress of labor.
Active management of a prolonged latent phase involves stopping the contractions, to allow the mother to rest or augmenting the contractions with oxytocin.
Often morphine sulfate or pethidine are given.
Physical and emotional supports are given.
The mother will wake up either in good labor or the contractions will 99 have stopped altogether.
The choice of rest or the use of oxytocin are based on the mother’s physical and emotional condition, her wishes and local resources.
The woman with a prolonged latent phase is usually discouraged and tired, when many hours of labor result in little progress.
Both physical and emotional supports are needed.
Nourishing fluids should be given.
Sometimes intravenous fluids are needed.
Artificial rupture of the membranes does not help a prolonged latent phase and is particularly dangerous if the mother is having false labor.
3.3 Evaluation Of Prolong Labor Multiparas with prolonged labor must be evaluated frequently to prevent uterine rupture Evaluation of the mother includes: a.
Checking blood pressure, pulse, respiration and temperature frequently b.
=Evaluating her emotional condition c. Observe her urine output: a decrease in urine output often means dehydration.
Urine should be tested for ketone bodies.
Ketonuria is a sign of dehydration.
Evaluation of labor includes: a.
Monitoring contractions (frequency, strength and duration) b.
Vaginal examinations to determine changes in dilatation and descent Prolonged labor may also begin in the active phase.
Most often the cause of delay is a large baby, a malpresentation, a malposition or foeto-pelvic disproportion.
Too much sedation or exhaustion can also slow labor.
4.0 Conclusion Abnormal labors threaten two lives- the mother and the baby.
Early diagnosis and evaluation for foeto-pelvic disproportion can avoid unnecessary long labors.
100 5.0 Summary Management of prolonged labor must include evaluation of the fetus and the mother in addition to the continued evaluation of the progress of labor.
6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Enumerate the causes of a prolonged labor 7.0 References and Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 101  UNIT IV THE POSTPARTUM VISIT AND EXAMINATION Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Purposes of the Postpartum Visit 3.1 Postpartum examination 3.2 Postpartum Infection 3.3 Causes of Postpartum Infection 3.4 Other Problems 3.5 Health Education 3.6 Immunization 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 102  UNIT IV THE POSTPARTUM VISIT AND EXAMINATION 1.0 Introduction The postpartum period begins with the delivery of the placenta and lasts for six weeks.
During this time the reproductive organs return to their pre-pregnant state and the family begins adjusting to its new member.
A lot of physically and emotionally changes occur at this period.
Women are frequently encouraged to return to the clinic four to six weeks after delivery.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: • List five purposes of the postpartum visit.
• Give the reasons why information about the following is needed at the postpartum visit: Problems of mother and baby since delivery Mother’s and baby’s weight • List the six childhood diseases that can be prevented with immunization.
• Define postpartum infection.
• List six factors that predispose to puerperal infection.
3.0 Purposes of the Postpartum Visit • To observe the newborn’s growth and development • To observe the physical and the emotional state of the mother • To encourage continued breast-feeding • To advise on a birth control method for those women wishing to participate in family planning • To provide emotional support to the new mother • To offer health education information 3.1 Postpartun examination The mother and the persons she brings with her must be warmly welcomed.
Health information about delivery and in the weeks following the birth are reviewed.
This information can obtained from the home-based mother’s card which are kept by the mothers.
In the absence of such a record, the following form may be helpful.
History The mother’s weight Pre-pregnant weight Weight before the delivery Present weight 103 Birth Information Date of birth Place of birth: Home or Hospital Type of delivery; Spontaneous vaginal or Forceps or Caesariam section Weight of baby: Episiotomy/Laceratioc Condition of baby at birth: Delivery conducted by: Doctor or midwife orTBA Antepartal problems Anaemia Malaria High blood pressure Tuberculosis Other (specify) Intrapartal problems Prolonged labor Fever Haemorrhage Other (specify) Postpartum problems Fever Excessive bleeding Foul smelling lochia Pain: Head Abdomen Back Legs Depression Other (specify) Problems with baby Fever Diarrhea Cough Poor eating Other (specify) Breast-feeding Yes/No Reasons This information will help the midwife provide appropriate health education Blood pressure 104 Blood pressure checked at the postpartum visit.
Most women who have high blood pressure only during pregnancy will have a normal blood pressure at the postpartum examination.
Women with high blood pressure should see the physician for treatment.
Urinalysis Urine is examined for the presence of for protein and glucose.
This can help detect urinary tract infections, kidney disease and diabetes.
The baby’s weight The weight of the baby at the postpartum visit should be compared with its birth weight.
When no weight has been gained or the amount is small, the midwife should ask carefully about feeding practices.
Babies with poor weight gain should be followed closely with frequent home visits.
Mothers of these babies need practical nutritional advice and emotional support.
Growth charts should be used for monitoring the baby’s growth and development.
3.2 Postpartum Infection The usual cause of fever in the postpartum period is a bacterial infection of the genital tract.
However, an infection can also be present in the urinary tract, the lungs, the breasts and in surgical wounds.
To make a diagnosis of postpartum infection, two temperature readings above 38 degrees must be recorded on any two of the first 10 postpartum days exclusive of the first 24 hours.
A complete physical examination of the patient is done to determine the source of the infection.
This includes a review of the mother’s antepartal and intrapartal history, physical examination, and the review of any laboratory tests that have been performed.
3.3 Causes of postpartum infection • Prolonged rupture of the membranes, • prolonged labor, • difficult delivery, • multiple vaginal examinations • retained placenta, • postpartum haemorrhage, • anaemia and • surgical intervention such as caesarean predispose to infection.
Uterine Infection Uterine infection is characterized by pelvic pain and tenderness, an offensive vaginal discharge, a soft large uterus, headache and general malaise.
Other symptoms include an increased pulse, a gradual rise in temperature.
The fever usually appears from 2 to 10 days after delivery.
Antibiotic therapy is often prescribed.
When the infection becomes more severe, the patient may present with, hypotension, low blood pressure, cold, moist skin and mental confusion.
If the 105 patient fails to respond after 2-4 days to antibiotic therapy, reexamination and further investigation are required.
Uterine infections can be prevented by observing the rules of hygiene, particularly when membranes are ruptured.
Urinary Tract Infection The patient with a urinary tract infection will usually have urinary frequency and burning or pain on urination.
The diagnosis is best made by a microsopic examination of the urine for white blood cells.
When white blood cells are present in numbers greater than 5-10 per high power field, infection is present.
Urinary tract infections should be treated with sulphur drugs for 5 days or antibiotics for 5-7 days.
Mastitis The causative organism is staphylococcus aureus, this is present in the baby’s mouth.
So breast infections are rarely found in women who bottle feed.
Mastitis often present with redness, pain, and warmth in the affected breast, fever and general malaise.
The drug of choice is antibiotic therapy.
A nursing mother with mastitis should continue to breast feed.
Malaria In areas where malaria is endemic, the newborns can be infected.
Infection can occur with any of the four species of human malaria.
The symptoms of malaria in infants are poor feeding, restlessness, sleepiness, pallor, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Fever is usually present.
These symptoms are similar with any other infection occurring during the first weeks of life.
The midwife should teach new mothers about good health practices.
Family planning services should be offered at this time.
Diarrhea infections This can cause mortality in children due to the large loss of fluid and electrolytes.
When large amounts are lost, death can occur.
Diarrhoea can occur from infected feeding utensil pacifiers and toy that babies put in the mouth.
A simple and inexpensive treatment for most cases of diarrhoea is Oral Rehydration Salts (ORS), a powder containing sugar and salt.
When mixed with water and given to children, it replaces the loss fluid and electrolytes.
ORS contain water, sugar, and salt, and are necessary for life.
ORS can also be made at home by filling a 5 ml teaspoon with salt.
Level off the amount with a knife so the salt is not piled above the edges.
Pour the salt into one litre of clean drinking water.
Add eight level teaspoons of sugar to the water.
Small amounts of the fluid should be given frequently.
Babies with diarrhoea should continue to be breast-fed and given the prepared solution.
3.4 Other problems Poor attachment to the baby 106 Occasionally, mothers will not develop good feelings toward their babies.
These women need extra attention and loving care from the midwife.
It may be appropriate to discuss adoption or some other culturally acceptable alternative with these women.
Problems with the Eyes Mothers can be taught to protect the eyes of their children.
Conjunctivitis, painful red eyes with swelling and a sticky discharge, is common in children.
Spread of this illness can be limited by washing the baby’s hands and face with soap and water.
Trachoma is a serious disease of the eyes.
It is spread by contact between one person and another, and by flies.
Regular washing of face and hands, and keeping flies away from children’s eyes, can prevent the disease.
Some blindness is caused by lack of Vitamin A.
An early sign of the disease is night-blindness, the inability to see in the dark.
When children eat orange coloured fruits, leafy green vegetables and red palm oil, the body can usually produce all the Vitamin A they need.
3.5 Health Education Good nutrition makes a child healthy and able to resist some infections.
Mothers should be encouraged to breast feed.
The advantaged of breast milk should be highlighted, such include; it meets all the baby’s nutritional needs, gives protection against infection and contributes to birth- spacing.
From 4-5 months old, the infants should be started on solid food as they need a variety of foods in addition to the mother’s milk.
Mothers should be told the importance of making the feeding of infants and small children a priority within the family Health education can also include important information about the nutritional needs of the mother, baby and the other members, and the importance of immunizations and the use of oral rehydration in cases of diarrhea 3.6 Immunization Mother must be encouraged to immunize their children against the six killers’ diseases such as measles, whooping cough, tuberculosis, diphtheria, tetanus and polio.
Immunizations protect children against these dangerous diseases.
Mother must be told the schedule of immunization Table 1 shows the recommended immunization schedule for children in Nigeria.
This service is provided by local health authorities, and is accessible to most individuals without cost.
Records of immunization received and the date given should be kept by each individual for reference.
Schedule for routine immunizations Vaccine Age BCG and Oral polio at birth Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, polio, 6 weeks 1st dose “ “ “ “ 10 weeks 2nd dose “ “ “ “ 14 weeks 3rd dose Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) 12–5 months Diphtheria, tetanus, polio, MMR 3–5 years Booster Tetanus, diphtheria, polio 13–18 years Booster 107  4.0 Conclusion Careful observation at the postpartum visit will lead to early identification of problems.
The lungs should be auscultated to make sure that normal breathing sounds are present; breasts observed for redness, tenderness, and warmth; the abdomen palpated for tenderness; surgical wounds examined for drainage.
Good communication and emotional support will encourage patients to listen to the advice given.
When puerperal infection occurs, the midwife must remember all the possible causes.
5.0 Summary Many puerperal infections could be avoided merely by observing fundamental hygiene practices.
6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Discuss the schedule for routine immunizations for children.
7.0 References and Other Resources Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 108 MODULE 4 SEX AND SEXUALITY UNIT I SEXUALITY Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Definition 3.0 Varieties of Sexuality 3.1 Erotic Preference 3.2 Sexuality Issues 3.3 Factors Infleuncing Sexuality 3.4 Sexual Response Cycle 3.5 Sexual Disorders and Sexual Dysfunction 3.6 Factors influencing sexual stimulation 3.7 Management 3.8 Youth Sexual Issues 3.9 Factors that lead to risky Sexual and Reproductive Health Behaviour 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 109  MODULE 4 SEX AND SEXUALITY UNIT I SEXUALITY 1.0 Introduction All humans are sexual being.
Sexuality is expressed in a variety of ways regardless of gender, age, race, socio-economic status, religious beliefs, physical and mental health or other demographic factors.
2.0 Definition Sexuality is a complex aspect of our personality and self.
Our sexuality is defined by sexual thoughts, desires and longings, erotic fantasies and experiences.
In many ways, sexuality is the force that empowers us to express and display strong emotional feelings for another person and is a natural stimulus for the procreation of our species.
Sexuality is an individually expressed and highly personal phenomenon whose meaning evolves form life experience, influenced by physiologic, psychological and cultural factors leading to range of attitude and behaviours seen in humans.
3.0 Varieties of Sexuality There is a tremendous range of variation in how people experience and express their sexuality.
Sexual varieties include sexual orientation, gender identity, erotic preferences and sexual lifestyles.
Sexual Orientation This is attraction to people of the same sex or both sexes.
Sexual orientation lies along a continuum with a wide range between the two extreme exclusively heterosexual attraction and exclusively homosexual attraction.
Individuals who are attracted to people of both genders are referred to as bisexual.
Gender identity Western culture is deeply committed to the idea that there are only two sexes.
Intersex: This has to do with gender ambiguity i.e.
having some parts usually associated with males and some parts usually associated with females.
Intersex anatomy may not be apparent at birth.
Sometimes, it is detected until puberty, until the person is identified as an infertile adult or until the person dies and autopsied.
Transsexuals: For the transsexual person, sexual anatomy is not consistent with gender identity.
Those who are born physically male but are emotionally and psychologically female are called male-female (MTF) transsexual.
Those who are born female but are emotionally and psychologically male are called female – to- male (FTM) transsexual.
Their sexual orientation may be heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual.
110 Cross Dressers: These are typically males who cross-dress to express feminine side of their personality.
Cross-dressing is a conscious choice and may occur at home or in public settings.
The frequency of the activity ranges from rarely too often.
3.1 Erotic Preference This deals with the various method of having sexual pleasure by a person or group of persons (lesbian and bisexual persons).
This includes: • Masturbation: This is the process of giving oneself pleasure by rubbing your sexual organs.
• Oral- genital Sex (cunnilingus): this involves kissing, licking or sucking of the female genitals including the pubis, vulva, clitoris, labia and vagina sucking.
• Anal stimulation: This has to do with the stimulation of the anus with finger, mouth, or sex toys such as vibrators in order to have sexual pleasures.
This is possible because the anus has a rich nerve supply.
• Genital Intercourse: This can be described as penile-vaginal actions involving the introduction of the penis into the vagina for both physical and sexual pleasures.
3.2 Sexuality Issues • Sex change • Gay issues • Lesbianism Gay and Lesbian Family Homosexual adults from gay and lesbian families are based on the same goals of caring and commitment seen in heterosexual relationship.
Legal issues for the same-sex couples are significant and constantly changing.
Domestic partner policies extend the same rights and privileges to partner of a non married employee of the same or opposite gender as would be offered spouses.
It can be a challenge for the nurse to keep current on how such legislation affects health care issues such as insurance coverage and the right to consent for health care.
3.3 Factors Influencing Sexuality Many factors influence a person’s sexuality.
Some of these factors are: family, culture, religion and personal expectations and ethics.
Family Families are the fabric of our day-to-day lives and shape the quality of our lives by influencing out outlooks of life, our motivations, our strategies for achievement, and our styles for copying with adversity.
It is within our families that we develop our gender identity, body image, sexual self-concept, and capacity for intimacy.
Through family interactions, we learn about relationships and gender roles and our expectations of others and ourselves.
Children observe their parents and model themselves after these role models.
If parent are able to share affection with one another and other family members children will most likely become adults who are able 111 to give and receive affection.
The following are some common sexual messages children get from their families.
- Sex is dirty - Premarital sex is sinful - Masturbation is disgusting - Sex is mainly for procreating - There is great variety in sexual behaviour Culture Sexuality is also regulated by the individual’s culture.
For example, culture influences the sexual nature of dress, rules about marriage expectations of role behaviour and social responsibilities, and specific sex practices, societal attitude vary widely.
Gender role behaviour also varies from culture to culture.
Culture differs with regard to which body parts they find to be erotic.
In some cultures, legs are erotic and breasts are not, body weights may also be a determinant of sexual attractiveness.
Female circumcision, also known as female genital cutting is a dangerous practice in parts of Africa.
Some of the cultural beliefs behind the practice include the following: • Female genitals are offensive to men, if not removed; the clitoris will become the size of a penis.
• The labia get in the way of intercourse.
• The cutting enhances fertility, and prepares woman for child birth.
Removal of the clitoris may or may not be accompanied by removal of the labia and closure of the vagina/entrance except for a small opening.
The complications include; Vesico-Viginal Fistula, urinary incompetence, vaginal scaring, and sexual dysfunctions etc.
Religion Religion influences sexual expression.
It provides guidelines for sexual behaviour and acceptable circumstances for the behaviour, as well as prohibited sexual behaviour and the consequences of breaking the sexual rules.
The guidelines or rules may be detailed and rigid or broad and flexible.
Many religious values conflict with the more flexible values of society that have developed during the last few decades (often labelled the “sexual revolution”) such as the acceptance of premarital sex, unwed parenthood, homosexuality and abortion.
These conflicts create marked, anxiety and potential sexual dysfunction in some individuals.
Personal Expectations and Ethics Ethics is the body of moral practice; it enables the public to distinguish between good and bad or right and wrong.
It borders on the signs or moral which deals with human character or conduct.
What one person or culture views as bizarre, perverted, or wrong may be completely natural and right to another.
Examples include values regarding masturbation and or oral intercourse, and cross dressing.
Many people accept variety of sexual expressions if they are performed by 112 consenting adults.
Couples need to explore and communicate clearly about various types of acceptable sexual expression to prevent domination of sexual decision making.
3.4 Sexual Response Cycle Human sexual response follows a similar sequence in both females and males regardless of sexual orientation.
The phases are; • Desire Phase • The Excitement Phase • The Orgasmic Phase.
• The Resolution Phase.
Desire Phase The response cycle starts in the brain, with conscious sexual desire called the desire phase.
Sight, hearing, smell, touch and imagination (sexual fantasy) can all invoke sexual arousal.
Sexual desire fluctuates within each person and varies from person to person.
Although psychological issues are the more common causes of lack of sexual desire, medications, drugs and hormone imbalances can also interfere.
The Excitement Phase involves physiologic effects of vasocongestion resulting in increase in the blood flow to various body parts.
This results in erection of the penis and clitoris, and swelling of the labia, testes and breasts.
Vasocongestion stimulates sensory receptors within the body parts that in turn transmit messages to the conscious brain where they are usually interpreted as pleasurable sensations.
When stimulation is continued, vasocongestion increases until it either is released by orgasm or fades away.
Simultaneosly there is an increase in the tension in muscle, orgasm occurs.
The Orgasmic Phase is an involuntary climax of sexual tension, accompanied by physiologic and psychological release.
This phase is considered the measurable peak of the sexual experience.
Although the entire body is involved, the major focus of the orgasm is felt in the pelvic region.
Male orgasm usually last 10-30 seconds while female orgasm last 10-50 second.
Men usually have an ejaculation and expel semen as part of their orgasm.
The Resolution Phase This is the period of return to the unaroused state, andmay last 10-15 minutes after orgasm, or longer if there is no orgasm.
This phase in female is quite varied as some women experience multiple successive orgasms followed by a long period of resolution.
113 3.5 Sexual Disorders or Sexual Dysfunction Sexual dysfunction can be defined as a persistent impairment of sexual interest or response.
In males, the most frequently sexual dysfunction is the inability to achieve an erection (impotence) or the delay of ejaculation until both partners achieve a sense of satisfaction (premature ejaculation).
This erectile dysfunction affects 50% of men between 40 and 70 years of age.
Women may have problems of inhibited sexual excitement that result in an inability to maintain a swelling lubrication response.
For women, a problem that often bring them to clinics is anorgasmia – the frequent inability to achieve orgasm Many individuals experience problems with their ability to respond to sexual stimulation or to maintain the response.
3.6 Factors influencing sexual stimulation • Socio cultural factors include a very restrictive upbringing accompanied by inadequate sex education.
Some people believe that sex is only for procreation.
Also, parental punishment for normally exploring one’s genital is a contributing factor • Psychological factors may include negative feelings, such as guilt, anxiety, or fear that interfere with the ability to experience pleasure and joy.
Adults who have been sexually abused at any time of their lives may experience overwhelming anxiety when faced with the decision to engage in sex.
Other psychological factors include fears of pregnancy, sexually transmitted infections, or pain.
• Cognitive factors include the internalization of negative expectations and beliefs.
Those with low self extreme may not understand how another person could value and love them and also find them sexually attractive.
• Loss of intimacy and feeling like a sex object may inhibit the feeling of communion and connection that is an important part of love making.
Another factor is expecting one’s partner to read one’s mind about sexual needs.
Failure to communicate may result in one or both partners not knowing how to please the other.
• Health factors can interfere with people’s expression of sexuality.
Physical changes brought by illness, injury or surgery may inhibit full sexual expression.
Some diseases such as heart disease, diabetes mellitus, joint disease, cancer can interfere with sexuality.
Surgeries such as hysterectomy, prostecotomy and radical surgeries that alter person’s 114 body image also interfere with sexuality.
The presence of STI in one’s partner induces fear of transmission in the other, often resulting in abstinence of sexual contact.
3.7 Management The threat posed by disease or loss of those body parts depends on: • Their meaning to the individual • The stage of development of body image and self.
• The reactions of the social group, including the spouse The ability to reproduce is seen by many as a criterion of usefulness and sexuality.
The loss of function may be followed by feelings of uselessness or of being only half a person, this is particularly distressing to the man with erectile dysfunction.
The inability to obtain an erection may make him feel less of a man and he may fear that his partner see him as less a man.
Most people have been culturally conditioned to the idea that some areas of the body should not be discussed, much less exposed to examination.
Such experience may disturb the individual and produce shame that may be enhanced by lack of privacy and exposure of the body in examinations or during care.
Sexually transmitted infections and cancer arouse guilt feeling of being punished for past deeds.
Interventions Assess the degree of threat posed by loss of function or body parts to the individual and plan, give and evaluate nursing care for that individual based on the assessment.
Other interventions may include; • Resolving dysfunctional sexual problems • Helping the individual to achieving a sense of self-worth • Helping the individuals to verbalize fears and anxiety • Showing understanding of health problems • Helping the individual to adapt to changes in sexual role and / or function • Helping the individual to be aware of and avoiding risk factors in sexual activity.
• Give physical nursing care that promotes feelings of dignity and self-worth by attention to personal hygiene and grooming.
• Promotes the return of health, control over body functions and independence 115 Reduce fear and guilt by • Acknowledging and discussing feeling • Anticipating the need for explanations and interpretations.
• Clarifying and correcting misinformation about causes of illness, physiology and the consequences, if any, of treatment on present function.
• Maintaining a confidence, non judgemental approach to the patient.
• Obtaining appropriate additional sources of spiritual or emotional help for the patient.
• Offering information and support for relatives 3.8 Youth sexual issues Youth sexuality is a great concern for many, sexual health issues facing the youths are: • Premature sexual intercourse • Sexually transmitted infections • Unwanted and unsafe pregnancies and abortions • Sexual diversity, • HIV/AIDS and cyber sex.
3.9 Factors lead to risky sexual and reproductive health behaviour These are; • Lack of sexual and reproductive health information and skills in negotiating sexual relationship and the inaccessibility of youth-friendly sexual and reproductive health services, growing peer pressure of pre-marital sex plays a major role in sexual and reproductive health related decision-making among youths.
• Another factor is the issue of sexuality education which is still considered a sensitive topic .Some cultural and religious constraints are impinging on its implementation • Misunderstanding and a lack of information on sexual diversity have caused a concern for many, as there is a tendency for judgements, stereotypes, discriminations and prejudices towards homosexuality in the society.
116 4.0 Summary Misunderstanding and a lack of information on sexual diversity have caused a concern for many, as there is a tendency for judgements, stereotypes, discriminations and prejudices towards homosexuality in the society.
Healthy youths are fundamental to the prevention initiatives.
Sexual and reproductive needs and rights of r youths must be promoted.
5.0 Conclusion Sexuality is an individually expressed and highly personal phenomenon whose meaning evolves form life experience, influenced by physiologic, psychological and cultural factors.
Sexual varieties include sexual orientation, gender identity, erotic preferences and sexual lifestyles.
Health workers have a significant role to play most importantly in the area of creating awareness.
7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Discuss the factors that can influence a person’s sexuality.
8.0 References and Other Resources Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 117  UNIT II SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTION (STI) Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Reproductive Tract Infections 3.1 Sexually Transmitted Infections 3.1.1 Common Bacterial Infections 3.1.2 Common Viral Infections 3.1.3 Parasitic Organisms 3.2 Gonorrhea 3.3 Chlamydial Infection 3.4 Syphilis 3.5 Human Papillomavirus Infection (HPV) 3.6 Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome 3.7 Effects of Sexually Transmitted Infection 3.8 Universal Blood and Body Fluid Precautions 3.9 Safer Sex Guideline 3.10 The Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control of STIs 4.0 Summary 5.0 Conclusion 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 118 UNIT II SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTION (STI) 1.0 Introduction Sexually transmitted infection is the most common form of reproductive tract infections.
Some Sexually transmitted infection are easily treatable and can be cured, some are more difficult and some are non-curable such as AIDS and herpes.
The WHO estimates that each year, there are over 333 million new cases of curable STIs.
In addition, UNAIDS calculates that in 2000 alone, 5.3 million people became infected with HIV.
Nearly a million people acquire a sexual transmitted infection (STI) including human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), everyday (WHO, 2010).
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner should have the knowledge of; Reproductive tract infections (RTIs) Sexually transmitted disease (STD) The management of Trichonomiasis Effects of Sexually Transmitted Infection 3.0 Reproductive Tract Infections (Rtis) Reproductive tract infections (RTIs) are infection that affects the reproductive tract.
The three types of reproductive tract infections are endogenous infection, iatrogenic infections.
Endogenous Infection results from an overgrowth of organism normally present in the vagina.
They include bacterial vaginosis and candidiasis.
Iatrogenic Infection occurs when the cause of infection (bacterium or other micro-organism) is introduced into the reproductive tract through a medical procedure such as menstrual regulation, induced abortion, the insertion of IUD or during childbirth.
3.1 Sexually Transmitted Infection (STIs): STIs are caused by viruses, bacteria, or parasitic micro-organisms that are transmitted through sexual activity with an infected partner.
About 30 different sexually transmitted infections have been identified some of which are easily treatable, many of which are not.
119 3.1.1 Common Bacterial Infections • Neisseria gonorrhoea (causes gonorrhoea or gonococcal infection) • Chlamydia • Treponema pallidum (causes syphilis) • Haemophilus ducreyi (causes chancroid) • Klebsiella granulomatis (previously known as calymmato bacterium granulomatis causes granuloma inguinal or donovanosis 3.1.2 Common Viral Infections • Human immune deficiency virus (causes AIDS) • Herpes simplex virus type 2 (causes genital herps).
• Human papillomervirus (causes genital warts and certain subtypes lead to cervical cancer in women) • Hepatitis B virus (causes hepatitis and chronic cases may lead to cancer of the liver • Cytomegalormus (causes inflammation in a number of organs including the brain, the eye and the bowel.
• Molluscum contagiosum virus MCV (caused molluscum contagiosum).
3.1.3 Parasitic Organisms • Trichomonas vaginalis (causes vaginal trichomoniasis) • Candida albicans (causes vulvovaginitis in women; inflammation of the glans penis and foreskin (balanopothistis) in men • Crab louse, collogually known as “ crabs” (phthmus pubis) • Scabies (scarcotes scabiei) 3.2 Gonorrhea Gonorrhea is a common STD that affects men and women causing cervicitis in women and arthritis in men.
In women it can easily ascend to the uterus and fallopian tubes if untreated.
Symptoms appear 2-10 days after the initial contact Clinical Manifestations • Asymptomatic in women • mucopurulent vaginal discharge • Cervical tenderness on bimanual examination 120 In The Male • Suppurature urethritis • Itching and burning about the meatus • Urethral meatus is red and edematous • Rectal infection in gay-men, infection of the pharynx may occur due to unprotected oral- genital sex Diagnosis Smears and cultures taken from the site of infection Treatment 1.
Uncomplicated gonococcal infection can be treated with a single dose antibiotic such as a. Cefixime (suprax) 400mg orally b. Cefriaxone (recephin) 124mg intramusalery c. Ciprofloxin (cipro) 500mg orally Complications 1.
PID, entropic pregnancy and infertility 2.
Disseminated infection 3.
Opthalmia neonetorum in newborn delivered through infected birth canal.
Management 1.
Administer antibiotics as prescribed, explaining the side effects to patients.
2.
Monitor for relief of pain, discharge, and other symptoms 3.
Explain the importance of sexual abstinence until symptoms are total resolved and until therapy is complete in patient and partner 4.
Encourage follow up for routine women’s health care and periodic STD screening 3.3 Chlamydial Infection 121 Chlamydia infection is common STD that occurs in both women and men, particularly in adolescents and young adults.
Women are asymptomatic Clinical Manifestation • May be asymptomatic or have vaginal discharge which may be clear mucoid or creamy discharge • Dysuria and mild pelvic discomfort Diagnostic • Antigen detection test on cervical smear • Chlamydia culture for cervical exudates • Screening urinalysis in male for leucocytes; if positive result; confirm by antigen detection test Management • Obtain history of sexual activity and symptoms or infection in partner • Patient education • Antibiotic regimens include o Azithromycin (zithromax) 1g orally in a sample dose o Doxycyline 100mg orally twice or day for 7 days o Erythromycin and floxacin may also be used • Current or most recent sexual partners should be tested and treated despite test results.
Because Chlamydia infection and gonorrhoea frequently co- exist, especially in teens and young adults, treatment of both STDs is recommended.
Complications PID Ectopic pregnancy or infertility secondary to untreated or recurrent PID Transmission to neonate born through infected birth canal 122 3.4 Syphilis Causative organism Treponema pallidum bacterium The treponema pallidum bacterium enters the body through mucous membrane, such as that of the vagina, or mouth or through the skin.
Within hours the bacterium reaches the lymph nodes, then spread throughout the body via the blood.
Syphilis may also infect a fetus during pregnancy, causing birth defects and other problems.
Symptoms Symptoms of syphilis usually begin 1 to 13 weeks after infection; the average is 3-4 weeks.
Incubation varies between 10-90 days.
Three stages of syphilis The stage may overlap or be widely separated.
The primary lesson: Is a small, painless chancre or ulcer.
It is deep and has indurated edges.
Usually, this chancre heals spontaneously, giving the false impression that the disease is cured.
The primary lesion appears most commonly on the penis of the male.
In the female, it may appear on the labia, vagina or cervix.
The secondary stage: Is characterized by a rash appearing flat, grey or called vulva warts.
The rash is usually accompanied by malaise and fever.
The rash regresses later and the patient enters the latent phase.
Latency refers to absence of symptoms in the infected individual.
Pregnant women can still infect their fetus in-utero.
In the tertiary stage The patient proceeds immediately or after a delay of 10-30 years to the third stage.
The bones heart and central nervous system including the brain can be affected, personality disorders arise and the typical ataxic gait of the tertiary syphilitic stage appears.
A large, ulcerating necrotic lesson known as gummer now occurs.
This is seen in genital tract, but it may occur on the vulva or in the testes.
At this stage the disease may be arrested but not reversed.
Diagnosis Careful history Culture or biopsies from the lesion Blood serology 123 Early diagnosis is made from scrapings from the lesions.
Scraping is made before antibiotic therapy is initiated so that the diagnosis can be confirmed.
Treatment Antibiotic therapy -penicillin is the drug of choice 3.5 Human Papillomavirus Infection (HPV) HPV is the causative organism in condylomata acuminate or genital warts.
Incubation period is up to 8 months.
Warts can be confused with those of syphilis but are different.
They are less flat and more cauliflower like.
Some attain a large size.
Clinical Manifestation • Single or multiple soft, fleshy, painless growths on the vulva, vagina, cervix, urethra, or anal area.
• vaginal bleeding or discharge, • Odour • Dysparennai Individual at risk of infection 1.
Sex at an early age less than 17 years old 2.
Multiple sex partners 3.
A history of STDs 4.
Poor personal and sexual hygiene 5.
A sexual partner with a similar history 6.
A history of anal intercourse Diagnosis • Pap smear • Colposcopy examination • Anoscopy or urethroscopy to identify anal and urethral lesions.
Treatment The partners of infected patients should also be examined and treated if necessary.
External warts are treated with podophyllin 10-25% in tincture of benzoin.
This caustic agent is applied with a cotton applicator and washed off in 4 hours.
The surrounding skin is coated with 124 petroleum jelly before application of the podophyllin.
Cervical and vaginal warts may be bath in 85% solution of trichloroactive acid.
This produces a stinging sensation.
Complications • cervical neoplasia • neonatal laryngeal infection if infant born through infected birth canal • Obstruction of anal canal or vagina by enlarging lesions • Scaring and pigment changes if treatment not employed properly 3.6 Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) HIV/AIDS pandemic is the greatest health problem threatening human race as of now.
The disease affects lives of every Nigerian family directly or indirectly.
It affects community, family, children, pregnant women and hence reduces the life expectancy.
It increases the burden on medical facilities, and drastically increasing the number of orphaned children.
Aetiology HIV/AIDS is a pandemic disease occurring virtually in all countires.
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) caused by human immunodeficiency virus types I & II.
Pneumocystis Carinii Pneumonia is one of the opportunistic infections in HIV/AIDS.
HIV- Human immunodeficiency virus is the causative agent of AIDS.
It is a virus of the lentivirus group (those that caused life long infection) and of the retrovirus family (stores genetic materials as RNA and not DNA) It is an RNA dinner (2 single standard DNA genome) and is characterized by reverse transcrptase enzyme (allows viral RNA to be transcribed into DNA).
Definition AIDS-Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome is a syndrome diagnosed when at least two major signs and one minor sign are present in the absence of known causes of immunosuppression such as malnutrition.
Major Signs: • Fever for more than one month • Weight loss more than 10% body weight • Diarrhoea for more than one month Minor Signs: • Cough for more than one month • Generalized pruritic dermatitis • Recurrent herpes zoster or shingles 125 • oropharyngeal candidiasis or thrush • Chronic or aggressive ulcerative herpes simplex • Persistent generalized lymphadenophathy In 1993, the centre for Disease control in the United States extended the definition of AIDS to include all people who are severally immunosuppressed i.e (CD4 count <200X 106/ ) L irrespective of presence or absence of an indicator disease.
But for surveillance purpose, the definition has not been accepted within UK and Europe where AIDS continues to be a clinical diagnosis defined by one or more of the indicator disease.
Routes of Transmission • Through Sex – Occurs in both heterosexuals and homosexuals • Blood Transfusion – Transfusion of infected and unscreened blood poses great danger to our health Care Delivery System.
Both National and State blood transfusion policies are needed to curtail quacks.
• Exposure to Infected Fluids – Common in un-sterile needles and re-usage of needles and other sharp cuts, abrasions and different types of wounds.
• Vertical Transmission – Infected mother to her unborn baby and through breast milk.
W.H.O Staging System For Hiv Infection And Diseases – Clinical Classification Stage 1 a. Asymptomatic i.e when a person has HIV Infection and is quite healthy.
b.
Signs of persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL) Stage 2 a.
Weight loss < 10% body weight b.
Minor mucocutaneous lesions, seborrhoeic dermatitis, prurigo, fungal nail infections, recurrent oral ulcerations, angular stomaitis or cheilitis.
c. Herpes zoster within the last 5 years d. Recurrent upper respiratory tracts infections.
Stages 3 a.
Weight loss> 10% body weight b. Unexplained chronic diarrhea for > 1 month c. Unexplained prolonged fever intermittent/constant > 1 month d. Oral Candidiasis (thrust) e. Oral hairy leukoplakia f. Pulmonary tuberculosis within the past year g. Severe bacterial infections (pneumonia & Pyomyositis) Stage 4 a. HIV wasting syndrome 126 b. Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP) c. Toxoplasmosis of the brain d. Crystosporisdiosis with diarrhea > 1 month e. Cryptococcosis extrapulmonary f. Cytomegalovirus disease of organ other than the liver, spleen or lymph nodes g. Herpes virus infection > 1 month (Mucocutaneous or visceral) h. Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy i. Disseminated endemic myosis j. Candidiasis of the eosophagus, trachea, bronchi or lungs k. A typical mycobacteriosis l. Non-typhoid salmonella septicaemia m. Extra pulmonary tuberculosis n. Kaposi Sarcoma o. HIV encephalopathy p. Invasive cervical cancer Diagnoses a.
Clinical HIV/AIDS is diagnosed with the observation of at least two major signs and one minor sign.
b.
Laboratory Diagnosis of HIV i. Elisa The second generation of ELISA’s uses recombinant DNA proteins of synthetic peptides of the virus as antigens.
ii.
Confirmatory 1.
Western Blot identifies antibodies specific to viral proteins 2. immunofluoresence assay 3.
Radioimmuno – precipitation assay iii.
Viral Demonstration Assay for circulating viral protein (p24 core antigen) Infected patient’s cells is cultured with, nitrogen-activated peripheral blood blast cells from normal subjects.
iv Viral Load This is the total number of viral nucleic acid molecules present in the serum of patients with HIV/AIDS and predicts progression.
>100,000molecules/ml – progression to AIDS likely in 3 years >300,000molecules/ml – progression likely in 1 year At @10,000molecules – time progression is 3-19years.
v. CD4 Cell Count 127 Measurement of CD4 cell count is used as a measure of disease progression and classification.
It is also used to determine when anti-retroviral therapy should be instituted (e.g CD4 count <500 cells X 106/ ).
L Incubation Period: Unlike other sexually transmitted disease, AIDs had a long incubation period of 6-10 years before the diseases becomes manifest as opportunistic infection with Prenmocystis carnii pneumonia Tuberculosis Neurological disease Bone narrow depression and Cancers e.g.
kaposis sarcoma death usually occurs within 2 years of the manifestation of full blown AIDs.
The cells that are most susceptible to HIV infection have CD 4 surface proteins (helper T-cell, macrophinges, dendritic and neuroglial cells).
A glycoproteinon the virus called gp 120 binds to CD4 protein on host cells and this complex enters the cells by endocytosis Treatment Current approaches to the treatment of AIDs include: Drug treatment of opportunities infections and malignancies Inhibition of replication of the HIV virus Immune reconstitution or immune potentiation Drugs use in treatment of AIDS.
These drugs are expensive and well beyond the reach of many AIDs patients in tropical countries of the world.
There is no cure for infection caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), but a number of drugs have been found to slow or halt progression of the disease.
Anti-retroviral drugs are aimed at reducing the plasma viral load as much as possible and for a long as this can be achieved.
There are; i.
Nucleoside Analogues e.g Zidovudine (AZT), Didanosien (DDI) Zalcitabine (DDCD4T), Lamivudien (3TC).These interferes with HIV viral RNA dependent DNA polymerase resulting in inhibition of viral replication.
128 ii.
Protease inhibitor decreases the viral load.
Examples are Saquinavir, Retonavir, Indinavir and Nelfinavir.
iii.
Non-Nucleside Reverse trancriiptase inhibitors.
Examples are Nevirapine, Delaviridine, Loviride.
3.7 Effects of Sexually Transmitted Infection • Pregnancy related complications • congenital infections • Pelvic inflammatory disease resulting in infertility, entropic pregnancy and chronic pain • Certain RTIs can increase the chance of HIV transmission.
Unfortunately, symptoms and signs of many infections may not appear until it is too late to avoid such consequences and damage to the reproductive organs.
3.8 Universal blood and body fluid precautions There are three routes by which healthcare workers may acquire bloodborne viruses occupationally: • inoculation of infected blood through the skin on a contaminated needle or other sharp instrument • contamination of mucous membranes with infected body fluid • contamination of cut or abraded skin with infected body fluid.
The concept of universal precautions has caused some controversy.
It has been suggested that where the prevalence of bloodborne viruses is low the precautions are unnecessary and should be used only with individuals known or suspected to be infected Others have argued that it is often difficult to identify infected individuals, and healthcare workers frequently do not detect those who practise high-risk behaviours.
Universal precautions can confer other advantages.
If applied consistently they also protect the patient from other pathogens since these are most likely to be found in body fluid and transmitted between patients on the hands of staff.
The use of the same level of precaution with every patient helps to maintain patient confidentiality, which could otherwise be compromised with the use of precautions directed only at those suspected to be infected.
129 Universal precautions are aimed at avoiding direct contact with body fluids from all patients at all times.
Universal blood or body fluid are geared to prevent the transmission of bloodborne viruses.
They incorporate the routine infection control measures.
The precaution are as listed 1.
Wash hands before and after patient contact and if skin is contaminated with body fluid.
2.
Cover cuts and abrasions with a waterproof dressing 3.
Wear gloves for direct contact with body fluid and mucous membranes 4.
Wear eye protection and a mask where there is a risk of body fluid splashing into the face 5.
Wear a plastic apron to protect clothing from contamination with body fluid 6.
Use sharps safely: place directly into sharps container, never resheathe, do not overfill container, and close securely before disposal 7.
Discard contaminated waste safely, either directly into the drainage system or into a clinical waste bag.
8.
Decontaminate equipment safely between patients 9.
Disinfect spills of blood with hypochlorite and clear up using gloves and a plastic apron.
3.9 Safer Sex Guideline • Responsible sexually conduct, based on a healthy understanding of human sexuality, should be taught at every opportunity.
• Reduce the number of sexual partners abstinence is safe.
Adolescent and adults should be encouraged to avoid casual sexual encounters.
• Avoid the exchange of fluid by • Using condom during vaginal and oral intercourse.
Use each condom only once • Never using saliva as a lubricant use spermicidal or water-soluble jelly • Not following or preceding anal intercourse with vaginal penetration without a change of condom • Using gentle sexual practice which avoid trauma to mucous membrane or skin • Avoiding other sexual practices such as oral-anal, oral-gentle sex.
Gonorrhoea hepatitis and other viruses can be transmitted in these ways.
• Avoiding prolonged wet (French) kissing unless with a partner you consider to be safe.
130  3.10 The Global Strategy for the Prevention and Control of STIs The control of STIs remains a priority for WHO.
The World Health Assembly endorsed the global strategy for the prevention and control of STIs in May 2006 (WHO, 2006).
The strategy urges all countries to control the transmission of STIs by implementing a number of interventions, including the following.
• Promoting safer sexual behaviour • General access to quality condoms at affordable prices.
• Promotion of early recourse to health services by people suffering from STIs and by their partners.
• Inclusion of STI treatment in basic health services • Special services for populations with frequent or unplanned high risk sexual behaviours such as sex workers, adolescent, long-distance truck-drivers, military personnel, substance users and prisoners; • Proper treatment of STIs i.e use of correct and effective medicines, treatment of sexual partners, educational and advice.
• Screening of clinically asymptomatic patients, where feasible (e.g.
syphilis, Chlamydia) • Provision for counseling and voluntary testing for HIV infection • Prevention and care of congenital syphilis and neonatal conjunctivitis and • Involvement of all relevant stakeholders, including the private sector and the community, in prevention and care of STIs.
4.0 Summary Most cases of sexually transmitted disease are treated on out-patient basis, and the person should be taught how to protect themselves and others.
The patient may experience guilt feelings and marital difficulties may arise when one partner infects the other.
4.0 Conclusion The disease carries social stigma.
For this reason, confidentiality must be maintained by the nurse at all times.
Contacts must be identified and discretely followed by the contract tracer.
6.0Tutor Marks Assignment Discuss the concept of universal precautions 8.0 References and Other Resources Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 131 UNIT III COUNSELLING ADOLESCENTS ON REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH ISSUES Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Principles of Counseling 3.1 Qualities of a good Counselor 3.2 Types of Counseling 3.3 Basic steps in the counseling process 3.4 Youth Friendly Services 3.5 Barriers to the provision and utilization of RH services by adolescents 3.5.1 Strategies to overcome these barriers 3.6 Effective management of a youth friendly clinic 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 132 UNIT III COUNSELING ADOLESCENTS ON REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH ISSUES 1.0 Introduction Counselling is a form of interpersonal communication in which a counselor (service provider) helps the client to identify, clarify and resolve problems: make informed decision and act on that decision.
It is important to emphasize that counseling is not advising.
2.0 Objective of Counseling • To give correct information • To help clients to make informed decision and choices about available RH options.
• To help clients with special problems or questions.
3.0 Principles of Counseling The principles of counseling as follows: • Mastering the subject matter • Providing correct and complete information • Being honest and non-judgmental • Supporting the expressed feelings of the client • Realizing the limits of counseling • Keeping culturally acceptable distance between the counselor and client • Client’s right to decide high degree of confidentiality.
3.1 Qualities of a good Counselor • Possess knowledge of the subject matter • Knowledgeable about cultural values and its influence on individuals • Being non-judgmental • Aware of own attitudes, values, emotions and limitations (values’ clarification) • Respectful and tolerant • Honest and truthful • Recognize the worth of each client • Allow the client to feel more in charge 133 • Possess good interpersonal communication skills • Empathic and patient 3.2 Types of counseling • Individual counseling – Often takes place in a clinic setting or during home visit.
In individual counseling, establishment of rapport is prompt and ensures confidentiality and expression of deeper feelings.
• Group counseling – This is especially important for individuals with similar problems or persons in similar profession.
For example adolescents, antenatal clients, postnatal clients, high-risk group, HIV positive individuals and persons living with AIDS.
Couple – Counseling on sensitive issues that affect both partners 3.3 Basic steps in the counseling process The steps in the counseling process is described as GATHER, G – Greet client warmly and politely A – Ask client about his or her sexual and reproductive health information or service needs.
T – Tell the client the RH services available related to his/her needs at the service delivery points and elsewhere H – Help client make decisions about health behaviour (including medical procedures or methods) that he/she should follow.
E – Explain how to effectively keep to the chosen behaviour.
R - Return or follow-up visit should be planned before client leaves.
(“R” also stands for Repeat, Reflect and Refer).
3.4 Youth Friendly Services Characteristics of Youth Friendly Service (a)Provider Characteristics Specially trained staff Respect for young people Privacy and confidentiality honoured Adequate time for client and provider interaction 134 Effective management of a youth friendly clinic (b) Health Facility Characteristics • Separate space and special times set aside • Convenient hours • Convenient location • Adequate space and sufficient privacy • Comfortable surroundings (c) Programme Design Characteristics • Youth involvement in design and continuing feedback • Drop-in clients welcomed and appointments arranged rapidly • No overcrowding; short waiting time • Affordable fee • Publicity and recruitment that inform and reassure youth • Boys and young men welcomed and served • Wide range of services available • Necessary referrals available Services available are grouped into 3 types namely: • School based services • Facility based services • Others Component s of youth friendly services • Sexual and reproductive education and counseling • Physical examination • STI screening, counseling and treatment • Contraceptive method clinic Career counseling and others 3.5 Barriers to the provision and utilization of RH services by adolescents • Barriers that prevent health services from being provided for adolescents • Barriers preventing adolescents from seeking help they need from the health services 135 • Barriers preventing adolescent who want help from reaching organizations which provide the health services, even when they know which organizations provide them and can reach them 3.5.1 Strategies to overcome these barriers include • Parental involvement • Peer education • Advocacy • Provision of RH services by skilled providers 3.6 Effective management of a youth friendly clinic A youth friendly clinic should be managed with the following points: • Ensure that there is a functional strategic plan with target • Indicators for measuring achievement • Ensure that youth are actively involved in the design, implementation and evaluation of programmes • Be responsive to youth needs • Ensure that the needed resources are available and accessible to youth • Ensure that youth are served and their rights respected • Ensure all staff are carried along in the management of ARH and mechanisms for referral/ networking and follow up of youth is in place and operational.
• Proper documentation of all activities and management information system.
4.0 Conclusion Youth friendly services are meant to help the adolescent to identify, clarify and resolve problems: make informed decision and act on that decision.
5.0 Summary Youth friendly services are mainly School based services and Facility based services 136 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Discuss the concept of a youth friendly clinic 7.0 References and Other Resources Brunner & Suddarth’s (2004) Medical Surgical Nursing.
(10th ed) Lippincott Wilkins 137 MODULE 5 FAMILY PLANNING UNIT I HORMONAL CONTRACEPTION Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Oral Contraceptives 3.1 Uses of Oral Contraceptives 3.2 Side Effects 3.3 Advantages and Disadvantages 3.4 Contraindications 3.5 Taking the Pill 3.6 Complication of Oral Contraceptives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 138 MODULE 5 FAMILY PLANNING UNIT I HORMONAL CONTRACEPTION 1.0 Introduction Hormonal contraceptives are basically two types; oral and injectibles.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: State the three ways that oral contraceptives prevent pregnancy.
• List four advantages of the birth control pill.
• List three disadvantages of the birth control pill.
• Give the reason that pregnant women should not take the birth control pill.
• List four medical reasons for not giving a woman the birth control pill.
• List the points that should be discussed with a woman who is starting to take the birth control pill.
3.0 Oral contraceptives (the pill) It contains the hormones oestrogen and progesterone, and prevent pregnancy in three ways by: a.
Preventing ovulation b.
Changing the cervical mucus so that it acts as a barrier to sperm c. Making the endometrium thin and unable to support the fertilized egg The pill is theoretically over 99 percent effective.
This means that when one hundred women take the pill for a year, not even one of them should become pregnant.
3.1 Uses of Oral Contraceptives • To preventing unwanted pregnancies, • Decrease painful menstruation, • Prevent iron deficiency anaemia, and • Provide some protection against ectopic pregnancy and pelvic inflammatory disease.
3.2 Side Effects These side effects include nausea/vomiting, changes in skin colour, weight loss, weight gain, swelling, headache, fatigue, depression, enlargement of the breasts, decrease in desire for sex, increase in desire for sex, breast tenderness, loss of hair, skin rashes, itching, dizziness, feelings of faintness, spotting/bleeding between periods, and numbness/tingling in the arms and legs.
These side effects are usually called “minor” because they do not threaten the life of the women.
Most disappear when the oral contraceptive is stopped.
Other include increase in birth defects and death from a disease of the circulatory system.
139 3.3 Advantages and Disadvantages The birth control pill has several advantages: a.
It is easy to use b.
It is self-administered c. It does not interfere with the sexual act d. It can be stopped at any time The disadvantages are: a.
It is easy to forget to take the pill regularly b.
It requires a regular supply of pills c. Many side effects, both major and minor, can occur 3.4 Contraindications Oral contraceptive is contraindicated in women with • a stroke or a heart attack since these are likely to occur again • b cancer since the cancer may grow because of increased oestrogen • in pregnant women as birth defects may occur • kidney or liver disease since the birth control pill is excreted by the kidney • thrombophlebitis • The pill should be given cautiously to women with the following: a. Diabetes or thyroid disease as the birth control pill may worsen the disease b.
High blood pressure, particularly if the woman had high blood pressure during pregnancy or has kidney disease c. Depression.
Women who are severely depressed may find this condition worsens if they take the birth control pill.
d. Women with varicose veins are predisposed to get blood clots.
e. Epilepsy as convulsions may increase while on the birth control pill f. Irregular menstrual cycles.
3.5 Taking the Pill The pill should be started on any of the first five days of the menstrual cycle.
(The first day of spotting or bleeding is considered day 1.)
If one pill is missed, the pill should be taken as soon as 140 the woman remembers that she has not taken it.
If two pills are missed on 2 consecutive days, the woman should take 2 pills on each of the next 2 days.
She should also use contraceptive foam or cream and her partner use condoms each time sex occurs until the next menstruation because ovulation can occur when 2 pills are missed.
3.6 Complication of oral contraceptive Elevated Blood pressure Blood pressure should be checked whenever the woman taking oral contraceptives comes to the clinic.
Women who have systolic blood pressure between 140 and 160 or diastolic pressure between 90 and 105 should be advised to return to the clinic once a month to have their blood pressure checked.
A systolic level of 160 mm HG or a diastolic level of 105 mm HG means that the pill should be stopped.
The blood pressure usually returns to normal within 30 days.
Headache Headache can mean high blood pressure.
The pill should be stopped when a woman has headaches that are getting worse, are associated with other symptoms or do not stop after having taken medication.
Blurred vision or temporary loss of vision Visual problems can also mean high blood pressure.
The pill is stoped if a woman has visual problems, especially when a headache or weakness in an arm or leg is present.
Chest pain Chest pain can be a sign of lung or heart problems.
Abdominal pain Abdominal pain can be a sign of liver tumours or gall bladder problems.
Leg pain Leg pain may be a sign of thrombophlebitis (blood clot).
Pain, swelling, warmth and redness on the legs are symptoms of thrombophlebitis.
An immediate referral to a physician is necessary.
If a woman has frequent leg pain without other symptoms, of thrombophlebitis she is advised to stop the pill.
4.0 Conclusion Oral contraceptives are used by women throughout the world.
Guidelines for their use, including medical history that could contraindicate their use and the schedule for “check-up”, this is because of the risk to woman who takes the birth control pill.
141 5.0 Summary Oral contraceptives contain the hormones oestrogen and progesterone, and prevent pregnancy in three ways by: preventing ovulation, changing the cervical mucus so that it acts as a barrier to sperm, making the endometrium thin and unable to support the fertilized egg 6.0Tutor Marks Assignment What advice would you give a woman that forgot to take her pill?
7.0References and Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
142  UNIT II INJECTABLE CONTRACEPTION Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Types of Injectable Contraception 3.1 Advantage of Injectable Contraception 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 143  UNIT II INJECTABLE CONTRACEPTION 1.0 Introduction The injectable contraceptive is effective, long lasting and not related to sexual intercourse.
Injectable contraceptives are more than 99 percent effective.
They prevent pregnancy by preventing ovulation.
They also change the cervical mucus, which becomes thick and sticky, and thus prevents sperm from entering the uterine cavity.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: o List three ways in which injectable contraceptives prevent pregnancy.
o List two advantages injectable contraceptives have over oral contraceptives.
o List four advantages injectable contraceptives have over IUDS.
o List three disadvantages of injectable contraceptives.
3.0 Types of Injectable Contraceptive Two injectable contraceptives are available.
They are Depo-Provera and Noristerat.
They prevent pregnancy by preventing ovulation, change the cervical mucus, which becomes thick and sticky, and thus prevents sperm from entering the uterine cavity.
Depo-Provera is usually given one 150 mg dose every three months.
Noristerat should be given in five 200 mg doses every 8 weeks.
All of the drug must be withdrawn from the container, otherwise the dose may be insufficient.
Because Noristerat comes in a thick, oily solution, the container may need to be warmed so that the solution is easier to take into and expel from a syringe.
The medication must be injected deep into the muscle and the injection site should not be massaged.
If these instructions are not followed, the medication may be absorbed more rapidly by the body and the length of time the woman is protected from pregnancy will be shortened.
3.1 Advantages Compared with oral contraceptives the advantages are, a.
More convenient if the woman has easy access to the drug.
b.
Not associated with the risks associated with the use of oestrogen.
Compared with the IUD, the advantages are: a.
Greater effectiveness b.
No pelvic examination is necessary c. No concern over uterine perforation or pelvic infection 144  Disadvantages The disadvantages of the injectable contraceptive compared with the oral contraceptive are: • Disturbances to the menstrual cycle.
Many women experience changes in their cycles after receiving the injectable contraceptive.
Cycles may be longer or shorter.
Flow may be increased or decreased.
Bleeding between period may occur.. • Delay in return of fertility.
It may take a woman up to 24 months to become pregnant after discontinuing use.
• Side effects cannot be stopped until the drug is totally excreted.
• More expensive than oral contraceptives or IUDs.
• Not usually available in a number of countries.
• Side effects include weight gain, nausea, dizziness, skin pigmentation, acne, dysmenorrheal, discharge from the nipples and decrease in the desire for sex.
4.0 Conclusion Oral contraceptives are safe and effective and offer advantages over other methods.
5.0 Summary Oral contraceptives are Depo-Provera and Noristerat.
They prevent pregnancy by preventing ovulation, change the cervical mucus, which becomes thick and sticky, and thus prevents sperm from entering the uterine cavity.
6.0Tutor Marks Assignment Enumerate the advantages of Oral contraceptives 7.0 References and Other Resources 1.
Ajayi, V. A textbook of The midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
145  UNIT III INTRAUTERINE DEVICES (IUDS) Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Advantages 3.1 Technique of Insertion and Removal 3.2 Time of Insertion 3.3 Contraindications 3.4 Complications 3.5 Counseling for Sterilization as a method of Birth Control 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 146  UNIT III INTRAUTERINE DEVICES (IUDs) 1.0 Introduction Intrauterine devices (IUDs) are devices placed in the cervix and uterus to prevent pregnancy 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: • List five advantages of the IUD as a method of birth control.
• List six disadvantages of the IUD as a method of birth control.
List three contraindications to insertion of an IUD.
3.0 Advantages The IUD is effective, convenient, and relatively safe.
It does not require repeated insertion nor does it interfere with sexual activity.
Fertility returns soon after the device is removed.
Pregnancy rates are reported to be one to six for every one hundred women who use the device for a year.
Disadvantages The disadvantages of the IUD are: • Pain, ranging from mild to severe, on insertion • Occasional fainting during or immediately after insertion • An increase in painful menstruation • An increase in menstrual flow if the device does not contain copper or progesterone • Bleeding/spotting between periods • Fairly high expulsion rates.
Although expulsion can happen at any time, it is most likely to occur in the first month after the device is inserted • An increase in the incidence of severe pelvic infection • The possibility of perforation of the uterus when the device is inserted.
3.1 Technique of Insertion and removal The device should be placed high in the fundus.
The IUD and instruments inserted into the cervix and uterus should be sterile.
Perforation, expulsion, and other medical problems are decreased when proper insertion technique is observed.
IUDs are removed without difficulty.
The threads of the device is grasped with forceps or with two fingers and pull steadily, if the device does not come out readily, the patient may need to be referred, 3.2 Time of Insertion IUDs can be inserted at any time during the menstrual cycle, immediately after delivery or an abortion.
The advantage of insertion post-delivery or post-abortion is that the patient motivation 147 is high and a return visit for insertion is eliminated.
Others prefer to insert them during menstruation.
At such time the cervical os is dilated so that insertion is usually easy and any bleeding that occurs is assumed to be normal menstrual flow.
3.3 Contraindications • Any infection of the genital tract • Pregnancy is known or suspected • A history of previous ectopic pregnancy • Unexplained vaginal bleeding • heavy periods (menorrhagia) • .
3.4 Complications 1.
Bleeding The most frequent problems are pain, and spotting or bleeding.
These often go away after two to three months when the body becomes accustomed to the device.
If the problems continue, the IUD may be removed.
2.
Infection Severe pelvic infections lead to abscesses.
Infection is often caused by bacteria from the vagina that has attached themselves to the thread of the device.
The treatment of pelvic infections in women using IUDs varies.
In some places the device is removed immediately and the woman is given antibiotics.
In others the device is left in place and removed only if symptoms do not disappear after antibiotic therapy.
Signs of pelvic infection are a.
Fever b. Pelvic pain or tenderness c. Severe cramping d. Unusual bleeding e. Unusual vaginal discharge 3.
Perforation may occur at the time of insertion.
When perforation occurs, pain and bleeding may or may not be present.
Immediate treatment depends on the symptoms.
the device be removed surgicaly.
4.
Pregnancy with an IUD in situ is common and is more likely to be an ectopic pregnancy when the pregnant woman is an IUD user.
The symptoms of an ectopic pregnancy; pain and bleeding may be missed because these symptoms are similar to side effects of the IUD itself.
3.5 Counseling Any women using IUD must be counsel on the following; 1.
The mechanism, how the device will be inserted and how it may affect her.
2.
Shown how to check for the thread attached to the IUD.
148 3.
Advised to come back for care if she misses a period or cannot feel the thread of the device All available birth control methods should be discussed with women wishing to use any method of family planning.
4.0 Conclusion IUDs are safe and effective and offer advantages over other methods.
Cultural beliefs about vaginal bleeding and concerns over the how the device prevent pregnancy must be respected.
5.0 Summary The IUD is effective, convenient, and relatively safe.
It does not require repeated insertion nor does it interfere with sexual activity.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Enumerate the advantages of IUDs 7.0 References and Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 149  UNIT IV CONDOM AND STERILIZATION Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Condom 3.1 Sterilization 3.2 Advantages of Sterilization 3.3 Counseling for Sterilization as a method of Birth Control 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment 7.0 References and Other Resources 150  UNIT IV CONDOM AND STERILIZATION 1.0 Introduction Condoms are a safe and effective method of birth control when used regularly and correctly.
Condom is best used by couples that are motivated and experienced.
Condoms also provide some protection against gonorrhoea, syphilis, herpes and Chlamydia.
Because condoms are often linked to prostitution and venereal disease they are unacceptable to some people.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit the learner will be able to: o List five advantages of condoms as a birth control method.
o List six disadvantages of condoms as a birth control method.
o Describe the procedure for correct use of the condom.
3.0 The condom All condoms are approximately the same length, circumference, and thickness.
They come in lubricated and non-lubricated forms.
They also come in colours, including pink, red, yellow, blue and black.
Heat is damaging to condoms, therefore, condoms should not be stored in hot places.
How to use a Condom Proper use of the condom is needed for its effectiveness.
It is rolled over the tip of the erect penis and then unroll it all the way down the penis.
It is advised that the condom be put on before the erect penis touches the genital area so that sperm present in the fluid that comes from the man’s urethra before ejaculation will not get into the vagina .After ejaculation the penis withdrawn immediately before it becomes soft and the condom slips off.
The man should grasp the ring of the condom firmly when he withdraws his penis from the vagina so that the sperm do not spill out.
Condoms should never be reused.
Most condoms have a reservoir or tip at the end to catch the sperm and avoid bursting.
When a condom does not have that tip, one centimetre of space can be left at the tip to create a reservoir before the condom is put on so that there will be room for the semen.
It is wise to check a condom immediately after use to make sure that it did not break.
A condom that breaks during intercourse carries the same risk as unprotected intercourse.
The effectiveness of the condom is increased when the woman uses contraceptive foam or cream at the same time.
The advantages of condoms are: a.
Convenience b.
Ease of use c. No side effects 151 d. Prevention of some infections e. No.
medical examination necessary before use f. Readily available The disadvantages are that condoms: a.
Interrupt lovemaking b.
Can be difficult to put on c. Don’t always stay on d. Can cause embarrassment to either partner e. Can break f. Reduce sensation for some men and women g. May increase anxiety because of fear of slipping off h. May be associated with decreased pleasure in lovemaking since immediate withdrawal is usually advised after ejaculation 3 .1 Sterilization Sterilization is a procedure that gives permanent protection from pregnancy.
This unit discusses the advantages and disadvantages of sterilization as well as the complications of the procedure and the kind of counseling should be given to interested people.
Female Sterilisation Two surgical procedures are used for female sterilization.
These are (a) hysterectomy, a major operation that involves removal of the uterus.
(b.)
bilateral tubal ligation (BTL), an operation in which both Fallopian tubes are cut or tied (ligated).
Bilateral tubal ligation (BTL), BTL can be performed by: a. Laparotomy (surgical incision through the abdomen) b. Colpotomy (surgical incision through the vagina) c. Mini-laparotomy (a tiny, surgical incision through the abdomen) Laparotomy is considered a major surgical procedure because it involves the use of general anaesthesia, a large incision is made on the abdomen.
The equipment and skill required for performing a mini-laparotomy are fairly inexpensive and simple.
Health care practitioners other than physicians can be trained to perform this procedure.
Mini-laparotomy Mini-laparotomy is faster, safer and less expensive.
The procedure is about 99 percent successful in preventing pregnancy.
It can be performed under local or general anesthesia.
The procedure takes 15-20 minutes or less to perform.
A small incision (2-4 cm) is made slightly above the 152 pubic bone.
The tubes are located and lifted out of the abdomen through the incision.
The tubes are tied and/or cut, and the abdominal incision is closed with a few stitches.
Following the procedure women should be told to keep the incision dry and clean for a few days.
Lifting heavy objects should be avoided during this time if possible.
Sexual intercourse can be resumed as soon as the physical discomfort is gone.
Protection from pregnancy is immediate.
The most common complications are: a.
Accidental cutting of the uterus, bladder, or bowel b. Haemorhage c. Infection Vasectomy (Male Sterilisation) Sterilization of men is called vasectomy, and it involves tying the vas deferens, the tubes which transport sperm from the testicles.
Vasectomy has a very low failure rate.
The procedure is safer than mini-laparotomy because the vas deferens are located outside the abdominal cavity.
is performed under local anaesthesia.
A small (1-2 cm) incision is made in the skin on one side of the scrotum, and the vas deferens pulled through the opening.
The vas is tied and /or cut, and the incision is closed with two or three stitches.
The procedure is then repeated on the opposite side.
The patient should be told to keep the incisions dry and clean for 24 hours.
Heavy work should be discouraged.
Men should avoid ejaculation for seven to ten days to avoid pressure and possible rupture at the site of surgery.
Unlike BTL in women, vasectomy does not immediately make a man sterile.
Sperm may be present in the next few ejaculations.
Condoms should be given to men at the time of vasectomy for use in the next four to six weeks.
The most common complications of vasectomy are infection and haematoma.
However, complications are rare and are not usually serious.
3.2 Advantages of Sterilizations: a.
Continual motivation on the part of the patient is not needed b.
A regular source of contraceptive supplies is not needed c. Protection is forever d. The procedure needs to be performed only once e, “Check-ups” as encouraged with the use of oral contraceptives and IUDs are not necessary f. Common side-effects associated with the oral contraceptive and the IUD are not present Disadvantages One major disadvantage is that is its permanency in that it gives life-long protection against pregnancy.
But people can change their minds, for example a partner may die, or a disaster may occur in which children are killed.
In these situations the person may regret having had the sterilization.
Reversal of the procedure, “untying” the tubes, is often unsuccessful.
153 3.3 Counseling for sterilization as a method of birth control • Counseling should emphasize that sterilization is desired only if people do not want more children at any time in the future.
• Sufficient time to make a thoughtful decision should be allowed.
• Counseling should include information about, benefits of the procedure and risks of the procedure • That no change in sexual functioning will occur as a result of sterilization.
• Patients should be told what will happen and how they are likely to feel.
• Post-operative care is the same as for any operative procedure.
Vital signs should be checked to identify haemorrhage.
Analgesics may be needed for pain.
• Danger signs that patients should look for after discharge are, in particular, bleeding, infection, and severe abdominal pain, and should be reviewed.
• Instructions for keeping the wound clean should be given to the patient.
4.0 Conclusion The midwife must know about sterilization procedures.
They must give appropriate information and counseling and support people in their decisions about birth control.
5.0Summary Counseling for sterilization as a method of birth control should emphasize that sterilization is desired only if people do not want more children at any time in the future.
Sufficient time to make a thoughtful decision should be allowed.
Counseling should include information about, benefits of the procedure and risks of the procedure 6.0 Tutor Marks Assignment Discuss the method of sterilizations available for the male and female 7.0 References and Other Resources Ajayi, V. A textbook of midwifery.
London, Macmillan, 1980.
(Macmillan Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series).
Olds, S., London, M. Ladewig, P., Davison, M. Maternal and Newborn Nursing and Women Health, 7TH Ed.
2004.
Pearson Prentice Hall Novak, J. and Broom, B. Maternal and Child Health Nursing, 1999.
Mosby Inc. 154
