 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: BED 414 COURSE TITLE: ADMINISTRATION OF THE ELECTRONIC OFFICE 1  COURSE GUIDE BED 412 ADMINISTRATION OF THE ELECTRONIC OFFICE Course Code: BED 414 Course Title: Administration of the Electronic Office Course Developer: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education N O U N Lagos Course Writer: Ntukidem Emmanuel O.
School of Business Education Federal College of Education (Tech) Akoka Course Editor: Dr Mrs C. Akinola Yaba College of TechnologyLagos IN CHARGE Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education N O U N Lagos Course Coordinator: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education N O U N Lagos 2  Table of Content Introduction What you will learn in this Course Course Aims Course Objectives Working through this course Course Materials Study Units References Assignment File Presentation Schedule Assessment Tutor Examination and Grading Course Marking Scheme How to get the most from this Course Tutor and Tutorials Summary 3  Introduction BED 412: Administration of the Electronic Office This course is a 2 unit course designed to train learners to effectively fit into modern electronic office, to understand its conceptions and utilize the skills and attitudes.
The course is divided into three modules of five units each.
What you will learn in this course?
You will be taught the keywords and concepts in electronic office, machines equipment and personnel.
A good coverage of this would equip you with adequate skill; competency and attitudes required to practice or teach electronic office administration.
Course Aims There are fifteen study units in the course and each unit has its objectives.
You should read the objectives if each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
In addition to the objectives of each unit, the overall aims of this course include: i.
To introduce you to the words and concepts of electronic office administration.
ii.
To familiarize you with the machines/equipment and personnel required in electronics office.
iii.
To expose you to the functions expected of the electronic office manager.
iv.
To acquaint you with the place of information and communication technology (ICT) in Electronic Office Administration.
Course Objectives The objectives of this course are: 1.
To inculcate appropriate Electronic Office Administration Skills on the learners.
2.
To educate learners on the machines/equipment in electronic offices and their uses.
3.
To educate learners on how to administer effectively, electronic office personnel.
4.
To expose the learners to the place of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in electronic office.
5.
To enhance effective administration of Electronic Office.
4  Working Through This Course You have to work through all the study units in the course.
There are three modules and fifteen study units in all.
Course Materials Major components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Text Books 4.
CDs 5.
A tutor 6.
Assignments File 7.
Presentation Schedule Study Units The breakdown of the three modules and fifteen study units are as followings module 1 Keywords and concepts in Administration of Electronic Office.
Unit 1 Concept of Administration Unit 2 Concept of Electronic Administration Unit 3 Concept of Office Unit 4 Meaning of Electronic Office Module 2 Electronic Office Machines and Equipment Unit 1 Types of Electronic Office Machines and Equipment Unit 2 Purchasing Office Machines and Equipment Unit 3 Functions of Electronic Office Manager Unit 4 Electronic Office Personnel Requirement Module 3 Business Information Systems Unit 1 Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Unit 2 Classification of Information Systems Unit 3 Types of Information Technology Unit 4 Effects of Information Technology in Offices References and other Sources Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
The textbooks and materials are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final 5  mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in this course guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMA) and a final examination, which you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor Marked Assignments (TMA) Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit them for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select four, which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignments may be presented to you in separate file, just know that for every unit there are some tutor marked assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination, which will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination, which shall last for two hours, you will be required to answer three questions out of at least five questions.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments Four assignments, best three marks of the four count at 30% of course work marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks How to get the most from this course The greatest advantages of distance learning are that the study units replace the university lecture.
With this arrangement, you can read/work through the study materials at your own time and pace.
Instead of listening to the lecture, you now read it, this is not to say that the lecturer will not give you some materials to read and work on them.
You are provided exercises to all appropriate points just as you may do with a lecturer in an in- class situation.
The stated objectives at the beginning of every unit, launches you into 6  bearing in mind what you should be able to achieve at the end of the particular unit.
Always go back to check whether you have achieved the objectives of a given unit.
In addition to the above, do the following: 1.
Read first, through the course guide thoroughly.
2.
Have a personal study schedule (i.e.
personal time-table) ensure that all the units are in your schedule including the time you are expected to spend on each unit.
3.
Keep religiously to your study schedule.
The moment you skip, you will start to have problem, so be very faithful to your schedules.
4.
Always have your textbooks, study materials and this course schedules with you.
Spare a tangible time every day to your study.
5.
Do not fail to do and submit your assignments as at when due.
Always go through these assignments, particularly when examination is drawing near.
They will assist you in your exams.
6.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and ensure that you achieve the objectives of each unit.
7.
When your assignments are returned, pay particular attentions to your tutor’s comments and ensure you keep to then in future work or assignments.
8.
Ensure that you complete all the units thoroughly before examinations.
Give yourself personal assessment even before coming to write the final examination.
Tutors and Tutorials The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you together with the name, telephones number and address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as this will help in your progress.
Do not skip any of your tutorials.
It is an opportunity to interact with our fellow students and to meet and discuss any difficulties in your study with your tutor and even fellow students.
Summary The course would train you on the concept of electronic office and how to administer it.
May you attain the lofty heights of your dream even through this course.
7 8  MODULE 1:- KEYWORDS AND CONCEPTS IN ADMINISTRATION OF AN ELECTRONIC OFFICE UNIT:- 1 CONCEPT OF ADMINISTRATION 1.0 INTRODUCTION The advent of modern technology has greatly affected the traditional methods of doing things in all spheres of our lives.
This is greatly felt in our communication systems, television programmes, automobiles, etc.
The functions, equipment, machines and the general office administration are particularly affected by this new trend in technologies.
With the advancement in technology much of the thinking regarding office administration has changed.
Presently, the two main areas of office technological development among others are microprocessors and tele-communcation, both of which provide possibilities for information creation, storage, retrieval and movement, previously inconceivable.
It is therefore a fact that the idea of an automated, electronic or paperless office is currently challenging many of the traditionally accepted practices of office work.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define “Administration” 2.
Discuss the significance of good Administration in an organization.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT The Concept of Administration According to Miewald (1978) Administration is the means by which set goals are achieved through cooperative human effort.
Adams (1980) also pointed out that administration is generally the process of working with and through others to effectively accomplish organization goals.
For Nwankwo (1982) Administration is the careful and systematic arrangement and use of resources (human and material situation and opportunities for the achievement of the specific 9  objectives of a given organization.
In more specific terms, administration is concerned with the performance of executive duities, the carrying out of policies or decision to fulfill a purpose and controlling of the day-to-day running of an organization.
To Breach (1995) administration is that part of management which is concerned with the installation and carrying out of the procedures by which programmes, plans and target are laid down and communicated, and the progress of activates are checked against them.
In view of the above analysis one can state that office administration is concerned with the planning, organizing, coordinating, controlling and evaluating human and material resource4.
This is necessary in order to achieve the goals and objective of the organization.
It is pertinent to separate management from Administration.
Management according to Gibson (1976) refers to a “ set of activates which can be classified as concerned with planning, organizing or controlling.
It is the job of getting things done through people.
This definition suggests that management is a process that is a sequence of coordinated events.
A manager is therefore a person who performs four basis responsibilities planning, organizing, Directing and controlling or Leading.
Administration on the other hand can be seen as the systematic arrangement of human and material resources and programmes that are available and systematically using them to achieve the aims and objectives of the organization.
Significance of Administration The place of administration has come to be clearly recognized in every sector of human endeavor, as being the cornerstone to the success and indeed to the very existence of an organization.
Being concerned with the planning, coordinating, supervision and control of the enterprise, with which it is involved, it is no over statement to state that the science of administration is an essential instrument of human welfare.
Indeed, so significant is the importance of this instrument of human welfare that none can agree with writers on administration who 10  asserted that if our civilization breaks down, It will be mainly a breakdown of administration and that the future of civilized government or organization rests upon our ability to develop a science and philosophy and practice of good administration, competent to discharge the public and even private functions of civilized society.
From the foregoing, it is not difficult to see that administration is the process on which social or organizational stability rests.
This is because goods administration ensures the establishment of institutional process machinery through which the function of the sate or enterprises is carried out forum day to day.
In administration, rules, laws, mechanisms are set up and their operation is coordinated controlled and supervised.
These are process of organization and management and they constitute administration.
The effect of these institutional mechanisms is that they ensure stability and continuity in periods of change and stress.
Without them changes in organization, especially when accompanied or occasioned in violence, will result in disintegration of society or organization and general chaos.
The administrative function therefore ensures the continuance can be regarded as the stabilizer of organization or society and the guardians of tradition.
4.0 CONCLUSION Administration has been clearly recognized, hence its study in various perspectives.
Different definitions, which point to the same goal, have been given to Administration, its significance has also been clearly discussed in this unit.
5.0 SUMMARY The word ‘Administration’ has been defined in several ways by various authors, one common factor among all definition is that administration is concerned with the systematic arrangement of human and material resources and programmes that are available to achieve specific organization goals.
Administration is so significant in the sense that it is the keystone to the success of any organization, the machinery for implementing organization goals.
11  6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
Briefly explain what is meant by ‘Administration’ 2.
Does Administration have any significance in an organization?
Discuss REFERENCES Miewald, R. (1978) Public Administration: A critical perspective.
New York: Mcgraw Hill book co. Nwankwo, J. I.
(1987) Administration and Learning Onitsha, Leadway Books Ltd Peretomode, V. (1996) Educational Administration Lagos Joja Educational Research of publishers Ltd. UNIT 2 ELECTRONIC 1.0 INTRODUCTION The advent of the silicon chip or integrated circuit as it is more properly called, has revolutionized the field of electronic.
Integrated 12  circuits are currently found in computers, pocket calculators, automatic bank tills, industrial robots and a host of other applications.
The ability to hardness electrical power in a miniature form (i.e.
micro electronics) is having a huge impact on modern life.
Cole (1995) states the most likely way that people at work will come into contact with microelectronics technology is in the area of information technology.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to a.
Define electronic b.
List some electronically operated equipment in an office What is Electronic?
The Oxford Dictionary of current English defines Electronic as the branch of science and technology that studies of the movement of electronics in a vacuum, gas, semi – conductor, etc especially in devices in which the flow is controlled and utilized.
Electronic involves the flow of electrons.
This could be experienced in several equipment, such as computer, calculator etc.
3.0 ELECTRONICALLY OPERATED OFFICE EQUIPMENT As defined above, electronics deals with movement of electronic in a vacuum, semi-conductor, etc.
In electronic offices, we can find several electronic equipment such as computer, telephone, photocopier, fax machines, electronic typewriters, shredding machines, calculators etc.
These equipment are operated through the means of stable elementary particle with a change of negative electricity found in all atoms and acting as the primary carrier of electricity in solids.
This operation eventually ends up by giving us the desired result through the office equipment in a fast, neat and effortless manner.
4.0 CONCLUSION Information technology today, has brought people in contact with electronics.
In every modern office, electronics’ operation is the order of the day.
Many equipment and machines are operated electronically.
13  5.0 SUMMARY Electronics has been defined as the science of the movement of electronics in a vacuum, semi-conductor, etc.
this operation is commonly experienced in almost all the equipment and machines in modern offices and organizations, particularly in modern offices, the following equipment are electronically operated: Computer, Photocopier, Fax Recorder, Telephone, Electric typewriter etc.
6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by “Electronics”?
2.
List six electronically operated equipment in an office.
7.0 REFERENCES Cole, G. A.
(1995) Management Theory & Practice.
London Aldine Place Pub Ltd. Oxford Dictionary of Current English.
Oxford University Press.
UNIT 3 OFFICE 1.0 INTRODUCTION 14  Activities such as the collection and processing of relevant information, issuing invoices dealing with customer’s orders, can no doubt be done in an open field.
Apart from the hot sun and rain, the inconvenience in carrying out such activities in the open can be said than imagined.
Prior to looking at the definitions and specific functions of an office, and the services, which are performed of an office, and the service, which are performed in relation to office work, it is useful to attempt to place the office within the context of the organization as a whole.
It must not be overlooked that offices do not function in isolation; their very existence4 is dependent upon other aspects of business organization, whether they be part of a manufacturing company or concerned with the provision of services, office vital functions particularly in areas of communication and records.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: a.
Define an office b.
List functions of office c. Mention types of office 3.0 THE CONCEPT OF OFFICE Harding (1989) stated that the offices, shop and Railway premises Act 1963 of United Kingdom, defines an office as a building or part of a building, the sole and principal use of which is for clerical activities.
Anyaduba (1997) defines an office as an entity or center of activities/network of an organization.
Mill (1981) perceived an office to be ‘anywhere whether building or otherwise, where clerical work is done.
In view of these views from renowned authors, one can safely describe an office as any place where, clerical, secretarial, or administrative activities is performed, Whether it is in ultra- modem, landscaped buildings belonging to a multi-national corporation, in a government department, (federal sate or local) in a firm of accountants, in the office attached to a retail outlet or in the spare room of a self-employed tradesman.
Where the office is and what facilities they have is unimportant.
What we are 15  concerned is the work, which goes on, its purpose, the functions performed, the systems used, the services provided, and the department, sections and personal required to perform these functions satisfactorily.
The office plays the role of an intermediary between the outside world and the different departments within the organization.
3.1 FORMS OF OFFICE LAYOUT Office layout can take one of the two for forms i.e.
- Open type/plan - Close/cubicles type of office Open Layout Here many employees of the same firm work together in a large zoom.
In this case the office manager can keep an eye on the general activities of the workers and coordinate the activities.
A good example of this type of office is the Banking Hall.
Advantages of the open office 1.
Lower capital cost for partition, doors, heating, lighting power and other service 2.
Better space utilization because less space would be taken up by partition doors corridors etc.
3.
Lower maintenance cost in decoration, clearing and for services generally 4.
Easter supervision and possibly fewer supervisors 5.
It facilitates easy communication and general use of office equipment 6.
Flexibility if layout is possible when organizational changes are necessary.
It gives rooms for expansion and contraction.
7.
Sharing of machines and other equipment becomes possible 8.
Better working condition is possible.
Disadvantages of Open Office 1.
It reduces security for confidential work and cash handling.
2.
Distraction through visitors and general movement.
3.
Communicable noise may become excessive.
4.
Infectious disease may easily spread.
16  5.
Lowering of workers morale through apparent regimentation and loss of individually, reduces sense of belonging to a well define working group and apparent regimentation and loss of individuality, reduces sense of belonging to a well define working group and apparent loss of status among many senior staff.
Close/Cubicle/Private Office Closed or private offices are necessary for those whose work is of a high confidential or those whose work entails frequent interview.
For those who work in open offices but requires occasional privacy, then open office may not be suitable.
The closed office should be designed as an efficient working place not only for the occupants but also for the visitors and if necessary for organizing small meetings.
Features of a Closed Office 1.
Supervision is less effective 2.
Re-arranging of furniture.
Machines or the structure are always difficult because of the partition.
3.
It is not economical because separate office facilities have to be provided for each cubicle coupled with high cost of partition.
4.
Inadequate work flow-work has to be sent form one department to the other by messenger who may have no knowledge or urgency of the work.
5.
Relationships- the relationship is personal in this type of offices it is between a few members of the group and other department.
6.
Privacy - privacy is possible especially when important and confidential matters are been discussed.
7.
Specialization - a more effective grouping of specialized job with fewer supervision is possible for instance, the machine operator does not in any distract the attention of the Accountant or Sales Manager who are in their difference offices.
8.
Individuality- it is possible for each executives to decide for himself the environmental condition in which he prefers to work.
17  3.2 FUNCTIONS OF THE OFFICE An office is a central place where clerical work is undertaken to coordinate and control the affairs of the whole organization, transact business and provide professional service Specifically, the office performs the following functions: i.
The office collects information from a variety of sources through different means of communication ii.
Sorts and classifies information iii.
Protects the business and offers security services iv.
Records information to ensure easy retrieved at a future date.
v. Gives out information vi.
Allocates responsibilities and schedule of duties to various members of staff.
vii.
Recruits staff and organizes for payment of salaries and wages viii.
Supervises cash flow and proper accounting system ix.
Organizes in service training for members of staff x.
Gives out professional advice xi.
Ensures strict adherence to the constitution for stability of the organization.
xii.
Plans and implements policies 4.0 OFFICE SYSTEMS AND PROCEDURES Apart from ensuring good communication and the handling, processing and recording of information, the office contributes to the effectiveness of an organization by establishing and maintaining efficient systems and sound procedure.
What is an office system?
An office system or procedure is the sequence of step, which is taken to perform a particular operation or function.
A system is concerned with what is done, how it is done, when, were, and by whom.
Why are systems necessary?
Systems are essential for the following reasons.
- They improve work flow and make things operate more smoothly - They enable control to be exercised over what is done - They can reduce overheads and generally make for economies.
- They make coordination between department easier 18  - They ensure the training of new staff.
What are the Essentials of Good Systems or Procedures?
1.
Simplicity 2.
Minimum supervision 3.
Utilization of Specialist staff and equipment 4.
Avoidance of non-essential steps 5.
Logicality 6.
No duplication of work 7.
Limited checking 8.
Flexibility and adaptability of techniques 9.
Close monitoring of progress 10.
Revision and updating as/ when required 11.
Minimum paper work.
Where these essentials are achieved, systems and procedures should easily satisfy their objectives and generally increase the effectiveness of the office.
5.0 CONCLUSION The importance of an office cannot be over emphasized.
This is so because the numerous tasks performed in the office in any organization can no doubt be conveniently carried out in an open field, which could be exposed to rain, sun, theft and other form of in security.
Every organization therefore deserves a well furnished and equipped electronic office to be able to carry out its functions effectively.
Effectively office systems and procedures is essential to ensure efficiency.
6.0 SUMMARY Office has been seen here as the nerve center or heartbeat of any organization.
It is the place where all meaningful activities in an organization are planned, and executed.
The types, functions, and office systems and procedures have also been elaborately discussed in this unit.
7.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is your concept of ‘office’ 19  2.
Discuss the two major types of office you know 3.
State and discuss some function of an office.
4.
What is an office system?
8.0 REFERENCES Anyaduba, M. (1997) Business Communication- a Mimeograph Series.
Nigeria, Benin City, University of Benin Harding, H. (1997) Secretarial Procedures, London.
Pitman pub.
Inc. Lawal, I.O.B (2001) Office Management and Administration Oyo, Nigeria Lobs Tan Business Venture.
Mills G. (1981) Office Organization and Method London: Pitman Pub Inc. UNIT 4 ELECTRONIC OFFICE 1.0 INTRODUCTION The primary purpose of an office among others, is a to collect and process relevant information which is subsequently stored or dispatched to appropriate persons.
Already the computer has made a 20  significant contribution to the processing of much of the routine data generated by office staff.
Cole (1996) stated that at least in the last 15 years in many parts of the world, it has become possible to process text electronically can be handled.
The imagination of many people has been captured by the concept of the electronic office.
Major changes in office work have been affected by technological development since the days of Industrial Revolution, but the idea of an automated, electronic or paperless office is currently changing the traditionally accepted practices of office work.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to 1.
Discuss what electronic office is 2.
State the basic features of electronic office.
3.0 CONCEPT OF ELECTRONIC OFFICE Electronic text- processors are called word-processor and are joint products of the computer and the electric typewriter.
According to Cole (1996), when use speak of the electronic office, we are now referring to an administration system based largely computers, word processor and associated communication devices.
Diagram, this can be expressed as in figure 1 below: 21  Figure I the Electronic Office: basic features (Adapted from Cole 1996) Advantages of Electronic Office Benefits claimed from the use of word processor include: 1.
Improved productivity in processing documents, report letters, etc.
2.
Increased job satisfaction among operators 3.
Improved quality and consistency of final output 4.
Staff savings usually among copy typists 5.
Ease of editing and manipulating text 6.
Ease of document recall from storage 7.
Ability to integrate the word- processor with office computers.
Disadvantages 1.
It inevitably requires changes to both the physical layout of the office and to existing procedures.
2.
Staff need time off the job to ensure adequate training 3.
Eye- Strain can be caused by excessive periods spent in front of the screen 4.
It may lead to staff redundancies 5.
It may reduce the scope of certain jobs, for example secretarial posts.
4.0 CONCLUSION The routine manual office functions had in the recent years been carried out through the use of word processors.
The system makes it possible to process text electronically.
The system is fundamentally based on computer and other communication devices 22  5.0 SUMMARY The unit has briefly discussed the concept of Electronic office, its basic features, advantages and disadvantages over the routine office procedures and administration 6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is Electronic office?
2.
Discuss the basic features of an electronic office 3.
State 4 advantages and 4 disadvantages of an electronic office.
7.0 REFERENCES Cole, G.A.
(1996) Management Theory and Practice London.
Aidine Place Publishers Ltd. Lawal, I.O.B.
(2001) Office Management and Administration Oyo, Nigeria.
Lobstan Business Venture and Pub.
Ltd Ntukiden E.O.
(2004) Fundamentals of Office Management Lagos.
Unique Educational Publishers.
MODULE 2: ELECTRONIC OFFICE MACHINE AND EQUIPMENT UNIT 1 TYPES OF ELECTRONIC OFFICE MACHINES AND EQUIPMENT 23  1.0 INTRODUCTION Office machines have been invented to perform most of the arduous tasks performed by the office worker.
It has been argued that with the invention of modern electronic machines the computer and the awareness of modern businessmen; human labour might be reduced to the barest minimum.
Some people even argue that the number of employees needed might be reduced.
But no matter the level of mechanization the human touch will still be needed.
In modern office today, Most of their activities are computerized and this has increased the rate of efficiency.
Many electronic machines are now available to reduce cost of wages and salaries, save time and reduce labour.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to 1.
List and discuss machines and equipment used in electronic office.
2.
State the advantages of Electronic office machines and equipment 3.0 LIST OF OFFICE MACHINES The following equipment and machines could be found in an electronic office.
(Adejumo (2000) a.
The electronic typewriter b.
The Electronic typewriter c. Photocopying machines d. Electronic stencil cutter – scanner Other Electronic Office Facilities In addition to microcomputers and word processors, the automated office will have one or more of the following facilities: 1 Tele-text 2 Facsimile machine (fax) 3 View data 4 Electronic mail The main features of these four facilities are as follows: 24  Facsimile machines: These machines enable ‘hardcopy’ (reports, memos, etc) to be transmitted worldwide, using the ordinary telephone network, they are very speedy but not secure in the sense of confidentiality.
Tele-text: This is a system for supplying commercial and other data via existing television networks.
The system operates rather like an’ electronic reference book’ whose data-filled pages can be read through by means of a handheld signaling device pointed at, or linked to, specially adapted television receiver.
View data: This is somewhat similar to teletext in that it provides an up to date reference source on commercial matters.
However, in contrast to teletext, the view data system is available only to subscribers and is an interactive system lines, accessed by telephone, computer (or terminals) and television.
Electronic mail (e-mail: This is a system for communicating messages by electronic rather than physical mean.
E-mail enables messages to be passed to and fro a computer terminal on an individual desk.
The new system is gradually being integrated into the other leading office systems (computer networks, word processors, etc) e. Facsimile reproduction and transmission f. Microfilm g. Teleprinter h. Word processor i. Dictating machine j.
Recording machine k. Calculating machine l. Computer Computers are increasingly indispensable today.
Many tasks at home and offices that were hitherto executed manually are being automated at a very fast pace worldwide.
Thus it is an apparent tool for efficiency improvement and precision of job or task execution.
25  Computer is a data processing machine it is electronic device in which data is input.
It can receive, store and use information and instruction the user gives to it.
Advantages of Office Machines/Computer 1.
Greater productivity 2.
Greater economy (although in the hand of an unskilled operator, the reverse is the case in terms of management and material used) 3.
Relieves men of boring and monotonous jobs.
4.
It increases speed 5.
Dependability and consistency (no tea break, no strike, no excuse duty) 6.
Economical in terms of salaries and wages 7.
Saves floor space in terms of staff offices and seats 8.
Flexibility- the machine could be commonly used by many departments.
4.0 CONCLUSION Different types of office machines and equipment are found in typical electronic offices nowadays.
These machines are primarily designed to reduce human labour to the barest minimum, to bring about efficiency, speed and accuracy on the job.
It is therefore necessary for modern offices to ensure the purchase and usage of this modern equipment, particularly the computer.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discusses the significance of modern office equipment and machines.
The machines and equipment were listed out and their advantages fully discussed.
6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
List ten (10) office machines and equipment you know 2.
What are the advantages of office machines and equipment 7.0 REFERENCES Adejumo T. (2000) Office Practice and Information System Ibadan.
Abbo Area publishers.
26  Azuka, E.B (1990) Modern Office Practice for Tertiary Institutions, Aba: Model Academic Pub.
Ltd. Fapohunda, A.
(1995) Understanding and Using Microcomputers, Abuja: Aflon Ltd. UNIT 2 PURCHASING OFFICE EQUIPMENT/MACHINES 1.0 INTRODUCTION 27  Office equipment and machines are the greatest asset of any organization.
In purchasing these machines therefore, certain factors should be put into consideration.
Some of these factors will be discussed in this unit.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to list and discuss some of the factors that should be considered before purchasing office machines and equipment.
3.0 CHOOSING A MACHINE It may happen that the electronic office manager is called upon to give an opinion on the choice of machine to be purchased, and this is no easy task.
There is such a large variety of machines available the office manager may not know where to start.
The following points are to be considered: 1.
Suitability of machine to the nature of work performed in the office 2.
Cost: How much will it cost to buy the machine and cost to maintain it afterwards.
3.
Availability of spare parts and copying materials will the spare part be available when needed, how about the ink, or liquid and paper to use?
4.
Ease of operation: If the machine is easy to operate, less operational; problem arises since training time will be minimized.
5.
Durability: This depends upon usage, maintenance, the operator and the quality of machine.
6.
Servicing Arrangement: Machines should be serviced promptly and regularly.
7.
Portability: If the machine is to be used at different locations of business, this should be considered.
8.
Space: check to see if the machine will fit into your office and that there is power point nearly.
9.
Reputation of the supplier: Office machines manufactures and distribution have a reputation to maintain.
Those who want to stay in business will ensure that their equipment is reliable.
Beware of the attraction of ‘discount’ 28  10.
Operating Cost: This is important especially where special stationery has to be purchased for use in the machine.
4.0 CONCLUSION Many factors and criteria have been listed and discussed in respect of purchasing office machine.
If these criteria are considered before purchasing office machines, it will not save the financial resources, but also material and office space of organization.
5.0 ASSIGNMENT List and discuss ten (10) factors that should be considered when planning to buy office machines and equipment.
6.0 REFERENCES Adejumo, T. (2000) Office Practice and Information System: Ibadan, Agbo areo Publishers.
UNIT 3 FUNCTIONS OF ELECTRONIC OFFICE MANAGER 1.0 INTRODUCTION 29  The functions of electronic office manager consists of the general elements of management, this consists of planning, organizing, staffing, coordinating, controlling Reporting and Budgeting.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: 1.
Identify the required function of electronic office manager: 2.
Discuss these functions.
Functions of Electronic Office Manager: 1.
Planning Planning has to do with selecting objectives and strategies for implementation, policies, programme and procedures for achieving the set objectives clerk (1997) asserted that planning is a decision making process since it involves selecting from among alternatives.
The office manager has to plan his daily activities.
2.
Organization In office management concept, organization means defining or setting clear cut tasks or goals and objectives that must be accomplished in order to achieve corporate aims through adequate and appropriate personal and allocating authorities and responsibilities to them to carry out these tasks.
3.
Staffing The office manager, has the task of filing and keeping filled, the positions, provided for in the office by the organization structure it thus necessitates defining work- force requirement for the job to be done an it include inventorying appraising and selecting candidates for positions, compensating training and developing staff to be able to perform their tasks effectively.
4.
Controlling The office manager has the responsibility of measuring and correcting the activities of subordinates to ensure that events conform to plan.
Thus, he measures, performance against goals and 30  plans, shows where negative deviation exists and puts in motion, actions to correct deviations and help to ensure accomplishment of plans.
5.
Coordinating This is regarded as the essence of manager ship for the achievement of harmony of individual effort towards the accomplishment of group goals as the purpose of management.
Each of the managerial functions is an exercise in coordination.
4.0 Conclusion Management is what managers in all spheres of life practice.
It involves a social process entailing responsibility for effective planning and regulation of the operation of an enterprise in fulfillment of a given purpose (in this case office management).
The office manager in shouldered with more tasks than he can do himself and has to get some of the tasks done through other people.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the major functions of an electronic office manager.
These functions include planning, organization, staffing, controlling and coordinating.
In order to maintain effective and functional office so as to achieve the objectives of an organization, the manager must effectively carry out these basic functions.
6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the function expected of an electronic office manager 2.
Discuss these functions fully.
7.0 REFERENCES Lawal .I.
O.B.
(2001) Office Management and Administration Oyo, Nigeria.
Lobstan Publisher Company.
UNIT 4 ELECTRONIC OFFICE PERSONNEL REQUIREMENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 31  A personnel is the most valuable asset of any organization.
Therefore, the electronic office must be equipped with qualified and adequate staff, so as to enhance productivity and achieve organization objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able: 1.
List out some qualities expected of an electronic office personnel 2.
State personnel requirement in an electronic office 3.0 QUALITIES OF ELECTRONIC OFFICE STAFF The qualities of electronic office staff can be divided into two categories: Business and personal attributes: Business Attributes 1.
Electronic machines skill: a high standard in electronic machines operation.
2.
Organisation skills: well organized so that the office routines are reliable and produce effective results at all times.
3.
Discretion, Initiative: Capable of working on his and her own initiative and using discretion without having to wait for employer’s instructions.
4.
Efficiency, reliability, responsibility for tasks delegated to him/her by employer.
Personal Attributes 1.
Appearance: Always neat and suitably dressed for the office.
2.
Personality: A pleasant and approachable manner both on phone and visitors 3.
Adaptability: A willingness to be helpful and adjust to situations.
4.
Interest: A desire to add to her knowledge, both academically and professionally.
32  5.
Courtesy: A courteous and sympathetic manner engenders the approval and cooperation of all who he/she contacts.
Professional Staff In addition to the qualities of electronic office staff discussed earlier on, a typical electronic office would require the following professional staff: 1.
Data processing managers: 2.
Systems Analysis (to assess potential application) 3.
Programmers (to write the instructions for the computer) 4.
Data preparation staff to convert raw data from document into a form suitable for the company.
CONCLUSION An office equipped with adequate and qualified staff enhance productivity.
Office personnel are also required to possess not only the professional business attributes, but also personal qualities.
High- class professional are necessary in electronic office.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the qualities required of an office staff, this includes the professional and personal qualities.
It goes further to state the professional required in an ideal electronic office.
6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline and discuss some professional qualities required of an electronic office personnel 2.
List and explain professionals required in an ideal electronic office.
7.0 REFERENCES Cole, G.A.
(1999) Management Theory of Practice London.
33  Ashford colour press.
Elendu E.O (1988) Introduction to Office Management Ibadan: University press Ltd. Olu A & Anselon (1995) Introduction to Computer Appreciation Port Harcourt ABC Press Ltd. 34  MODULE 3 BUSINESS INFORMATION SYSTEMS UNIT 1: INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the past, information handling involved massive dependence on paper, but has today, shifted to the creation, storage and transmission of tiny electrical impulses.
Specifically, the advent of computer has transformed the whole world into a global village.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define (ICT) 2.
Discuss the properties/ characteristics of ICT 3.
State the components of ICT WHAT IS INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (ICT) The Department of trade and industry in Britain has provided a useful working definition of ICT as “the acquisition, processing and dissemination of vocal, pictorial, textual and numeric information by a microelectronic based combination of computing and telecommunications.
Properties/Characteristic of Information An information system is a primary vehicle for the purposeful processing of information.
For example, the information system of an organization is the total apparatus for handing information within the organisation in all respects.
An information and communication system is also a scheme which collect, organizes, stores, process and displays information in all its forms and format some of the characteristics of which are inherent in the concept of information include the following: a.
Information must be expressible 1.e it must have a form of expression 35  b.
Information must posses meaning i.e.
It must be meaningful to both the sender and the recipient c. Information must be measurable -i.e.
It must meet an expectation d. Information must be processable i.e.
it must have elements which could be recorded in written form.
e. Information must be transmissible or communicable i.e.
it must be able to travel from one place to another, orally or in written form.
Components of ICT Cole (1995) Stated that there are three major components of information technology and these are as follows: 1.
Computers: Electronic machines capable of making large sets of calculation very rapidly.
2.
Micro-Electronic: The design, application and production of very small- scale electronic devices containing densely packed components.
3.
Telecommunications: The transmission of information by means of electric cables (telephone and telegraph) or by means of radio waves (Via transmitters, Satellites etc) Telephone links, for example are used by business everywhere as an essential part of their communication with colleagues and clients.
Telephone links are obvious resource to be used in the development of information technology.
4.0 CONCLUSION The era of massive dependence on paper in office is gradually ending the information and communication technology deals specifically with acquisition, processing and assemination of information by electronics.
Every electronic office has to embrace this news trend seriously so as to catch up with the modern technology development all over the world.
36  5.0 SUMMARY This unit introduced the information and communication technology (ICT) to electronic office manager.
It discusses the characteristics of information, and components of ICT, primarily the computer, microelectronics and telecommunications.
6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by information and communication Technology (ICT)?
2.
What are the characteristics of information 3.
State and discuss the three major components of ICT 7.0 REFERENCES Fapohunda a.
(1995) Understanding and Using Microcomputer Abuja, afton ltd. Olu, a.
(1995) Introduction to Computer Appreciation port Harcourt, abc Computer Nig Ltd. 37  UNIT 2: CLASSIFICATION OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS 1.0 INTRODUCTION In a functional approach, information systems can be classified in two- organizational systems and public information utilities.
Ehiemna noted that information system in any formal organization like an institution can be further distinguished according to their man purpose.
He identifies there as support of managerial and administrative functions or support of operational and services.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Classify the various information systems in use in organizations 2.
State the differences and characteristic of each of these information systems.
3.0 1.
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM (MIS) THIS INVOLVES THE System that will help management make decision which will promote the achievement of set goals of the organization, since the main duty of the management supported by the office, is decision making.
For example, PERT (Project Evaluation review Technique) is a management technique for setting policies, planning, preparing budgets, scheduling and controlling projects.
This could be termed a management information system.
ii.
Administrative Information System (AIS) Refers to the systems that help in implementing the objectives of the organization, because any decision made by the management are to be implemented by the operational staff of the organization.
All the systems or applications, which will be, used or employed for the purpose of implkementing decisions for the management, are regarded as the Administrative oriented information system.
iii.
Public Information Utilities: any system that can be employed in providing service to the public is referred to as the public oriented information systems in other words all the means by which an organization informs the public of its 38  status and activities through whatever medium is public oriented information system.
4.0 CONCLUSION Any record keeping system such as an address basic may be considered as an information system what sets modern information system apart from the traditional ones is the electronic dimension of the former which permits extremely fast, automated manipulation of digitally stored data and their transformation from and to analog representation.
SUMMARY Principally, information system can be classified into support of managerial/administrative functions and of operational/services functions, This was further broken down to MIS, AIS and public information utilities (PIU) in this unit.
6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
State and discuss the three classifications of information system.
7.0 REFERENCES Casady, M (1994) Word and Information Processing Concepts Ohio South West pub.
Co. Ehiemna P. (1967) Information Technology/Word Processing a Mimeograph, University of Benin, Nigeria department of Computer Science.
39  40  UNIT 3 TYPES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES INTRODUCTION As information could be classified into various forms, such as text, numeric, graphics and voice so also is information technology.
Information technology could be in terms of the type of information or with respect to the medium of transmission.
We will discuss the different types of information technology.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
State and discuss the various types of information technologies.
2.
State some advantages of information technologies 3.0 I INFORMATION TRANSMISSION TECHNOLOGIES The most natural medium of transmission or communication is through the air.
Air is a medium of transmission which though transparent, and could not be seen, yet most of our vocal communication is through, the air medium.
Other mode of communication is by physical on non- physical medium.
Non- physical medium is commonly called wireless, while the physical type uses wire and cables e.g.
telephone wire, closed circuit television.
ii.
Information storage/retrieval technology: there are three notable classes of this form of information technology namely.
a.
Paper medium: typing sheets, stencils, punched cards and paper types b.
Magnetic medium: Magnetic cards, audio tapes, magnetic types, diskette and disks for computer.
c. Optical medium: (Compact disks Cd-Rom) for audio and Cds for computers.
No doubt the oldest form and commonest storage medium in use today is paper despite the modern technology and invention of the computer and its associated peripherals.
41  iii.
Information manipulation/ processing technology This specifically addresses the class or type of equipment or machine commonly used in organization.
There are various types such as telephone system, FAX machine, computer system, Electronic typewriter an of course the inter networking system simply called the internet.
The must common and very recent technique of information transmission is the E-mail system, which is a service under Internet.
The use of information system and technologies will improve communication network for example, essential teaching aids are available.
The knowledge of information systems provides the opportunity to rightly choose which medium will be adequate for the type of information we are sending out.
4.0 CONCLUSION Information systems deal with the creation, storage, processing and communication of information along with related methods, equipment and techniques for implementing information systems.
SUMMARY Information could be transmitted through several modes and media.
They could by done physically or non- physical commonly called wireless, others are paper magnetic and optical media.
The office manager should choose rightly, the medium that will be suitable for the outgoing information.
6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
State and discuss 3 types of information technology you know.
2.
State some of advantages of magnetic medium in respect to teaching and learning.
7.0 REFERENCES Ehiemna, P. (1976) Information Technology/Word Processing Mimeograph, university of Benin, Department of Computer Science.
Casady M. (1984) Word and Information Processing Concept Cincinnati Ohio, South West pub.
Company.
42  UNIT 4: EFFECTS OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN OFFICES 1.0 INTRODUCTION The principal part about information technology is that it serves PEOPLE rather things.
Whereas robots, machines and other industrial computer serve material and components, and data processing computer serve clerical systems, the new office technology serves man’s need to communicate with his fellows.
The availability of wide range of information sources and transmission media quests management and professional staff, in particular, the ability to make informed decision based on an up to date picture of a situation and awareness of alternative responses and their likely responses.
This unit will discuss the effect of (I.T) generally on offices, the employees and employers.
OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
State the implication of information technology (I T) on office itself.
2.
State the implication of (IT) for employees.
3.
State the implication of (IT) for employers.
GENERAL IMPLICATION ON OFFICE The general implication of information technology in office may be summarized as follows: a.
Investment in technology may lead to issue of work fragmentation, boredom, redunctant skills and loss of job satisfaction.
b.
Office jobs will undergo significant changes c. Fewer jobs may be required as routine work is taken over by machines d. The processing and transmission of information by offices will be speeded up considerably e. Routine office work will become considerably more cost- effective.
f. Flexibility of services offered by offices can be greatly enhanced by the variety of equipment now available 43  g. International business communication will be readily accessible to even the smallest office.
Main Implication On Office Employees.
This will be stated in two perspectives, namely, benefits and Demerits Benefits a.
Learning new skills b. Tedious jobs can be delegated to machines c. Easier and quicker access to information d. Easier means of remedying typing errors.
e. More jobs for those who are skilled in maintenance f. More jobs for programmes and software design g. Opportunities for shorter working day/ week Demerits a.
Fewer jobs will be required b.
Office workers might become machine-minders c. Heralth problems associated with VDUs, Printers, etc d. Strong competition between employees for available jobs e. Loss of personal contacts as information is passed by machine instead of by more traditional methods.
Effects on Employers For employers, there are few disadvantages and many advantages.
The disadvantages include: 1.
Time/ disruption caused on transferring from manual to electronic systems 2.
Software may not necessarily meet operation needs and may have to be custom made.
3.
Considerable upheaval among existing staff.
The Principle Advantages are: 1.
Substantial saving on salaries due to fewer staff required 2.
Substantial saving on overheads due to reduction in office space required as disk storage replaces filling cabinets, etc.
3.
Speed of obtaining, processing, strong and retrieving information to aid decision-making.
44  4.
Vastly improved productivity 5.
Flexibility of working due to variety of equipment available, all or most of which can be operated by existing staff.
6.
Improved communication between individual executives and their offices.
4.0 CONCLUSION Since the arrival of the new technology in information (IT) in business office, work, personnel and employers have been affected in various ways.
Computers, which is the main machine in this new technology has brought even more significant changes in the way offices function.
5.0 SUMMARY The impact of information technology in office has been discussed in various ways.
IT affects the office positively, but greater negative effects on the employees.
Again, the employers have greater positive impact than disadvantages.
On the whole, the information technology has a lot of advantages on the office, employees and employers over and above disadvantages.
Every office should strive to be electronically equipped.
6.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
State 4 impact information technology has on each of the following: a.
Offices b.
Employees c. Employers 2.
Sate 3 significant disadvantages of (IT) on employees.
7.0 References Cole, G.A (1996) Management Theory of Practice London.
Ashford Colour Press.
White, C. C. (1982) Technological Changes and Employment, WRU Occasional Paper.
45  UNIT 5 RECORDS MANAGEMENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION The success of any business organisation depends on the efficiency of its record management.
Staff records provide information to evaluate and control staff activities.
The records also provide information for relevant agencies both in the private and public sectors.
Records management is very important in any organisation.
Effective records management therefore, enable the organisation solve management problems and take decisions of he survival of the business both in the short and long run.
Information needs to be created, stored, retrieved retained and disposed off when necessary.
All these require effective records management.
Effective records management is possible when records created, stored or retained can be retrieved without much difficulty.
With the constant changes in technology, modern organisations world-wide are now managing their records electronically.
For this reason, there is the provision of an Electronic Record Management system in advanced countries.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define “Record Management”.
2.
State needs for Record Management.
3.
Differentiate between managing Physical Records and Managing Electronic Records.
3.0 THE CONCEPT OF RECORD MANAGEMENT Records management is the practice of identifying classifying, archiving, preserving and destroying records.
The ISO defines records as information created, receives, and maintained as evidence and information by an organization or person in pursuance of legal obligations or in the transaction of business.
The international council on Archives (ICA) committee on Electronic 46  Records defines records as “a specific piece of recorded information generated, collected, or received in the initiation, conduct or completion of an activity and that comp-rises sufficient content, context and structure to provide proof or evidence of that activity” while the definition of records is often identified strongly with a document, a record can be either a tangible object or digital information which has value to an organization.
For example, birth certificate, medical X-rays, office documents, database, application data and e-mail are all examples of records.
4.0 NEED FOR RECORD MANAGEMENT Records must be managed properly to facilitate decision-making and tackle difficult management problem.
Other reasons for records management are: a. Assess to accurate, efficient and timely information and when required.
b.
Development and maintenance of an effective means of creating, storing, retrieval, retaining and disposing management information.
c. Effective records management provides and protects the management information system.
d. Records management provide efficient information database for the management staff and the relevant public.
e. Records, if properly managed, would save the management from the embarrassment of information getting to unauthorized people.
The onus is on the management through the records manager, to device an efficient records management programme that will cater for records creation, storage, retrieval, retention and records disposition.
Such a records manager should be familiar with the information requirements of the organization, as objectives and structure.
The records management must be “an all-rounder” in various disciplines such arrangement, economics, accounting, information storage, retrieval, filling and indexing, concepts and application 47  information processing, to be able to cope with the intricacies of records management.
5.0 RECORDS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM This is a computer program (or set of programme) used to track and store records.
The term is distinguished from imaging and document management systems that specialize in paper capture and document in management respectively.
Records management systems commonly provide specialized security and auditing functionaries tailored to the needs of records managers.
The general principles of records management apply to records in any format.
Digital records (almost always referred to as electronic records) raise specific issues however.
It is more difficult to ensure that the content, context and structure of records is preserved and protected when the records do not have a physical existence.
Unlike physical records, electronic records cannot be managed without a computer or other machine.
Functional requirements for computer systems that can be used to manage electronic records have been produced by the US Department of Defence (National Archives of England and Wales).
6.0 MANAGING PHYSICAL RECORDS Managing physical records involves a variety of diverse discipline.
At the simplest, physical records must be organized and indexed.
In more complex environment, records management demands- expertise in forensics, history, engineering and law.
Records management then resolves to being a coordination of many experts to build and maintain the system.
Records must be identified and authenticated.
In a business environment this is usually a matter of filling business documents and making them available for retrieval.
Generally, records must be identified and handled much more carefully.
48  Identifying Records: If an items is presented as a records it must be first examined as to its relevance and it must be authenticated forensic experts may need to examine a document or artifact to determine that it is not a forgery, or if it is genuine, that any damage, alterations, or missing content is documented.
In extreme cases, items may be subjected to a microscope, x-ray, radiocarbon, and dating or chemical analysis to determine their authenticity.
This level of authenticity is rare, but requires that special care be taken on creation and retention of the records of an organization.
Storing Records: Records must be stored in such a way that they are both sufficiently accessible and are safeguarded against environment may be stored on ordinary paper in a file cabinet in an office.
However, many records file rooms employ specialized environment controls including temperature and humanity.
Vital records may need to be stored in a disaster resistant safe or vault to protect against fire, flood, earthquakes and even war Modern records keeping technologies transferred much of that information to electronic storage.
Circulating Records: Records are stored because they may need to be retrieved at some point, Retrieving, tracking the record while it is away from the file room, and then returning the record is referred to as circulations.
At its simplest, circulation is handled by manual methods, such as simply writing down who has a particular records and when they should return it.
However, most modern r5ecords environment use a computerized records management system that includes the ability to employ bar code scanners for better accuracy or radio frequency, identification technology (RFID) to track movement of the records from office to office, or even out of the office.
Bar code and RFID scanners can also be used for period auditing ton ensure that unauthorized movement of records is tracked.
Disposition of Records: Disposition of records does not always mean destruction.
Disposition can also include transfer of records to historical archives, to a museum or even a private party.
When physical records are destroyed, the records must be authorized for 49  destruction by law, statute, regulation and operating procedure once approved, the records must be disposed of with care to avoid inadvertent disclosure of information to unauthorized parties.
The process to dispose of records needs to be well- document starting with records retention schedule and policies and procedures that have been approved at the highest level of an organization.
An inventory of the types of records that have been disposed of must be maintained.
Records should never be discarded as any other refuse.
Must organization use some form of records destruction including pulverization, paper shredding or incineration.
Preservation of Records: series of innovation have made the preservation of records possible on sophisticated office equipment.
Records can be preserved in this equipment.
Microfilm: the cost of storage space necessitates micro filming- storage and filling technique for important document that must be kept for a long period of time.
The miniature copies of documents are made on 8mm, 16mm or 35mm film.
The film can be viewed through a scanner whenever the stored information is required.
Floppy Diskette: this is the low- cost storage facility of information on a computer some other means of storage on the computer are the magnetic tapes, magnetic disks and magnetic drums.
The magnetic disk provides a large storage capacity for document.
The magnetic tapes is used in medium and large scale computer systems.
The magnetic drum is used in large-scale computer systems.
Preservation of records is as important as the records being preserved: therefore organization must preserve its assets adequately.
7.0 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL (IR) Information retrieval (IR) is the science of searching for information in documents, searching for document themselves, searching for metadata which describes documents or searching within databases, whether relational stand- alone databases, or hypertext networked databases such as the internet or world wide web or intranets, for text, sound, images or data.
50  There is a common confusion however, between data retrieval, document retrieval, information retrieval and text retrieval.
Each of these has its own bodies of literature, theory, praxis and technologies.
IR is like most nascent fields, interdisciplinary, based on computer science, mathematics, etc.
Automated IR systems are used to reduce information overload.
Many universities and publi9c libraries abroad US IR systems to provide access to books, journals and other documents information Retrieval systems are often related to object and query.
Queries are formal statements of information needs that are put to an IR system by the user.
An object is an entity, which keeps or stores information in a database.
User queries are matched to objects stored in the database.
A document is therefore a data object.
Often, the documents themselves are not kept or stored directly in the IR system, but are instead, represented in the system by document surrogates.
8.0 CONCLUSION Information about and outside an organization need to be created, stored, retrieved, retained and disposed of when necessary.
The success of any business organization depends on the efficiency of its records management.
Traditionally management of physical records was common, but with the constant changes in technology, modern organization worldwide are now managing their records electronically.
This involves a computer programme (or set of Programme) used to track and store records.
Properly managed records facilitate decision making and tackle difficult management problems, as well as save the management from the embarrassment of information getting to unauthorized people.
9.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the concept and the needs of records management have been discussed.
Attempt has also been made to discuss and differentiate between managing physical records and electronic records management.
The key factors in records management have not 51  been storing records, circulating records, Disposition of records and preservation of records.
10.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define “Records management” 2.
State at least four needs for records management 3.
Differentiate between managing records physically and managing records electronically.
11.0 REFERENCE Aromolaran, E. A.
(1998) Office Administration and Management: Lagos: Concept Pub.
Ltd http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/information retrieval.
52  UNIT 6 FILLING SYSTEMS 1.0 INTRODUCTION Filling is systematic record keeping.
It is one of the vital clerical and secretarial activates in the office.
Indexing is an aid to filling information can be traced easily when large numbers of files are kept.
It also serves as reference list.
As a result of advancement in technology electronic filling systems now replaces the traditional metal filling cabinets with digital version, which is more secure and offers new features to improver efficiency.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Define ‘Filling’ 2.
Discuss the Electronic filling system 3.0 THE CONCEPT OF FILING According to Denyer (1979) Filing is the basis of record keeping which entails the process of arranging and storing these records systematically so that they can be located or retrieved when required.
Harrison (1979) describes filing as the work of putting away correspondence such as letters, invoices, circulars, reports etc in a systematic and orderly manner where they can be retrieved when needed.
Filing can also be described as the “memory of an office where information can be stored in a system specially designed for that purpose.
In a nutshell, one can summaries that filing is a systematic and orderly storing of various document in a suitable equipment or system especially designed for that purpose, so that these documents (Information) can be retrieved within few minutes when needed.
4.0 REASONS FOR FILING It is necessary to file records.
a.
To provide accurate and timely information for executive within an organization b.
To develop and maintain an efficient system for creating, storing, retrieving, retaining and disposing information 53  c. To preserve documents and safeguard the company’s records d. To design and control standards and methods on the management of records, equipment and producers.
e. To facilitate easy location of documents f. To aid management in making decision easily.
5.0 ELECTRONIC FILING SYSTEM As stated earlier on Electronic-filing system replaces the traditional metal filing cabinets with a digital version, which is more secure and offers many new features to improve efficiency.
It is easy to get started and required some training.
The electronic filing system supports all applications.
Technical documents, letters, spreadsheets, drawings or other types of documents can be created and then managed in the filing systems environment.
A significant problem is the process of finding document after it has been created and filed.
Most enterprises have developed ad hoc standards for document referencing and trace- ability with varying degrees of success.
In recent time, some software/applications have been developed to aid Electronic-filing system.
Among which is Electro file, 123 file-IT.
These applications may not be common in our environment ELECTRO FILE: In this program, the user first selects the application required, and specifies the level of access allowed.
Then, up to six different labels can be attached to the document, one of which the document ID is mandatory.
All labels can be customized using the label editor.
Fro greater partitioning of the top- level category, the user can specify a pre- defined sub- category of Drawer, folder or file.
Electro file programme is designed to bring sophisticated document management facilities to the small and medium sized businesses.
The Electro file management program sits above the operating system and alongside application programs.
Electro file provides a uniformed environment for the creation of filling and retrieval of all forms of information and documents.
It is compatible with client/server networks using Windows 95, Windows 98, Windows ME.
54  123 File IT: Provides a powerful browser-based Digital document fillng system.
IT has various advance features such as browser- based viewing and administration with powerful searching capabilities, patent-pending sure save for ensuring the image has been saved correctly and securely between server and client, scanner compatibility, OCR, Bar code and the ability to store any type of digital file in the same folder.
Benefits of Electronic Filing System 1.
Increased customer care 2.
Saves time 3.
Saves costs 4.
Increased staff productivity 5.
Reduced paperwork and storage costs 6.0 CONCLUSION Filing, a process of systematically arranging, storing and retrieving documents could be carried out physically and electronically.
The electronic filling and-retrieved system comparatively, saves time, cost and increases staff productivity, reduces paper work and storage costs.
Many programs are now developed such as Electro file, 123 file IT as a result of advancement in technology.
7.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the concept and importance of filing system.
It deals with the reasons for filing and finally discussed the Electronic filing system, its operation, benefits and some of the latest programmes in Electronic filing and retrieval systems.
8.0 ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is filing?
2.
Discuss some of the benefits of electronic filing system.
55  9.0 REFERENCES Adejumo T. (2000) Office Practice and Information Systems: Ibadan, Agbo areo Pub.
Denyer, J. C. (1979) Office Administration London: Macdonald and Evans Pub.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/information retrieval.
56  57  UNIT 6 FILLING SYSTEMS 10.0 INTRODUCTION Filling is systematic record keeping.
It is one of the vital clerical and secretarial activates in the office.
Indexing is an aid to filling information can be traced easily when large numbers of files are kept.
It also serves as reference list.
As a result of advancement in technology electronic filling systems now replaces the traditional metal filling cabinets with digital version, which is more secure and offers new features to improver efficiency.
11.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 3.
Define ‘Filling’ 4.
Discuss the Electronic filling system 12.0 MAIN CONTENT The Concept Of Filling According to Denyer (1979) Filling is the basis of record keeping which entails the process of arranging and storing these records systematically so that they can be located or retrieved when required.
Harrison (1979) describes filling as the work of putting away correspondence such as letters, invoices, circulars, reports etc in a systematic and orderly manner where they can be retrieved when needed.
Filling can also be described as the “memory of an office where information can be stored in a system specially designed for that purpose.
In a nutshell, one can summaries that filling is a systematic and orderly storing of various document in a suitable equipment or system especially designed for that purpose, so that these documents (Information) can be retrieved within few minutes when needed.
13.0 Reasons For Filling It is necessary to file records.
a.
To provide accurate and timely information for executive within an organization b.
To develop and maintain an efficient system for creating, storing, retrieving, retaining and disposing information c. To preserve documents and safeguard the company’s records d. To design and control standards and methods on the management of records, equipment and producers.
e. To facilitate easy location of documents f. To aid management in making decision easily.
58  14.0 ELECTRONIC FILLING SYSTEM As stated earlier on Electronic-filling system replaces the traditional metal filling cabinets with a digital version, which is more secure and offers many new features to improve efficiency.
It is easy to get started and required some training.
The electronic filling system supports all applications.
Technical documents, letters, spreadsheets, drawings or other types of documents can be created and then managed in the filling systems environment.
A significant problem is the process of finding document after it has been created and filed.
Most enterprises have developed ad hoc standards for document referencing and trace- ability with varying degrees of success.
In recent time, some software/applications have been developed to aid Electronic-filling system.
Among which is Electro file, 123 file-IT.
These applications may not be common in our environment ELECTRO FILE: In this program, the user first selects the application required, and specifies the level of access allowed.
Then, up to six different labels can be attached to the document, one of which the document ID is mandatory.
All labels can be customized using the label editor.
Fro greater partitioning of the top- level category, the user can specify a pre- defined sub- category of Drawer, folder or file.
Electro file programme is designed to bring sophisticated document management facilities to the small and medium sized businesses.
The Electro file management program sits above the operating system and alongside application programs.
Electro file provides a uniformed environment for the creation of filling and retrieval of all forms of information and documents.
It is compatible with client/server networks using Windows 95, windows 98, windows ME.
123 File IT: Provides a powerful browser-based Digital document filling system.
IT has various advance features such as browser- based viewing and administration with powerful searching capabilities, patent-pending sure save for ensuring the image has been saved correctly and securely between server and client, scanner compatibility, OCR, Bar code and the ability to store any type of digital file in the same folder.
Benefits of Electronic filling system 6.
Increased customer care 7.
Saves time 8.
Saves costs 9.
Increased staff productivity 10.
Reduced paperwork and storage costs 15.0 CONCLUSION 59  Filling, a process of systematically arranging, storing and retrieving documents could be carried out physically and electronically.
The electronic filling and-retrieved system comparatively, saves time, cost and increases staff productivity, reduces paper work and storage costs.
Many programs are now developed such as Electro file, 123 file IT as a result of advancement in technology.
16.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed the concept and importance of filing system.
It deals with the reasons for filing and finally discussed the Electronic filing system, its operation, benefits and some of the latest programmes in Electronic filling and retrieval systems.
17.0 ASSIGNMENT 2.
What is filing?
3.
Discuss some of the benefits of electronic filling system 18.0 REFERENCES Adejumo T.(2000) office practice and information systems: Ibadan, Agbo areo Pub.
Denyer, J. C.(1979) Office Administration London: Macdonald and Evans Pub.
8 60  61  62  63  64  65  66
