 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: BED 212 COURSE TITLE: COMPUTER APPLICATION IN BUSINESS i Course Guide Course Code: BED 212 Course Title: COMPUTER APPLICATION IN BUSINESS Course Developer: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Course Writer: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor: Professor L. E. Ekpenyong Department of Vocational and Technical Education Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City ii Contents Page Introduction What you will Learn in this Course Course Aims Course Objectives Working through this Course Course Materials Study Units References/Further Readings Assignment File Presentation Schedule Assessment Tutor Marked Assignments Final Examination and Grading Course Marking Scheme How to Get the Most from this Course Tutor and Tutorials Summary iii  Introduction BED 212 – Computer Application in Business is a 2 credit unit course designed to train you for the use of personal computer in the world of business.
The knowledge gained in this course would lead to proficiency in electronic business management.
As a business educator in training, it is advised that you study each unit carefully to ensure you gain the desired skills required in electronic business management.
What you will Learn in this Course In this course you will be exposed to the business environment, the use of Microsoft Word in business, Microsoft Excel in business and other computer applications in business.
Course Aims The aims of this course are directed towards preparing: 1. citizens who would be able to teach electronic business management at the secondary school levels, and 2. graduates who would be able to impact the skills of electronic management into the general society through workshops, seminars, and in-house training.
Course Objectives At the end of this course, you should be able to:  identify various business documents maximally,  create electronic business documents with minimal errors,  manage business data effectively, and  manage business data efficiently.
Working through this Course To gain the maximum proficiency required in this course, you must work through all the study units.
Starting from module 1, unit 1 to module 4, unit 4.
Ensure you master a unit of study before proceeding to the next unit.
Where references are made to previous taught courses or elsewhere, you should Endeavour to visit reference sources.
1 Course Materials This course material consist of : 1.
A course guide; 2.
The main text, broken down into four modules and 16 study units; 3.
Text books 4.
Microsoft Office 2007 5.
Electronic text 6.
An assignment file Study Units This course material contains four modules and sixteen study units as follows: Module 1 The Business Environment Unit 1 Types of Business Organisation Unit 2 Problems in General Business Unit 3 The Concept of Computer in Business Unit 4 The importance of Computer in Business Unit 5 Caution in the use of Computer in Business Module 2 Microsoft Word in Business Unit 1 Document Production Unit 2 Data Security Unit 3 File Management Unit 4 Document Presentation, Module 3 Microsoft Excel in Business Unit 1 Solving and Making Decision with Microsoft Excel Unit 2 Managing Large Worksheet Unit 3 Presentation of Data with Charts Module 4 Other Applications in Business Unit 1 Graphics Unit 2 Database Unit 3 Microsoft Office Outlook Unit 4 Desktop Tools/Data Communication/Creating Website 2 References and Further Readings Every study unit contain list of references and further readings.
Do not hesitate to consult them if need be.
The Assignment File The assignment file contains all the Tutor Marked Assignments including BED 212.
Do your assignments and you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count in the final score you will obtain in this course.
The Presentation Schedule The Presentation Schedule included in your course material gives you important dates for the completion of Tutor Marked Assignments and tutorial attendance.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on Tutor Marked Assignments (TMAs) and final examination which you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) In addition to working through all the TMAs in your course material, four TMAs would be sent to you in the assignment file.
The four TMAs must be answered and submitted for assessment.
The four assignments would be marked and the best three would be selected which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination which will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination which shall last for two hours, you will be requested to answer three questions out of at least five.
3 Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down Assessment Marks Four assignments, best three marks of the four Assignments count at 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lectures.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make this a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through this course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
In addition, do the following: 1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organise a Study Schedule.
Design a “Course Overview” to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary 4 or a wall calendar.
Decide on a method and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulty with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is tool late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through it, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your study centre as up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and therefore will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you fee unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and on the ordinary assignments.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
5 13.
Finally, ensure that you practice on the personal computer as prescribed to gain the maximum proficiency required.
Tutor and Tutorials The dates, times and locations of these Tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and address of your Tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important; therefore try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties you might encounter when reading.
Summary This course will equip you with the basic skills you require to become competent in electronic business management.
I wish you the best of luck as you read through this course.
6 Course Code: BED 212 Course Title: COMPUTER APPLICATION IN BUSINESS Course Developer: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Course Writer: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Course Coordinator: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor: Professor L. E. Ekpenyong Department of Vocational and Technical Education Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City 7 Contents Page Module 1 The Business Environment Unit 1 Types of Business Organisation Unit 2 Problems in General Business Unit 3 The Concept of Computer in Business Unit 4 The importance of Computer in Business Unit 5 Caution in the use of Computer in Business Module 2 Microsoft Word in Business Unit 1 Document Production Unit 2 Data Security Unit 3 File Management Unit 4 Document Presentation, Module 3 Microsoft Excel in Business Unit 1 Solving and Making Decision with Microsoft Excel Unit 2 Managing Large Worksheet Unit 3 Presentation of Data with Charts Module 4 Other Applications in Business Unit 1 Graphics Unit 2 Database Unit 3 Microsoft Office Outlook Unit 4 Desktop Tools/Data Communication/Creating Website 8 Module 1 The Business Environment Business is usually associated with buying and selling of goods and services.
To be able to sell or buy a good or service requires certain organised procedures.
To have a fulfilled procedure and a desired attainment of the good or service provided there must be a clear and defined data or information, without which the aims and objectives of the business might not be achieved.
To have an effective use of the available data and information, there must be a place, equipment and personnel to make the data and information meaningful.
It is also important to know that data and information vary from organisation to organisation.
Therefore, in this module you will learn about: Unit 1 Types of Business Organisations Unit 2 Problems in General Business Unit 3 The Concept of Computer in Business Unit 4 The importance of Computer in Business Unit 5 Caution in the use of Computer in Business Unit 1 Types of Business Organisation Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Today, computer is inevitable in business transactions.
Before now computer was seen to have been meant for certain type of businesses only and in certain types of organisations.
This belief has been overtaken by the continuous change in technology, which makes every aspect of business to enjoy the benefit of the computer, whether it is macro or micro.
9  Brainstorm: 1.
Take a paper and write out all the names of offices where you have seen people using computer.
2.
Are the computers the same in build and model?
What difference did you notice?
3.
Identify the duties people perform with computers.
4.
Is there similarity in the duties?
A good brainstorming would result to your knowing that the offices are not all in the same kind of organisation and thereby may not be rendering the same services which in turn would lead to performing different tasks with the computer.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you should be able to:  identify the various kind of business organisations,  explain certain duties of business organisations.
3.0 Main Content There are different types of business organisations.
They could be manufacturing industry, entertainment industry, education industry, health industry, sales and other servicing industries.
It is the type of industry or organisation that would determine the kind of tasks the computer would be found useful.
Let us take few examples: Education Industry – In this industry the main task facing the manager could be:  Compilation of application lists  Computation of results  Compilation of admission lists  Students’ enrolment  Projection of students’ enrolment within a specific period  Projection of demand and supply of teachers within a specific period  Calculation of students’ progression and retention rate  Creating question bank 10  E-learning  Production and utilisation of multimedia in teaching and learning Manufact uring Industry – In the case of the manufacturing industry, the task may be:  Meeting the demand of customers  Ensuring quality control of product  Creating an enabling awareness of the product by way of advertisement  How to reduce cost without reducing quality Health Industry – In health industry inclusive hospital and other collaborative bodies like pharmacy and the like, there focus is entirely different from the first two discussed above.
In this industry they may require computer for:  Medical information  Administrative purposes (this runs across all industry with slight differences)  Clinical and special purpose  Radiology o X-ray o Ultrasound o Digital imaging technique o Bloodless surgery (which can be achieved through simulation)  Interactive videoconferencing o Teleradiology o Telepathology o telepsychiatry In medicine we have what is called telemedicine, which involves the use of computers, the internet and other communication technologies to provide medical care to patients at a distance (Burke and Weill 2000).
There is no doubt that there is no point of similarity in use.
This is more visible in the daily communication like typing of letters, memoranda, sending of e-mails and so on.
But in the core area of business, the need and use of computers in organisations differ.
This is why it is very important for business men or those working within an organisation to be very conversant with the aims and objectives of their organisations, which is the base that would determine what an organisation would need to do with the computer.
The need and task would therefore determine the kind of computer hardware and software that the organisation would need.
Sometimes some certain terminologies may sound the same in the use of computers in business but may not actually be requesting exactly the same thing.
For example the use of interactive videoconferencing, it is true, was first identified with meetings, which make its usage to be acceptable in any field of 11 life.
But outside this, videoconferencing is used differently in some of these organisations, for instance in the medical line a patient’s ailment can be diagnosed and surgical operation can be performed at a distance without the patient travelling long distance to see the consultant, while education industry may use theirs to simulate learning.
In this case, though both organisations might be said to be involved in videoconferencing, they would both require different gadgets and possibly different softwares in order to be able to have a successful videoconferencing.
Some of these organisations would require special packages to perform the identified tasks.
In this regard purpose-made software may be required instead of going for commercially produced software.
However, where commercially produced software meets the need of the organisation, there would not be need of spending money and time developing a new one which usually would take time to complete and.
at the same time more money would be spent.
Where there is need to provide an in-house package, the manager should be able to spell out exactly what the organisation wants to achieve with the use of the package.
This would help the programmer to design what can easily be used by the concerned persons.
At other times it becomes imperative that specific computerised gadgets have to be bought.
Still using the medical line as an example, the normal personal computer with just the normal installation of Microsoft windows would not be able to carry out the function of x-ray, ultrasound and bloodless surgery.
The nature of the task therefore would determine the right hardware and software that would be used in conjunction with the normal computer if need be.
Software products fall into one to the following categories:  Operating systems  Utilities  Word processors  Spreadsheets  Database managers  Communication and internet browsers  Graphics and publishing applications  CAD software  Multimedia and presentation software  Education and entertainment software  Software development systems  Networking and network-management systems  Microsoft Encarta 12 Within these general categories, there are other specialised categories of software, which is sometimes referred to as vertical applications.
These include:  Accounting systems  Bank management systems  Retail point-of-sale systems  Financial planning software  Legal and medical office management systems  Medical diagnostic software  Insurance claims processing systems  Software development accessories Self Assessment Exercise Visit hospitals and a banks to find out the different types of problem they solve with computers and how they achieve their targets.
Share your experience with your colleagues or facilitator.
4.0 Conclusion In conclusion, as useful as the presence of computers is in organisations, their needs and functions should be properly prioritised.
First, the mind set that computers are only required for document processing should be discarded because the use of computer in business goes beyond processing of documents.
Computer could be used in the packaging of products, for security checks, for product monitoring and so on.
To have the best use of computer in your organisation, you need to be conversant with the set aims and objectives of the organisation; it is only with this you will be able to actualise the use of computer in carrying out your daily task in your office.
5.0 Summary The use of computers in organisations differs from one organisation to the other, depending on the nature of business such as education, health and manufacturing.
There are times where the functions of computer cut across the organisation but at other times, special packages may be required, for instance in the health industry where computerised gadgets like x-ray machines are required.
But where commercially produced packages meet with the need of the organisation, there may be no need to go for special computerised gadgets or special programmes, so as to reduce cost and avoid waste of time.
Also, new softwares may be created where customisation of the existing software could not serve the desired purpose.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 13  Choose a particular industry or organisation and i.
List the type of computer gadget and software used in the organisation.
ii.
Explain the procedure the gadget and software are used in achieving the organisational set goals.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
14  Unit 2 Proble ms in General Business Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Problems are inseparable from normal human daily activities, hence the need for innovation.
It is the existence of problems that brings about dynamism, because in finding a solution to an identified problem, change will occur.
This is to say that problem is part of life.
In a more modified form, some people refer to it as challenges, which are commonly used in our day-to-day speech.
Therefore, just as human beings are faced with 15 challenges so also there are challenges in general business on daily basis.
A highly challenged organisation can lead to management discomfort until a solution is found.
Brainstorm: 1.
Do you have challenges in your life?
2.
How do you solve your challenges?
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  identify basic problems in business,  analyse the process of problem solving 3.0 Main Content The basic challenges that are usually associated with business are:  Having accurate data  Processing of data accurately and on time  Storage of data  Easy retrieval of data  Increase in productivity  Quality control measure  Sustainability in business Apart from the basic challenges, others could be how to:  manage schedule on a daily or hourly basis,  manage list of contact,  carry your data with you,  be able to work any where,  communicate and share data from any where, 16  work with graphics – intensive or desktop publishing applications,  design or use multimedia products,  set up complex hardware configurations.
These challenges could surface in different ways and in different facets.
In trying to solve these problems with the use of computer, the problem may be compounded, reason being lack of knowledge of what should have been done.
This may be as a result of using right software wrongly.
Therefore, it is important to know where and how computer can be use to solve problem.
To get a problem solve with the use of the computer, you need to analyse the problem thus: Analysis Problem Analysis Solution Problem statement Recognition  Data Gathering * Understanding the problem  Pre-Processing * Formulating a solution plan  Cleansing * Implementing the solution  Filtering * Evaluation of the solution General model of a problem solving process Source: Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006) What problem have you identified?
This could come in the form of an obstacle or difficulty that could prevent you from reaching the desired goal.
For instance you may be faced with a problem of how to delete a row or column in an Excel so as to be able to enter more data or to be able to work with the existing data.
The problem could equally be that you want to manipulate or sift some data to get information that could enable you 17 take some decisions.
You cannot solve a problem when you do not know the exact problem you want to find solution to.
After a problem has been identified, try to identify the cause of it.
This will enable you gather the necessary data that would assist you in getting the problem solved.
Pre- process, cleanses and filters the data gathered to ensure adequacy.
Having achieved this, defined the problem, this definition would give you a clear view of what problem you actually want to solve without beating round the bush.
A problem that is not well stated or defined could lead to more problems in the sense that working with the so called identified problem may lead to a solution which on the long run may not be found useful or may jeopardise business.
After a problem statement has been made, re-analyse the problem by ensuring understanding, formulate a solution plan i.e.
how you intend to solve the problem, implement the solution and finally, evaluate the solution.
The purpose of evaluation is to ensure that the solution provided would actually take care of the existing problem.
Once evaluation has been certified, a decision can then be taken out of the solution.
Example In XYZ company N180 was invested at 12 percent interest compounded quarterly over two years given 1.03 compound value interest factor.
Mr. Adekunle has the duty to calculate the amount due at the end of each period for 24 months.
3 months constitute a period.
First, Mr. Adekunle needs to identify what is required of him i.e.
the problem he needs to find solution to.
The major problem would be how to arrive at the value at the end of 24 months.
Secondly, he needs to analyse the problem, to know what is required.
In this instance the periods – beginning principal value and interest value need to be identified.
These values are required to get the value at the end of each period.
Then think of a format to present it for easy calculation and understanding.
This may appear thus in an excel worksheet: 18  The result would help the company to take decision on the investment made.
Self Assessment Exercise Present a problem and state how you would get the problem analysed in the computer with the suggestions of possible solutions.
Discuss your result with your colleagues or facilitator.
4.0 Conclusion To be able to use the computer effectively in business transaction, you must identify what you need the computer for and what aspect/programme/software is required to solve the identified problem.
Map out a strategy of how you intend using the identified computer software to solve the problem.
Then apply the identified software to get the value.
5.0 Summary Every aspect of human life is associated with problems, and business environment is not different.
Problem which is often referred to as challenges come in diverse forms in business, which usually affects the adverse decision taken.
Since every negative decision 19 has an effect on the organisation., it is therefore important that appropriate solution is provided using adequate processing tools that would minimise errors that could affect the final decision.
This requires following a procedure – problem recognition → analysis → problem statement → analysis → solution.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Visit an office in an organisation (mention the name of the organisation and the office) and i.
Identify the office challenges that require the use of computer.
ii.
Explain how such challenges have been handled in the office.
iii.
State your views about your findings.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
20  Unit 3 The Concept of Computer in Business Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction As discussed in the above unit, human life is associated with challenges and the process of looking for ways to solve the challenges leads to discovery.
Before now the major machine that was in business was the manual typewriter.
The limitation of the manual typewriter led to the invention of electric typewriters which went through several processes of modification and advancement.
This was followed by the birth of personal computer which today has helped to ease the tasks in business.
This unit will focus on the computer.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 21   Explain the concept of computer in business  Explain the genealogy of the use of computer in business 3.0 Main Content In the 1940s to 1950s, computers were special purpose machines that only large institutions such as governments, the military, and universities could afford.
The earliest computers were ENIAC (Electronic Numeric Integrator and Calculator) and universal Automatic Computer (UNIVAC).
But in 1960, computer revolutionised business world.
IBM introduced its system/360 mainframe computer in April 1964.
In the 1970s, Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) took further steps to bring computers into mainstream of business.
Today, personal computer (PC) is the most common computer.
It is PC because it is designed to be used by one person at a time.
In spite of its small size, the PC is more powerful than any of the room–sized machines of the 1950s or 1960s.
Computers have become so vital in the modern society that without them our economy would grind to a halt.
The flexibility of the computer makes it very useful in the business world on a daily basis.
Office workers use personal computers to write letters, keep employee rosters, create budgets, communicate with co-workers, find information, and manage projects and so on.
Sales people use computers to manage accounts and make presentations.
You now have portable computers called laptop computers or notebook computers.
The operating system (OS) is an important aspect in business, of which an average business man should have an idea.
An operating system is a software programme but different from other programmes, it is the master’s control programme.
The operating system provides the tools (commands) that enable you to interact with the personal computer.
It is therefore important we know the OS we use for our business.
Then you need to get advise on the central processing unit (CPU) type, Memory, Disk space, compatibility is very important when upgrading your personal computer.
Early desktop computer users used it as a replacement for the typewriter, to generate letters, memos, and other documents.
Many business professionals relied on the computer to “crunch numbers”.
As time went on personal computer began to replace the ledger book as primary tool for tracking and analysing revenues and expenses in business.
Individuals and organisation use computers to maintain lists of contracts, products, sales, personnel and so on.
This leads to what is called productivity software.
Productivity software is any application that helps the user accomplish a specific task e.g.
text, graphics, working with numbers, searching for data or preparing a presentation.
Examples of productivity software are: 22   Word processor – provides tools for creating and formatting text-based documents.
It is the most common software.
 Spreadsheet programmes – used for working with numbers and performing complex calculations.
One of the most important tools for accountants, business managers, and anyone else who needs to create budgets, analyse statistical or collect numerical research.
 Database management system – help to keep track of things from a sales person maintaining a list of contracts, to government agencies tracking entire population.
This helps to gather large volumes of data and process them into useful information.
 Presentation programme – used for creating sophisticated presentations using text, graphics, numerical data, sound and animations.
The resulting presentation can be printed, displayed as slides or overheads or played back on a computer screen.
 Desktop publishing (DTP) software – helps to revolutionise the publishing and graphic arts industries, allowing the ordinary users the power to produce professional quality documents and publications.
The popular DTP software packages are Aldus PageMaker, QuarkPress, and Adobe Frame Maker and so on.
Storage device is provided on the personal computer which network administrators, CD-ROM drive, Diskette drive or Floppy disk drive Hard disk.
Storage devices can be summarised thus:  Storage device can be classified as magnetic or optical.
 The most common magnetic devices are diskettes, hard disks, magnetic tapes, and removable hard disks.
 The most common optical devices are CD-ROM, WORM and Magnetic – optical disks.
To measure derived performance, know the average access time and the data-transfer rate.
Self Assessment Exercise With reference to a particular organisation, x-ray the genealogy of the use of computer in that organisation.
Share your answer with your colleagues or facilitator.
23  4.0 Conclusion Personal computer is designed in such a way that it can serve all business purposes.
The type of software installed into the computer, determines the various functions that can be performed by it.
Therefore, the type of business activities in an organisation would determine the kind of software that would be required for use in that environment.
5.0 Summary The use of computer in business started in the 1940s as special purpose machines that could only be afforded by big organisations like universities, military and government.
But with subsequent development the Digital Equipment Corporation (SEC) took a further step in the 1970s to bring computer into mainstream businesses.
But today, the personal computer is now the most commonly used and more powerful than the room size computers of 1950s and 1960s.
The computer has become inseparable from economic development because of its role in business.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Choose an organisation of your choice and explain the type of computer operating system used in the organisation and how it is used to achieve set organisational objectives.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
24  Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
Unit 4 The importance of Computer in Business Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Much has been said about the computer, but one may wonder why computer has gained so much popularity in every aspect of human life.
What is spectacular?
What is unique?
What is special?
These are the curiosity this unit will settle in your mind.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit you should be able to:  Explain the importance of computer in business  State the shortcoming in the use of computer in business 3.0 Main Content On a normal daily business activities computer can be used to track an investment, publish newsletter, design a building, practice landing, pay bills by consumers and do most shopping on computers.
But outside this, the uses of computer can be classified under various activities as follows: 1.
For sale – helps to enter orders, write letters, track travel expenses, update customer files, and create colourful presentations to help sell product.
2.
For Accounting – helps to organise and manipulate large sets of data.
3.
Classroom – used for learning process as books, paper, and pens, students use computers to develop science projects, prepares reports, gather information from electronic sources around the world.
Connection to school networks: Used to 25 guide museum goers and tell them about the exhibits.
It is also used to compute results and run analysis.
4.
With the use of 3D CAD tools, designers can create photorealistic three – dimensional renderings of a finished building’s interior and exterior.
5.
Using computer-aided design (CAD) programmes, architects, engineers, and designers can perform the entire design process on the computer.
6.
Designers use CAD programmes to create products of all kinds.
A designer can use a CAD program that creates a three-dimensional wire frame outline of the product.
7.
Factories use computerised robotic arms to do physical work that is hazardous or highly repetitive.
8.
To measure distance: You can find way anywhere with GPS, which is used to determine locations.
GPS receiver can be used on foot, and in cars, boats, and planes, GPS units takes three forms – dashboard units, handheld devices and laptop units.
9.
GPS is used by private pilots and boaters to chart accurate courses and reach their destinations safely across unfamiliar routes.
10.
GPS is also used by: a.
Emergency vehicle drivers b.
Used by geologists to measure changes in the height of mountains and the movements of glaciers.
11.
It is used by police through a Mobile Data Terminal (MDT), which provides speed to information, such as license, plate numbers of stolen cars.
12.
You can equally make a career from computer such as: a. Programmer – who helps to develop software to suit a desired house style for a particular purpose e.g.
Accounting software.
b.
A graphic artists, illustrators, designers – use less of keyboard for their jobs, but require to draw on the computer, or even to drag blocks around on the screen then may rely more on a pointing device than a keyboard.
CAD and high – end design applications frequently can work with digitizing tablets.
c. Secretaries, transcriptionists, writers – requires keyboard, scanners to enter text from a printed source, speech-recognition software.
26 d. Architects, engineers, 3–D designers – Requires large format plotters and thermal wax printers, though expensive but indispensable.
3–D designers create elaborate still images of interiors or landscapes; also need high–quality colour output for their projects.
e. Multimedia and game designers, animators: For these developers, audio and video output is critical.
They need to record, edit, and mix sounds of all types as well as play them back.
They also require video recording and playback capabilities, hence the installation of video cards, digital cameras and video recording units to their systems.
Self Assessment Exercise With reference to NOUN, share the importance of computer with your colleagues.
4.0 Conclusion The importance of computer in business cannot be over emphasised.
As discussed in the main content, computer is useful in every aspect of business and to all professions, hence the peculiarity and the importance attached to it.
5.0 Summary Computer is very important in every profession which include health, accounting, education, architecture, engineering, entertainment, programming, designing and the like.
The use of computer can be most appreciated when the right software is used by the right person, who is able to identify an existing problem and apply the software to solve the problem.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) With reference to an organisation, identify the importance of a computer in business.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co. 27 Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
Unit 5 Caution in the use of Computer in Business Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction 28 To be able to enjoy the use of computer judiciously without much hitch, certain criteria must be considered.
These criteria act as the determining factor in the success you make when using computer.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Determine the danger in the use of computer in business  Avoid hitches in using computer for business 3.0 Main Content Are you looking for a way of solving the problem of handling large figures in your business accurately?
The computer can do that for you.
29 But to get the maximum relief you desire you must adhere to the following: Buying a Computer When you want to buy a computer for your business, consider:  The nature of job the computer would be used for, which is what will determine the operating system, the memory, and Disk space need to be given a high consideration.
You may not be a computer expert, but invite the expert who will educate you on the right type of computer that will suit the volume of work.
Using Computer In using computer you need to be cautious of your health, especially if you work on the computer for long hours.
1.
Use matching chair and table, sit up straight and ensure that you rest your back on the chair back rest to making working on the keyboard free from back ache and undue stress.
Do the same even when you are using laptop, especially if you are going to work on your laptop for long hours.
Working on the laptop for long hours could affect your health.
Good sitting posture 30  Learn to rest your back when you type to avoid backache and stress.
Your health is very important.
2.
Learn to touch type, i.e.
mastering appropriate keyboarding skills.
This will help to reduce stress.
Type without looking at the keyboard.
Keep your wrists straight.
Let your hand be in a straight line with your forearms 3.
Protect your eyes.
Staring at the computer screen for long hours could strain or even injure the eyes.
Many users’ vision has deteriorated as a result of prolonged computer use.
What is the way out?
a.
Do not stair at the screen for long hours.
A constant focus at the same distance for a long period could distort the shape of your eye lens.
b.
Learn to blink at regular intervals, this would help reduce strain.
c. Place your monitor at a distance of between 2 and 2.5 feet away from your eyes.
d. Keep your screen clean and position your monitor in such a way that there will not be a direct reflection of light into the eyes.
31 e. Work on a large monitor screen as least 14 inches, a small monitor may cause omission to be too close.
f. Buy a monitor that holds steady image without flickering.
4.
Take regular breaks.
At intervals, get up and walk around, and stretch occasionally while working.
Computer and the Society The society is dynamic, and therefore the brands and models of computers keep changing, hence frequent changes in available application packages and operating systems.
The changes are usually a total change but modifications to improve daily task.
There are threats that the computer is faced with: a.
Lack of stable power supply could endanger the life span of the computer, hence it is important to support the machine with some gadgets that could help maintain or stabilise the current flow into the computer while working.
Power surge can destroy your computer fast, so protect your computer.
b.
Another threat could be the upload of package you do not know much about.
c. Using hardware or software that is not compatible with the system.
Switch off your computer when not in use.
Though some experts recommend leaving computer on all the time, but this practice consumes more amount of energy supply.
Computer Crime Not only is the computer used for business, it is also used by hoodlums to perpetuate crime.
This in recent times has taken different shapes such as:  Theft: the value lost in a stolen hardware is usually attributed to the stored data rather than the value of the machine.
 Some people sometimes purposely distribute virus which destroy data fast.
Software virus is parasitic programmes which can replicate themselves.
Virus can be programmed to carry out the following and even more: o Copy themselves to other programmes o Display information on the screen o Destroy data files o Erase an entire hard disk o Lie dormant for some time and become active after a while when some conditions are met.
To present virus use any antivirus programme like: o Norton Antivirus 32 o Symantec Antivirus for Macintosh o McAfee VirusScan o IBM AntiVirus o Dr. Solomon’s Anti-Virus o Virex o Disinfectant o Avast  Software piracy and illegal copying or use of programme is another crime.
So learn to protect your programme before they are lunched into the market.
 Computer jiggles which are common in cybercafés.
Mind whom you do business with online.
 Though the legal system are developing laws to cover the use of computer and it peripheries, mind what you do.
 Piracy is also a threat between companies and their employees, especially with company owned programmes or software.
Protect your trade secret.
 Some hackers constitute nuisance with their skills by stealing money or crash computer systems intentionally.
Hackers are experts in computer technology, but take great pleasure in solving software problems frequently by circumventing the established rules and regulations.
 Passing of junk e-mails and faxes are part of computer crime.
Ethical Issues in Computing In summary of ethical issue in computing, Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
came up with the ten commandments of computer ethics: The Ten Commandments of Computer Ethics 1.
Thou shall not use a computer to harm other people.
2.
Thou shall not interfere with other people’s computer work.
3.
Thou shall not snoop around in other people’s computer files.
4.
Thou shall not use a computer to steal 5.
Thou shall not use a computer to bear false witness.
6.
Thou shall not copy or use proprietary software for which you have not paid.
33 7.
Thou shall not use other people’s computer resources without authorisation or proper compensation.
8.
Thou shall not appropriate other people’s intellectual output.
9.
Thou shall think about the social consequences of the program you are writing or the system you are designing.
10.
Thou shall always use a computer in ways that ensure consideration and respect for your fellow humans.
Self Assessment Exercise Look around the society and state the odds of the use of computer.
Share your view with your colleagues.
4.0 Conclusion To receive the maximum usage of computer in business, you need to consider the safety of your life because you need good health to run business.
Thereafter, critically examine the environment where your business functions and the threat surrounding the use of computer in executing your business in that area.
This will give you knowledge on how to protect your business.
5.0 Summary To succeed in every daily activity, caution is taken, which is what is also important in the use of computer in business because of the threat the business faces.
The threats in the use of computer in business are – health, piracy, theft and wrong use of programmes or softwares.
An adequate knowledge of these threats would help to minimise the danger that would face the business.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) With reference to a particular business, explain the caution required in the use of personal computer.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office 34 Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
35  Module 2 Microsoft Word in Business Microsoft Word is a software designed to handle the basic skills of business documents.
The main features of this software are improvement on the use of the typewriting skills in typing basic business documents.
This module will expose you to the management of business documents which will acquaint you on: Unit 1 Document Production Unit 2 Data Security Unit 3 File Management Unit 4 Document Presentation, All examples in this module shall be based on Microsoft Office Word 2007.
Unit 1 Document Producti on Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Letters 3.2 Memoranda 3.3 Reports 3.4 Minutes 3.5 Invoice 3.6 Newsletters 3.7 Flyers 3.8 Tables 3.9 Charts 3.10 Diagrams 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 36  1.0 Introduction No business can trive well without data or information which is usually passed from one person to another or from one company to another.
The life wire of any company lies in the way and manner information is being processed and transferred.
This makes communication imperative in business.
There will be no buying, selling or rendering of services if there is no communication.
In communication, there must be a sender, process and the receiver.
There is no communication if the receiver cannot decode (interpret) what has been sent.
Communication in diverse forms All forms of communication are important in business, but this course material would concentrate on written communication; which mostly requires the use of personal computer.
Written communication in business can take the form of letters, memoranda, reports, minutes, invoice, newsletters, flyers, table, charts and diagrams.
These are the various forms through which messages can be sent from one source to another.
The way these documents are presented speaks about a company’s image.
This is why this unit is 37 designed to teach you the vital skills required when using personal computer for business documentation.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify different types of business documents;  Display business document using the appropriate skills.
3.0 Main Content The most commonly used business documents are:  Letters;  Memoranda;  Reports;  Minutes;  Invoice;  Newsletters and  Flyers.
In the process of producing these documents other functions may be required.
For example there might be need to create a table, use charts and diagrams for illustrations.
In this instance it becomes necessary to know how personal computer can be used to create these documents.
3.1 Letters There are four types of letters.
They are: i. business letters ii.
circular letters iii.
personal-business letters iv.
personal letters We would start the discussion from the bottom.
Personal Letters – These are letters written or received from relatives and friends.
This type of letter can take any form of display.
We are not usually concerned about this type 38 of letter in business.
Personal letters are not regarded as official letters, hence the name personal letters.
Personal–business Letters – These are personalised letters that take some features of business letters.
The major difference between personal-business letters and business letters is in the salutation and complimentary close.
For a business letter the salutation and complimentary close are formal.
For the salutation, it is usually typed as Dear Sir/Dear Madam/Sir/Madam and the complimentary close is “Yours faithfully”.
But for personal-business letters, the salutation reflects the addressee’s name e.g.
Dear Mr. Adegbuyi/Dear Kayode, while the complimentary close ends with “Yours sincerely”.
Using this form of letter implies that the writer is familiar with the addressee.
The issue for discussion or the issue for which messages are sent will be a familiar one.
This method is useful at a certain stage in business, because it makes you have a personal touch with your clients.
You speak to them in familiar terms; which makes the clients feel recognised and happy.
Circular Letters – These are letters addressed to a group of persons.
For example, if a company XYZ wants to inform its customers about a change in the company’s closing hour; the salutation would read – Dear Customers.
This is to say that the content of the letter is for all the company’s customers.
This form of letter is also used by government parastatals when instructing the various bodies on actions that should be taken.
This form of letter is not specific neither does it consider the interest of an individual.
The most important thing to note is that circular letters do not have addressee’s address, the salutation is general, the complimentary close is “Yours sincerely” and sometimes omitted, finally the designation is general e.g.
Management.
The use of complimentary close in circular letters has given way to the non-use of it in Nigeria.
Most companies have now adopted the non-use of complimentary close.
Rather simply type Management.
Business Letters – First and foremost we need to look at the different parts of a business letter.
Just as human beings have parts of the body; which is needed for a whole being to function, so also are the various parts of a business letter, so as to have a standard and presentable business letters.
Parts of a Business Letter The parts of a business letter are: 1.
Writer’s Address 2.
References – Our Reference and Your Reference 3.
Date 4.
Attention Line 39 5.
Addressee’s Address 6.
Salutation 7.
Heading 8.
Body of the Letter 9.
Complimentary Close 10.
Signature 11.
Designation 12.
Enclosure.
Although our concern is on the display of a business letter and not the construction or the grammatical structure, the various parts of a business letter would be better understood if they are discussed.
Therefore, let us look at the discussion of the various parts.
Writer’s Address The first thing to be seen on a business letter is the writer’s address.
There is a need for the recipient (the person to whom the letter is written) to know where the letter is coming from.
The practice today, is to print the address of the writer at the top edge of the paper.
Once this is done, it is referred to as letter headed paper.
There are different qualities of papers that may be used.
The printer can give a better advice on this.
Where there are no printed letter headed papers, the address can be typed in thus: School of Education National Open University of Nigeria 14/16, Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island – Lagos To achieve the above you need to consider the following: 1.
Set half an inch as top margin 2.
Set your left and right hand margins at 1 inch each or 11/ inch each 2 3.
Type in the address, break the words appropriately 4.
Highlight each line and select appropriate font type and size to match a letter headed paper.
It is not compulsory that all lines of the heading must be equal font size.
You can vary the size for space or for appropriate display.
5.
Centre each line vertically on the paper.
40 6.
You may use colour if desired, but with appropriate combinations to reflect the maturity of the company.
You may also decide to use the WordArts.
Follow this procedure: 1.
Click on Insert, the following display will appear at the menu Then click on WordArt - , the following drop down menu will appear thus: Click on any design of your choice.
2.
A dialog box will appear 41  3.
Type in the text in the specified box 4.
Follow the command to achieve the desired goal.
The beauty of the use of wordarts is that you can have variety of display.
Also you can move the text as desired by clicking on the text and move to desired position.
But the best is to use printed letter headed paper on a quality A4 paper.
References You have two types of references – “Our Reference” and “Your Reference”.
Reference helps to establish relationship between the writer and the receiver; which helps to keep track of the communication between the two.
“Our Reference” indicates the reference of the writer; which is used to keep record of its communication to the receiver.
Then “Your Reference” indicates the receiver’s reference; which is also used to keep record of its communication to the writer.
For example if company ABC is writing a letter to company XYZ, company ABC reference will be “Our Reference” and company XYZ reference will be “Your Reference”.
But if the writing is on its first instance, it would be only ABC reference i.e.
“Our Reference” that would be available while “Your Reference” would be vacant.
Example Our Reference: NOUN/REG/CONT/XYZ/1 Your Reference: This takes us to how to formulate references.
The purpose of reference as earlier mentioned is to track communication.
So in formulating references you need to consider 42 the parameters (tools) involved in tracking the communication.
This may involve the names of the company, the department the letter is coming from, the purpose of the letter, the volume if necessary and the number.
With the example above, NOUN refers to National Open University of Nigeria; REG refers to Registrar which indicates registrar’s office; CONT refers to Contractor which implies that the subject matter is on contract for company XYZ and the ‘1’ means that is the first letter coming from company ABC to company XYZ.
Whoever that is writing takes the position of “Our Reference”.
It is often advised that the references positions are printed along side with the letter headed paper, e.g.
Show letter headed with reference positions Our Ref: Your Ref: Another important thing to note in typing references on a letter headed paper with references positions is to ensure alignment i.e.
the references should align with “Our Ref” and “Your Ref”.
To do this effectively, requires a ruler.
Both the manual and computer rulers are found useful.
See below to identify the computer ruler.
Sometimes the ruler may not appear as you launch Microsoft Word.
When this happens, do the following to make the ruler appear: 43 Click on the view menu – click on ruler, and the ruler will appear.
The computer ruler and the manual ruler have the same measurements.
Use the manual ruler to measure the letter headed paper to know the exact measurement where the positions of the references are.
Let’s say 2 inches as you measured.
Locate 2 inches on the computer and type in the references.
As you print, it would align with the headings of the references.
Date There are two methods of typing dates.
They are the British and American methods.
With the British method you have the day, month and year for example, 2nd March 2009 or 2nd March, 2009.
But the American style would be month, day and year e.g.
March 2nd 2009.
The British style is the most common and preferred in Nigeria.
The house style of either of the two could be adopted.
To type the date, leave a minimum of three clear spaces and maximum of five clear spaces between the last lines of print on the letter headed paper and the typing line of the date.
Attention Line In business letters, there are times the attention of someone else other than the addressee is drawn to the subject matter under discussion.
In typing the attention line, there are two schools of thought – one school says the attention line should be typed before the addressee’s address and the other school of thought says that the attention line should be typed immediately after the addressee’s address.
The opinion of the first school of thought is that the addressee might not notice the attention line soon after sighting the addressee’s address; therefore it should be typed first to avoid oversight.
The second school of thought feels that the addressee being the main person the letter is addressed to should have the honour first before the person whose attention is called to the subject matter.
Again, any method used is acceptable depending on the prevailing house style.
See the examples below: For the Attention of: Mrs. C. Okoro The Dean, School of Education, Attention line before the National Open University of Nigeria, addressee’s address 14/16, Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos 44 OR The Dean, School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, 14/16, Ahmadu Bello Way, Attention line after the Victoria Island, addressee’s address Lagos For the Attention of: Mrs. C. Okoro Which ever method that is used; single or double line clear spacing should be left in between the attention line and the addressee’s address.
Addressee’s Address This is the address of the recipient.
It is typed in single line spacing.
Salutation In business letters, the salutation is formal and it is usually typed as Dear Sir/Dear Madam.
Where the sex of the addressee is not known, the salutation should be Dear Sir.
The salutation is typed one or two clear spaces after the addressee’s address.
Heading The heading introduces the letter.
It gives an idea to the reader of what the content of the letter contains.
The heading is also helpful in sorting of mails.
It is typed one or two clear spaces after salutation in capitals and bold.
Preferably font size 14.
Once it is bold, it should not be underscored (underlined).
Both underscore and bold perform the same function of emphasis; therefore one should be used at a time.
The heading should distinctly express the content.
Body of the letter This is typed in single line spacing or at the most 11/ line spacing, with one or two clear 2 line spaces in between paragraphs.
Complimentary Close Business letter ends with “Yours faithfully”.
Before now when the use of letter headed paper was not common the company’s name is typed immediately after the complimentary close to show that the writer is writing on behalf of the company.
45 Example Yours faithfully, NOUN These days, this practice is now obsolete, though some companies are still practicing it out of ignorance.
Once a company’s letter headed paper is used, it shows that the writer is not autonomous rather he/she is standing in for the company.
Should there be a need for legal action, it is the company that would be sued and not the individual because the individual was not representing himself/herself.
Company’s letter headed paper cannot be used for personal writing.
Signature A space need to be left for the signature of the writer.
Without the writer’s signature, a business letter is disregarded because it is assumed somebody else would have done the writing.
But there are occasions whereby someone else needs to sign for the supposed writer.
This can be reflected in the designation.
Designati on This is the position the writer is holding in the company.
The designation would signify the amount of importance that would be attached to the content of the letter.
Let us look at the following examples for clarity: Suppose Mr. O.A.
Okonofua is the Sale’s Manager in company ABC, and a letter need to be sent from his office to company XYZ to tender apology for the delay in the supply of goods to company XYZ, but it happens that Mr. O.A.
Okonofua is on annual leave.
Some questions like, would the letter be put on hold until Mr. Okonofua returns from his annual leave?
Can somebody else write on his behalf?
It is Mr. Okonofua that is on annual leave and not the entire company.
Therefore the normal business should still be carried out.
Somebody would have been approved by the management of the company to act in his office while he was away for his annual leave.
So the letter must be written in the office of the Sale’s Manager.
So the complimentary close and designation would appear thus, assuming Mr. K.E.
Adeleke is the one acting in his office.
Yours faithfully, Sign.
of Mr. Adeleke 46 K.E.
Adeleke for Sale’s Manager Sometimes it may be that the Sale’s Manager is not on annual leave, but he is very busy with official matters.
In this instance he could mandate any of his subordinates to sign on his behalf.
This would still follow the same procedure as explained above.
It is wrong to type in the name of the manager when he is not the one signing.
The signature alone may not be enough to trace the actual person when the need arises.
Using the example above, it will appear thus: Yours faithfully, K. E. Adeleke’s signature ఌఎ O.
A. Okonofua for Sale’s Manager This method must not be used.
Another area of importance in a business letter is when a letter needs to pass through two or more officers before getting to the final addressee.
For example if a course coordinator or a programme leader is to send an official letter to the vice-chancellor, it would be wrong for the course coordinator or the programme leader to write straight.
Such a letter must pass through the Dean of the School where the course coordinator or programme leader belongs; say School of Arts and Social Sciences.
The letter will be addressed thus: To: The Vice Chancellor, National Open University of Nigeria, 14/16, Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Through: The Dean, School of Arts and Social Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, 14/16, Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
It is not compulsory that the “through” must be typed in full.
The abbreviation “Thru” can be used.
The layout pattern has two schools of thought.
One school says that the address of the final person to act on the letter should come last while the first address 47 should be the address of the officer that would act on the letter first.
Following this school of thought, it means the above example would appear as follows; Thru: The Dean, School of Arts and Social Sciences, National Open University of Nigeria, 14/16, Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
To: The Vice Chancellor, National Open University of Nigeria, 14/16, Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Suppose it is more than two addresses, say in a conventional university where a letter is routed from a lecturer through the Head of department, through the Dean of the faculty to the Vice Chancellor.
Such letter will be addressed thus: Thru: The Head of Department, Department of Educational Studies and Management, Faculty of Education, University of Benin, Benin City.
Thru: The Dean, Faculty of Education, University of Benin, Benin City.
To: The Vice Chancellor, 48 University of Benin, Benin City.
Remember it could be the vice chancellor first, followed by the Dean and then the Head of Department.
The two methods are acceptable depending on the most preferred by an individual or the house style of the organization.
Where a personal business letter is written, a letter headed paper is not mandatory except where the individual has one.
Let us see some samples of business letter.
½ an inch xxxxxx xxxxxx xxxxx xxxxxxxx xxxxx Company’s address xxxx…….. xxxxx……….
Reference line 3 – 5 clear line spaces xxxxxxxx Date 1 – 2 clear line spaces xxxxxxxxxxx Attention Line 1 – 2 clear line spaces xxxxxxxxxxxx Addressee’s xxxxxxxxxxx address xxxxxxxx xxxxxxx 1 – 2 clear line spaces Salutation 1 – 2 clear line spaces xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Heading xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 1 – 2 clear line spaces xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx Body of xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 1 – 2 clear line spaces the letter xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx 1 – 2 clear line spaces Complimentary close 5-6 clear line spaces Signature xxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxx Signatory Designation 49 A simple business letter layout National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island – Lagos The Registrar’s Office Our Ref:: Your Ref: 5th March, 2009 The Manager, MACVY Enterprises, 14 Jones Street, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Dear Sir, RE: MR. MARTINS OJO I write to introduce Mr. Martins Ojo to you.
He is one of our Information Technology staff.
He is efficient and effective in the use of modern technology.
The university is sending him to train your staff as requested.
Feel free to work with him.
We look forward to receiving your comments on the training.
Yours faithfully, Abikoye, J. K. Registrar 50  There are things to note in this letter: 1.
The space given after the end of print on the letter headed paper, 2.
The consistency in the line spacing, 3.
The signatory, and 4.
The space provided for signature.
The space given after the end of print on the letter headed paper and the beginning of the letter, starting from the “Date” is three clear spaces.
Remember you could also use four clear spaces.
The mode of determining these spaces would be explained to you in unit 3 of this module.
Also the spaces given between each section was consistent.
In typing of letters, use single line spacing to type and give one clear space in between paragraphs.
At the most use 1½ line spacing and two clear line spaces in between the paragraphs.
The signatory is the registrar.
No body is signing for him.
Also enough space is given for the signature.
Remember you need to give four or five clear spaces for the signature.
But supposing someone else is signing for the registrar, the display will go thus: 51  National Open University of Nigeria 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island – Lagos The Registrar’s Office Our Ref:: Your Ref: 5th March, 2009 The Manager, MACVY Enterprises, 14 Jones Street, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Dear Sir, RE: MR. MARTINS OJO I write to introduce Mr. Martins Ojo to you.
He is one of our Information Technology staff.
He is efficient and effective in the use of modern technology.
The university is sending him to train your staff as requested.
Feel free to work with him.
We look forward to receiving your comments on the training.
Yours faithfully, Akintorin T. (Mrs.) For: Registrar 52  Another important area of note is the style of presentation.
The two main styles of business letters presentations are – blocked and indented.
The commonly and widely accepted today, is the blocked style as used above.
For the purpose of this course the two styles are presented thus: Blocked Style 53 Long letters usually have continuation sheets.
Plain sheet of the same quality of the letter headed paper is used as continuation sheet.
The display of such continuation sheet may appear thus: Continuation Sheet of a Blocked Style But a letter that is displayed in indented style will appear thus: Indented Style 54 In indented style, the first line of typing in each paragraph is indented five or six spaces to the right depending on the font size.
This is set as ‘tab’ default.
To achieve this just press the ‘tab’ key and it takes you to the desired point to start the first line in a paragraph.
The complimentary close is typed starting from the middle of the document to the right.
A continuation sheet of indented style will appear thus: Indented style continuation sheet Note the position of the first line of the addressee’s address, the page number, the date and complimentary close.
Self Assessment Exercise Type an invitation letter, inviting an applicant to an interview in a particular organisation.
Describe the format adopted including the line spacing.
3.2 Memoranda The memoranda are another form of written communication in a business.
The memoranda are used within an organisation.
The singular form is memorandum.
It is often abbreviated as ‘memo’.
Memo does not contain addressee’s address, salutation and complimentary close, but it must be signed for the purpose of authority; which the document needs to carry.
How should a memo be displayed?
Let us see the following: 55  Most companies also have memo headed paper.
Where this applies, the memo has to be printed on the memo headed paper.
There are equally long memo; which may run into another page.
The continuation page should not be typed on the memo headed paper but on a plain paper.
This may appear thus: 3.3 Reports Reports are vital in an organisation.
The report of a committee helps in decision making.
The way reports are typed indicates the type of understanding the readers would receive.
A good report must reflect the following:  The body that constitute the committee  The date the committee was constituted  Members of the committee 56  The terms of reference  Procedure  Findings  Recommendations These usually form the major headings in a report.
The headings could be presented as a shoulder or side headings.
The shoulder heading is most recommended.
Reports are typed in single line spacing and at the most, one and half line spacing with size 12 in Times New Roman or Arial font type or any other font type within the same range.
Where charts and table are required for illustrations, they must be well spaced in between lines or paragraphs.
3.4 Minutes Minutes are typed in shoulder or side headings.
Minutes could be presented in a tabular form.
This depends on house style.
But whether it is typed in plain or tabular form, the most important thing is to ensure that the major headings are well spelt out.
3.5 Invoice Invoices are vital in a business environment.
This may differ from business to business.
First and foremost, identify the key words that are required to describe the goods to be transacted in the business.
Invoice is presented in a combination of straight typing and tabulation.
Here is an example of an invoice: INVOICE: 54323 PLACE LOGO HERE, MONTH DAY YEAR OTHERW ISE DELETE BOX 57  COMPANY NAME HERE SHIP TO: TO: COMPANY NAME HERE COMPANY NAME HERE Street Address, Suite 555, City, State 55555 Street Address, Suite 555, City, State 55555 555.555.5555 555.555.5555 555.555.5555 555.555.5555 555.555.5555 555.555.5555 UNIT QUANTITY DESCRIP TION TOTAL PRICE 3.6 Newsletters/Flyers Newsletters and flyers are usually display work.
This may require the use of dropped caps and column typing.
To insert ‘Drop Cap’.
Type the words and highlight the letter that you want drop e.g.
.
Then click on ‘Insert’ and click on ‘Drop Cap’, the following drop menu will appear: 58  Click as desired and follow the instruction.
If the document is to be presented in columns, click on ‘Page Layout’ and click on ‘Columns’, it will appear thus: Select as desired, and follow the instructions.
In selecting new document you can insert default template.
To get this done, click on “Office Button” → “New”→ select from the displayed templates → follow given instructions in the template.
3.7 Tables 59  To insert a table in a document, click on “Insert” → click “Table”, the following drop down menu will appear thus: Select the rows and columns as desired as you point the cursor through the boxes.
Click after you have selected the desired rows and columns.
But where the desired rows and columns go beyond the specified rows, click on “Insert Table” and select as desired.
The challenges that are usually encountered in tabular work include:  Addition of rows  Addition of columns  Deletion of rows  Deletion of columns  Splitting of cells  Merging of cells  Text Direction  Boarder and shading Now let us see how these can be achieved using the table below:  To add row(s) to the above table, do the following: There are different ways to achieve this.
First, place your cursor on the right edge of the last row as shown below: 60  and press the enter key.
As soon as the enter key is pressed a third row would appear.
Another way is to highlight, the number of row(s) to be inserted, see example below: With the cursor still in the cell click on “layout” and the following will appear: Then click on any of the following in the drop down menu as desired: From this menu, you can also delete unwanted row and column.
To merge or split cells, select as desired from the following section in the menu, while the cursor is placed on the required cell(s): Still on the “Layout” menu, you can align your text within the cell, set your text direction and sort data.
61  There are times you want to add boarder or shading to a cell or some group of cells within a table.
To achieve this highlight the cell(s) required and right click, the following would appear: Click on “Table Properties”.
The following will appear: Click on “Borders and Shading” 62  Then click on “v” shape in the box beside “No Color”, the following drop down menu will appear: Choose desired colour, and click OK and OK in the underneath box.
The highlighted part will appear thus: Name Country City You can equally use the “Apply to” in the dialog box to select the desired position within the table where you want the colour to appear.
Another method of achieving this is to highlight the cell or cells to be shaded and right click, then click on “Border and Shading”, a dialog box will appear, click on “Shading” to see exactly the appearance of the dialog box below: 63  Then select colour and apply as desired.
3.8 Charts and Diagrams Charts and diagrams are used for illustrations.
They help to enhance information in a business environment.
To insert a chart on a document, click on “Insert” → click on “Chart” and the following dialog box will appear: Select the desired chart.
Suppose, a pie is selected, the following will appear: 64  Type in the desired headings and figures to over- write the default prints, and delete the default where not required in the excel worksheet Once you are done with the data entry close the excel worksheet, then the chart will appear.
It can be resized by clicking and dragging.
To edit the chart, right click on the chart and click “edit data”.
To insert diagrams, click on “Insert” → picture/Clip Art/Shapes/SmartArt as desired.
Within the shapes, it is only textbox you can easily type inside the box.
To type text into other shapes, right click on the shape and click add text, a cursor will appear.
As soon as a cursor appears type what ever you wish to type.
Self Assessment Exercise Get samples of various documents as discussed and practise the typing as described above.
Cross check your typing with the above specifications.
4.0 Conclusion 65  Document production is a vital aspect of business communication.
To produce a good business document requires adequate practice.
Therefore ensure you practice more of this.
5.0 Summary Document production includes business letters, memoranda, invoice charts, and diagrams.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Type a report that includes charts, tables and diagrams as illustrations from any source of your choice.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
Unit 2 Data Security Contents 1.0 Introduction 66 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The use of password 3.2 Data Storage 3.2.1 Internal Device 3.2.2 External Device 3.3 Data Disposal 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Data security is very important in business.
You need to secure the data or information generated or received for the following reasons: i. for the purpose of future use; ii.
for easy retrieval; iii.
for confidentiality; From time to time information or data are usually referred to for the smooth running of any business.
There are time that vital data or information need to be kept for future use.
In this case the data need to be well secured, failing which there would be a problem at the time the data is needed for use.
It is not all information or data that provide their usefulness at the immediate; some of them are found useful at a later date.
Therefore such data must be well kept so as not to run into problem of need.
It would be meaningless if information or data kept for future use cannot be retrieved at the time of need.
This is more frustrating than not having the information or data at the first instance.
Finally, for the purpose of confidentiality, information or data need to be well secured.
This covers both present and future use of data or information.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  apply the basic procedure of securing data;  explain the basic process of disposing data;  explain simple procedure of data storage.
67  3.0 Main Content This content would take you through simple way of securing your documents and how such documents could be discarded if not required.
3.1 The use of password The personal computer can be secured without unauthorised persons having access to use it.
The use of the personal computer could be personalised by the use of password.
Except the right password is typed in, the computer cannot be used.
In this case it means the user has to make the password personal.
If not any body that has the password can use it.
To personalise the use of a personal computer, seek the advice of a computer engineer.
Apart from using the password to personalise the use of a personal computer, it could also be used to secure access to documents.
In this case, anybody can have access to the computer but any anybody cannot have access to the documents that have password, except the person who has the password.
To password a document, use the following method: Stage one: Type the document Stage two: Save the document.
Do this: Click on “Office Button” with your document opened.
68  From the dropped down menu Click on “Save As”; from the dialog box that will appear select ‘Word Document’ or ‘Word Template’ or ‘Other Formats’ if you want to save on office 2007, but select ‘Word 69 97-2003’ when you want to save in Word 97-2003 version.
A document saved in Word 2007 cannot be opened with a lower version of word i.e.
Word 97-2003.
But if saved in a lower version (Word 97-2003), the higher version (Word 2007) can open the document.
A click on any of the format except ‘Find add-ins for other file formats’ that may require other steps, a dialog box will open thus: Now note the following: The source name 70  What is unique in these arrows?
The source name – this is the source where you want your document to be saved.
The source name in the above dialog box shows “Business Education” this means that the document is saved or is going to be saved under the folder named “Business Education”.
To select an appropriate source name, click on the small sign like ‘v’ by the side i.e.
Then a dropped down menu will appear thus: 71  Select the desired source.
The volume of what appears at the dropped down menu is dependent upon sources that have been created.
Another important aspect of the arrow is the “File name”.
Type in the name in which you want the file to be saved, using the example on the dialog box above, the file name is “Computer Application in Business” i.e.
the name the document is saved with.
A name must be given for identification, easy sorting and retrieval.
Do not use a name you cannot easily retrieve your file with.
Then the “Tools”.
Click on the black ‘v’ like shape at the bottom: A dialog box will appear thus: Click on “General Options”, and a dialog box will appear thus: 72  In the above dialog box, take a look at the directions of the three arrows: In the first arrow in the box, type in the name you wish to use as the password e.g.
kate.
You must use a name you can easily remember, if not you may not be able to open your document.
Also mind the ‘case’ of letters used i.e.
upper case (capital letters - KATE), initial case (Kate) or lower case (small letters – kate).
You would notice that though the name is the same, the way they are typed is not the same.
It is the way the password is recorded at the initial stage that the computer would recognise when opening the document.
In the second arrow, type in the same password name, it will prompt an error if there is a difference.
Click on the small box where the third arrow is pointing to if you want your document to be ready only.
What this means is that when the document is opened, you may not be able to effect any correction, but can only read.
It is advisable not to click on the box, except when you want to make your document read only.
After this process, click on OK, and a dialog box will appear thus: 73  Re-enter the password in the space provided and click OK.
The same box may come up again, re-enter the same password and click OK. Then click save at the main box underneath.
After this first saving, any other information added to the document would be saved by clicking on “save’ from the file menu or press “ctrl + s”.
To open a file that is having a password, a click on the document would produce a dialog box where the password would be typed in before it can open.
Go through the process once more and ensure you have mastered the procedure before you continue to the next stage.
3.2 Data Storage There are two basic ways to store data – internal and external devices.
3.2.1 Internal Device 74 A part of the internal device has been discussed along with the password.
But it is important to note that documents could be saved in: i. my document ii.
my computer – for the internal device under my computer, the saving device is the Local Disk (C:) iii.
Desktop My document is usually set at the default.
Once ‘save as’ is clicked, the source directory that comes up is ‘my document’.
Once saving is done through that source, it means the file will be domiciled in ‘my document’.
To change the source directory from ‘my document’ click on the ‘v’ black shape beside the source box as shown in the description of ‘password’ and select as desired.
Saving on the Local Disk (C:) means saving on the hard disk.
You could save a particular file on both directories i.e.
on ‘my document’ and on ‘local disk (C:)’, one would then act as a back up file.
Should there be a problem with one directory; the file could then be retrieved from the other directory.
The best source to save your document is “My document”.
Saving in the Local Disk (C) is not too secured especially when there is the need to re-format the disk.
The saved file may not be recognised.
And saving at the Desktop may slow down the speed of your computer.
Remember, to save a document, click on file, from the dropped down menu click on ‘save as’, follow the direction on the dropped down menu.
 Type a document and save it through the internal storage system.
 Save the document in ‘my document’ and back up the document in the local disk (C:).
Are y ou happy with your performance?
If yes continue, and if not, go thr ug h the pro cess once more before you proceed.
3.2.2 External Device Documents could also be stored through the external device through 3½ floppy (A:), DVD/CD(D), Pen Drive or Flash Drive and the use of external hard disk.
75 To save on the external device, go through the normal process of saving.
The major difference in the saving is the selected source where the document would be saved.
Remember to click on the ‘v’ shape black button to select the desired source.
3.3 Data Disposal What do you do when you no longer need a particular file or document?
Different questions come to mind:  Am I sure I no longer need this document?
 Would there be a need of it in the future?
 Is the document a confidential document?
 How do I dispose the document?
These and many other questions may come to mind.
But the most worrisome is when the document is a confidential one.
It means it must be disposed without a trace.
A leakage in confidential documents could cause the company great distress.
If the file or document is not a confidential document, the normal delete can be used.
In this instance it means that the deleted document or file would be resided in the recycle bin, which can be culled back if need be.
But where confidential documents or files are involved, not only should the document be deleted from the source file name but must also be deleted from the recycle bin.
For a very high confidential document, the knowledge of an engineer may be sought to ensure proper disposal to avoid any trace that may be carried out by experts who may want to retrieve the unwanted data by all means.
When you are disposing the electronic data, do not forget to look at the ‘hard copy’ if any.
The hard copy is the printed copy of the document.
Where there is no need for it dispose it through the use of trash bin.
Do not burn, do not release for re-cycling and do 76 not give to petty traders to use as wrappers for their wares.
Any of these methods may lead to exposing the confidentiality of the document.
Self Assessment Exercise Visit any organisation of your choice, and state the mode of data disposal that is used in the organisation.
Share your findings with your colleagues and facilitator.
4.0 Conclusion In conclusion, do not hastily dispose your documents or files; ensure you are done with them before disposing them off.
Choose the right mode of discarding your files.
Your data or information must not litter the environment.
Remember that an information or data that is not properly secured could lead the organisation into a doom.
5.0 Summary To secure data or documents or files, the use of password is considered very helpful.
The personal computer could use password to personalise the usage.
Where this is not done, the file or document could be saved with password, which means the document or file can only be opened with the use of the recognised password by the computer.
The user of the computer could choose where a document or file should be saved.
File could be saved through the internal device or external device.
Both could also be used.
But where by a file is no more needed an appropriate means should be used to discard the file without allowing the information to litter the environment.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) With reference to a particular organisation, explain how vital information can be protected in a business.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 77  Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
Unit 3 File Manage ment Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Creating a File 3.2 Organisation of Files 3.3 Creating a Folder 3.4 Organisation of Folders 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction File management was very pronounced in the office before the advent of the modern office.
This was usually referred to as filling system, where filing is done horizontally, vertically, geographically, numerically, departmentally, alphabetically and by subject.
But today, most people have lost sight of this various mode of filling systems because 78 they feel it is only associated with manual filling system since the office today speaks Information Technology.
This is where the problem lies.
Most users of the personal computer find it difficult to manage their files, hence the problem of retrieving files especially when the person that created the file is not available.
This unit will teach you on how to manage electronic files.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Organise electronic files,  Organise electronic folders.
3.0 Main Content This unit will teach you how to create file, folder and how to organise them for proper office usage.
3.1 Creating a File Remember in the past unit, we have discussed a little on how to create files.
As a refresher on creation of files, let us consider this case study.
Case Study National Open University of Nigeria has various schools and units divided as follows: Schools - School of Arts and Social Sciences School of Education School of Business and Human Resources School of Science and Technology School of Law Units - The Vice Chancellor’s Office - The Office of The Deputy Vice Chancellor (Academics) - The Office of The Deputy Vice Chancellor (Administration) - The Office of the Registrar - Centre for Continuing Education and Work Training (CCE & WT) - Foundation Programmes (Access and General Studies) 79 - Study Centres These are some of the units that exist in the university.
The university is a system where by the various sub units interact to achieve the set goals.
The major mode of interaction is written communication; which is produced electronically.
Also the university may also need to interact with the environment, this include the public, other organisation and government.
To have an effective interaction also requires the use of computer.
Since the schools and units need each other to contribute to the welfare of the university, it means each of them has to keep an up-to-date record of each other interaction to have a good link.
But for the purpose of this course material, let us consider the record system in the office of the Registrar.
In the office of the Registrar, mail would be sent and received from all the existing schools and units as well as the government parastatals and other concerned organisations.
Question How would the mail be organised electronically for easy retrieval?
Procedure 1.
For the documents going out of the Registrar’s office, files have to be created for them.
A file is for identification.
To make the identification much easier, a name is attached hence ‘file name’.
The file name is the name given to the file for proper identification.
Just as you have name of persons such as John, Modupe, Adewale, Ajadi, Okoli, so as to be able to identify the particular person that is being referred to.
So for every document that is created, it has to be saved with a file name.
You may apply the following process: a.
Type the document b. Click on Office Button c. Click on ‘Save As’ d. From the dialog box select the source as desired Through this method several files would have been created.
The same procedure would be adopted in saving a document received.
The only difference would be that, you are not the one to create the document rather you have to scan the document, import and save with a desired file name.
In this regard, it is assumed that the files created in the Registrar’s office may include: 80   Dr. J. K. Adedeji  Prof. O. M. Komolafe  Mrs. A.
A. Kadiri  Dr. J.
B. Jubrin  Leave Notification  Advertisement for Academic Vacancy  Workshop on Course Writing  Computer supplies  Advertisement for Contractors  Senate Minutes  Students’ Academic Records In creating a file name, the right name needs to be used for easy sorting.
Therefore the name given to a file must be reflective of the content of the document.
3.2 Organisation of Files Already created files.
This may run into several hundreds, thousands and even more.
So if they are not properly organised there will be difficulty locating a file at the point of need.
This is where file organisation becomes very vital.
To sort files appropriately, the file names must be reflective of the document if not the file may be placed wrongly and would lead to difficulty in the process of retrieving same.
There are files that need to go together.
Files in the electronic way are documents.
So we are now talking about putting related documents together in one box i.e.
the folder.
This could be likened to the normal manual flat file folder or arch file where documents of related matters are kept.
Folder Arch file Documents 81  The list of files above from the registrar’s office has to be sorted so that related documents have to be kept in the same folder for easy identification.
3.3 Creating a Folder How do I create a folder?
To create a folder, do the following: i.
Open the source where you want to save the document e.g.
‘My Documents’.
To get to my documents click on start and from the dropped down menu, click on my documents.
Another method is to click on My Documents on the Desk top if it is available there.
82  ii.
Click on my documents and a dropped down menu will appear thus: showing all the files and folders that have been saved so far.
iii.
right click on the free white space and another dropped down menu will come up.
Free white space 83  A dialog box shows when you right click on the white space iv.
click on New, and another dialog box will appear thus: 84  v. click on folder, and the following box will appear: This box appears.
Type in the name you want to use to save the folder.
You can do this in two ways – type on top of the name (New Folder) in the box to over write or use back spacer key or delete key to delete the name (New Folder) and type in the desired folder name.
Note: Follow this procedure to create as many folders as desired.
Working with the files from the registrar’s office as indicated above, all the files are not related.
To make files more manageable, we have to sort into schools and units.
So in this instance folders should be opened for the various schools and units.
85  Self Assessment Exercise Open folders for all the schools and units in National Open University of Nigeria as stated above.
vi.
Enter files into folder.
There are two ways of entering files into folder.
First, if the files have been created, open the source where the files are and open the folder.
Copy the file(s) and paste inside the folder using the cut and paste mode.
Sometimes both the folder and the file(s) may be in the same source like my document.
E.g.
The folders are in yellow colour.
The others are files.
Let us assume we want to put the files into the folder named ‘New Folder”.
Right click on the file, a dropped down menu will come up, from the dropped down menu click on ‘copy’ then go to the folder (New Folder) where you want to copy the file, double click (i.e.
fast click twice) and the folder will open thus: 86  This shows there is no file in the folder.
Right click inside the white space and from the dropped down menu, click on paste.
Let assumed the file we copy is ‘Business Management – LASU’, as you click on paste the file will appear on the folder thus: You can enter as many files in this order.
But you must ensure that the files entered are related to the name given to the folder, because the folder is acting as the umbrella.
87 Apart from copying the files one by one you could highlight all the files you want to copy, right click and click on copy and go to the folder, right click and click on paste, all the files copied would be pasted at once.
Highlighted files You could also use drag and drop method.
With this method, left click on the file, hold down the mouse without releasing your finger and take the cursor to the folder and release your finger.
As soon as this is done, the file(s) automatically copy into the folder.
The best method is:  to create a folder first  then type the document  click on file  click on save as  click on the source where you want the document saved e.g.
my documents  click on the folder you have created  and save 88  Self Assessment Exercise Try each of these methods.
Go through them several times until you ascertain proper mastery.
3.4 Organisation of Folders Remember you have created folders for all the schools and units in National Open University of Nigeria.
If the folders are left to exist the way they are, they will turn to junks i.e.
it will again become unmanageable.
Therefore there is a need to arrange these folders.
Take for example, the folder named ‘school of education’ in the Registrar’s office.
There are so many letters going and coming from School of Education.
Putting everything together will not make it manageable, so there is a need to create other folders within the folder ‘school of education’.
But before creating folders within the school of education, yearly folders e.g.
2002 folder, 2003 folder, 2004 folder etc need to be created and within each year folder two major folders need to be created in office of the Registrar.
These folders are ‘Incoming Mail folder’ and ‘Outgoing Mail Folder’.
Folders for all the schools and units in the university would be present in both the incoming mail folder and the out going mail folder.
This is for easy retrieval.
The incoming mails should be recorded electronically both the ones that are received in electronic form and those that are received in hardcopy form.
The hard copy form would be made possible through scanning.
Within each school or unit folder, other folders can now be created e.g.
staff record, facilitators update, Notice of Senate meeting etc.
To save folder inside another folder, follow the same procedure of saving file(s) inside folder.
Self Assessment Exercise Try your hands on this and share your experience with you colleagues 89  4.0 Conclusion To be effective and efficient in an organisation, documents must be properly managed failing which the efficiency level will be very low.
Low efficiency could increase the problem of quality assurance which is sought by the public.
Therefore the issue of file management must be considered very vital in the business world.
5.0 Summary To have adequate file management, create files with file names that can easily be retrieved and arranged them in manageable folders for easy retrieval and control.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) With reference to a particular organisation, explain the process of managing a file in a business.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
90  Unit 4 Document Presentation, Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Formatting 3.2 Display/Layout/Background 3.3 Proofreading 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction 91  The way documents are presented speaks about the integrity of an organisation.
A document may carry good information, but if the document has poor presentation, such document would send wrong signals in spite of the good information it possesses.
This is why document presentation is very important in business.
This unit would therefore be devoted to discussing different areas that are eye catching in document presentation.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Format documents  Review documents 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Formatting There are different types of formatting:  Simple Character Formatting e.g.
underline, bold, italicize your text.
To achieve this, click on Home on the menu bar and click the desired formatting - .
Short cut keys could also be used.
Press ctrl + B for bold, ctrl + I for italic and ctrl + U for underscore.
Press one of the shortcuts before you type the text you want to format.
When you want to stop formatting, press the same shortcut key to turn off the formatting.
You can also format already typed document.
To format already typed document, highlight the desired part and select the desired format.
 Special character formatting.
These are used to enrich the document.
This may be “Page Background”, which may include watermark, page colour and page borders.
You may also want to effect “Page Setup” or work in different “Paragraphs”.
To achieve any of these, click on “Page Layout” in the menu and select as desired.
92 To have special effect on font like subscript and superscript, click on “Home” in the menu and select from: for example to type 9 to the power of 3, type 9 and 3 thus 93, highlight 3 thus and click then it will appear thus 93.
To achieve paragraph formatting, click on “Page Layout” and select the desire format under “paragraph”.
3.2 Proofreading It is important to proofread a typed job before it is sent out of the organisation.
This is best achieved by the use of Thesaurus, spelling and grammar tools.
To get this click on “Review” and select as desired.
A quick type can be done by highlighting the desired word(s) and right click on the word to check for spellings and grammar.
Sometimes, the computers automatically prompt green or red waiving lines.
The green waiving line queries grammar, while the red waiving line queries spellings.
These serve as alert to proofreading.
Another important aspect of proofreading is the use of “Track Changes”.
This will enable you to edit materials electronically.
Self Assessment Exercise Edit a material electronically, and share your experience with your colleagues.
3.3 Mail Merging Mail merging is very important in the production of business documents.
There are times there is the need to send the same content of a document to several persons probably with different names and addresses.
In this instance, mail merging is the best option that can be used to achieve such documentation within a short time.
To mail merge, the following steps may be taken: 93 First, prepare a table for the information that would be different in the document e.g.
name and address.
This may appear thus: Name Address 12 Street John Mark Benin City 23 Abiola Avenue Ojo Adekunle Lagos School of Education Okoro Nduka NOUN, Lagos Department of Arts and Social Sciences Pius Ehimen Lagos State University Ojo 56 Lane Close Caroline Ujagbe Kano Plot 547 Dada Ojugo Arewa Suit Abuja 99 Ajuwa Avenue Ibhagbosoria Uduaghe Sokoto Save the table in appropriate source.
Secondly, type the document, say a letter e.g.
Dear We are glad to inform you that our interest rate has been reviewed downwards.
You are now to pay 2.5% on any outstanding loan as from the month of September, 2009 as against the 6% earlier charged.
Should you need further clarification, please feel free to ask.
Yours Sincerely, This letter is to be sent to different persons and addresses.
So let us identify where the names and addresses would be inserted.
“Address” 94  Dear “Name” We are glad to inform you that our interest rate has been reviewed downwards.
You are now to pay 2.5% on any outstanding loan as from the month of September, 2009 as against the 6% earlier charged.
Should you need further clarification, please feel free to ask.
Yours Sincerely, Thirdly, place the cursor on the document and click on “Mailings” at the menu bar.
Then click Mail Merge → Step by step mail merge wizard, then a drop down menu will appear thus at the right hand side of the screen: At the bottom of the drop down menu click on “Next: Starting document”, and follow the instructions.
When you click on step 3 a dialog box will appear requesting for your existing list.
Click on the source to open the file.
With our above list, this will appear: 95  Then click OK. A click on step 4 will bring the following dialog box Place your cursor on the first place of insertion, in this instance where you want the address to be placed then click on “More items”, the following dialog box will appear: 96  Click Insert.
Repeat this in all the points of insertion.
A click on step 5 will effect all the identified names and addresses.
To enhance the mail, you may work through the icons on “Mailings” Self Assessment Exercise With the use of mail merge, type a letter and duplicate same to 10 persons.
4 Conclusion It is good to present our documents in a way to enhance understanding and as well as gaining time.
5 Summary In presenting a business document, attention should be given to appropriate formatting as well as time gaining techniques, such as mail merging.
6 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Edit any material of your choice with the use of “Track Changes”.
Use balloon to show the changes in the text and print.
7 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 97 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
Module 3 Microsoft Excel in Business Microsoft Excel is very useful in the business world, especially in the computation of data that involve figures and complicated tabulations.
This module would discuss the day-to-day activities that require the use of excel in business.
BED 211 – Microsoft Office has already introduced us to Microsoft Office Excel, therefore, this module would focus on the use of excel for problem solving in business.
Microsoft Office Excel 2007 would be used in this module to discuss the following: Unit 1 Solving and Making Decision with Microsoft Excel Unit 2 Managing Large Worksheet Unit 3 Presentation of Data with Charts Unit 1 Solving and Making Decision with Microsoft Excel Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Identification of Business Problems 3.2 Problem Analysis 3.3 Identification of Possible Solution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction 98 In Microsoft Word, we study some tabular work which involves the use of columns, rows, and cells.
But there is a limit to which Microsoft word can handle tabular work, especially when advanced calculations are involved.
This is where Microsoft Excel comes in.
This unit will expose you to the beginning part of the use of Microsoft Excel.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Solve basic problems in business by applying basic statistics with the use of Excel.
 Analyse basic problems with the use of Microsoft excel.
3.0 Main Content 3.1 Identification of Business Problems Excel works with columns, rows and cells.
Sometimes problem may occur in the use of formulas, using formulas and cell references instead of values and determining order of preferences.
Let us look at some areas that may require problem identification: Excel Arithmetical Operations – Calculation Excel Operations Example Addition + =3+A1 Subtraction - =A1-A2 Multiplication * =A1*4 Division / =X4/Y4 Exponent ^ =2^8 You will recall that in BED 211 – Microsoft Office, we were told that every formula in excel starts with ‘=’ sign.
By way of interpretation, under the column of example above, the equal sign is mandatory.
=3+A1 means the value 3 is added to any value that is in cell A1.
In the second row, =A1-A2, it means the value in A2 is subtracted from the value in A1.
In the third row, =A1*4 means the value in A1 is multiplied by the value 4.
The fourth row =X4/Y4 means the value in X4 is divided by the value in Y4 and finally in the fifth row =2^8, it means the value 2 is raised to the power of 8.
The day-to-day activities in the business world require these basic arithmetical operations for business to flow.
For example, a business man may want to get the total amount of sales per month and year.
In this case, it means monthly sales should reflect as well as the summation per year.
Also the business man may want to get the net profit, by subtracting all expenses from the gross profit made.
This can be achieved by simply entering the right formula to capture the right value.
99  Formulae and Cell References instead of values - Supposing the cost of producing 1000 copies of a textbook is N3,235, the cost of one textbook will be N3,235 divided by 1000.
Using excel formula it will be N3,235/1000.
It is wrong to type a value into a cell instead of entering the formula that produced the value.
Typing a value will make your work cumbersome and you will find it difficult to reference cells.
To work with formulae accurately and with fewer problems you need to know how to determine order of precedence rules.
Order of Precedence Rules S Order of Example Resulting Explanation ource: Precedence Value Gross, 1.
Operations in =A1*(3+5) If A1=2, the Excel first performs the Akaiwa, parentheses resulting addition of 3 + 5 even Nordqui value is though multiplication st & 2*(3+5), or has a higher precedence Evans 2*8 = 16 than addition, because the addition operation is enclosed in parentheses 2.
Exponentiation =3*A1^3 If A1 = 2, the Excel first performs the Self resulting exponential operation of Assessm value is cubing A1, and then ent 3*2^3 or 3x8 performs the Exercise = 24 multiplication 3.
Multiplication =A1 + B2* If A1=2, B=3 Excel first multiples B2 Identify and division C3 and C3 = 10, by C3, and then adds problem from left to the resulting the result to A1 areas in right value is a 2+3*10 or business 2+30 = 32 known 4.
Addition and =A1- If A1=2, Excel first divides C3 to you subtraction B2+C3/10 B2=3, and by 10, then subtracts B2 and from left to C3=10, the from A1, and finally express right resulting adds this value to the how you value is 2-3+1 quotient would or -1+1=0 use excel to solve the problem.
Discuss your experience with your colleagues.
3.2 Problem Analysis 100  The following is a case study: Sharback manufactures and sells Adire (tie and dye) clothes at Abeokuta, a town which is distinctly known for good Adire clothes.
Due to the popularity of this Adire, the company is challenged to meet the demand.
The manufacturing company is forced to add volume to the quantity manufactured so as to be able to meet with the demand.
Sharback is committed to maintaining a high standard for which the company is known, but there is a great concern that the standard may be compromised due to increase in production.
One of the problems in the production process is Quality Control, which is often referred to as “QC”.
Each Adire is thoroughly inspected and tested before being released for sale when a defect is detected.
The defect is traced to the original production line that manufactures and package the Adire.
Adewale who is the control manager noticed an increase in defect products since the increase in the production of Adire.
The fear arose that the company may not be able to meet the demand if the numbers of defected goods keep increasing.
In this instance, Adewale would need statistics for the analysis statistics for thorough analysis..
Using Statistical Functions of Data Values The skills required in using statistical functions include:  Freezing rows and columns  Splitting a window into panes  Using absolute references  Using the AVERAGE function  Using relative references  Using the ROUND function Statistics is often referred to as a subset of mathematics, which is applied to observe data.
Some common statistics that are used are:  Mean  Median  Mode  Standard deviation The mean is the arithmetical average of a set of data.
Median is the arithmetical value that occurs in the middle of a set of data.
Mode is the arithmetic value that occurs most 10 1 frequently in a set of data.
Standard deviation is a measure of how widely data values are dispersed from the arithmetical mean.
Let us see the following examples: Values: 8, 7, 2, 2, & 10 a. Arithmetic mean = (8+7+2+2+10)/5 b.
Median = to get the median, reorder the value in ascending order thus: 2, 2, 7, 8, 10, the middle value 7 is the median.
c. The mode is the value that occurs most often, in this set of data, the mode is 2. d. The standard deviation is the degree which scores spread out about the mean or central tendency.
The mean in two sets of data might be the same but with different standard deviation, which shows the data is more or less widely distributed or could exhibit entirely different distribution profile.
Also two data might have the same standard deviation and the mean values in the same data could be different, this indicates two dissimilar manners.
In the case of Sharback Adire production, Adewale must analyse the recent trend in Adire being rejected in the quantity control for quality defects.
The two most common defects being found in the Sharback Adire models are as follows:  High colour coefficient indicating poor surface finishing that can result in fast fading of material.
Adires are rejected if the colour mixture differ from the actual colour number with  0.01  Low texture strength indicating that the material texture cannot absolve the desired colour.
The Adires are rejected if the texture of material is less than 0.7 The problem has under gone some analysis, the next stage would be to identify possible solution.
3.3 Identification of Possible Solution To be able to identify the possible solution that excel can provide the following are essential: In statistical value, you may want to ROUND functions e.g.
26.436 would be 26.
Examples of ROUND functions are: Formula Description Resulting Value =ROUND (26.436) Rounds 26.436 to the 26 nearest whole number =ROUND (B2,1) Where B2 contains 21 102  value 21.38, round 21.38 to the nearest tenth =ROUND (102234,-2) Rounds 102234 to the 102,200 nearest hundred =ROUND (33.75%,2) Rounds 33.75% to the nearest hundredth, which is the same as 24% the nearest percent because the precise value is 3375 =ROUND First sum 20.33 and (SUM(10.33,10.44),0 20.44 resulting in 40.77, then round the 41 value to the nearest whole number These functions can also be expressed in excel.
Let us see the following: Examples of Functions that modify the precision of a value Resulting Function Description Syntax and Example Value Rounds a number to a ROUND (number, num- ROUND specified digits) = 25% number of ROUND(25.33%,2) decimal places Rounds a number up to ROUND(number, num- ROUND-UP the specified digits) = 1.01 number of ROUNDUP(1.002,2) decimal places Rounds a number down ROUNDDOWN ROUND to the specified (number, num-digits) = 9 DOWN number of ROUNDDOWN(9.99,0) places Rounds a number up to EVEN (Number) = EVEN the next 4 EVEN(2.23) highest even integer 10 3  Rounds a number up to ODD (number) = ODD the next 3 ODD(1.23) highest odd integer Round a number down INT (number) INT -5 to the nearest = INT(-4.3) integer Truncates a number to an TRUNC (Number, integer TRUNC num-digits) -4 removing the = TRUNC(-4.3) fractional part of the number Paste Special The copy and paste mode is the same in what we have learned in BED 111 (Introduction to Keyboarding and Word Processing), BED 112 ( Advanced Word Processing) and BED 211 (Microsoft Office).
But there are situations where you need to use the paste special mode.
When you click on paste special; click on the desired function.
As a reminder, let us look at the following Paste Special box: Let us see the explanations of some of these paste functions in the table below: Formulas Description Displays a dialog box that provides Paste Special different paste options Paste only the formulae from the Formulae original (copied) cells 104  Paste only the values from the Values original cell(s); the formula or any formatting are not pasted Paste the formulae and formatting All except Borders from the original cell(s), but not the format of the cell borders Paste the formulae and formatting from the original range of cells, but Transpose reverses the orientations, so that the rows of the original cell range, and the original columns become rows Paste a connection or link to the Paste Link original cells, including the applied formatting Paste operations (Add, Subtract, Paste the operation so specified Multiply and Divide) Mean, Median, Mode and Standard Deviation Excel Statistical Functions Statistic Function and Syntax Arithmetic Mean AVERAGE(number 1, number2,…) Median MEDIAN(number1, number2, …) Mode MODE(number1, number2,… Standard Deviation Now let us calculate the statistics for the colour coefficient Quantity Control Data for Sharback Ventures 10 5   Unique manufacturing identification number (mfg ID#)  Size  Style  Date manufactured  Production line on which the Adire was manufactured  Colour coefficient value  Low texture To calculate the colour coefficient, the mean, median, mode and standard deviation are calculated for proper decision making.
To achieve this, the following formulas are entered: For Mean - =AVERAGE(F2:F5) For Median - =MEDIAN(F2:F5) For MODE - =MODE(F2:F5) For STDEV - =STDEV(F2:F5) The result showed there was no mode.
The standard deviation would be best used for the decision.
The present standard deviation would be compared with the previous standard deviation.
The lower the standard deviation the better the coefficient.
The use of excel in problem solving is not limited to manufacturing industry.
It could be applicable to other industries such as education.
Let’s see how we can solve the following problem: MATRIC EXAM LETTER S/NO NAMES C.A.
TOTAL RMK NUMBER SCORE GRADE 1 Adeniji Eunice kemi 03/01/AV/01/053 19 27 46 2 Adeoye Victor A.
03/01/AV/03/041 19 33 52 3 Adesanya S. Adekunle 03/01/AV/01/010 19 27 46 4 Adesuji Modupe Omoboja 03/01/AV/01/054 19 27 46 106  5 Adeyemi Ademola 03/01/AV/01/055 21 36 57 6 Afolabi Motunrayo S. 03/01/AV/01/056 22 33 55 7 Agbebaku Evelyn 03/01/AV/03/002 21 36 57 8 Agoro Fadilat T. 03/01/AV/03/042 21 33 54 9 Agunbiade Bukola 03/01/AV/01/140 21 29 50 10 Ajayi Emmanuel O.
03/01/AV/01/011 19 27 46 The Problem: The above result was submitted by a lecturer.
The examination officer is faced with the problem of providing the letter grades and thereby seeks an easy way this can be achieved to meet the time line and at the same time minimize error.
Question: What would the examination officer do to achieve this, using excel.
Answer: To solve this problem, the examination officer has to use the ‘IF Formula’, if when defined will eliminate errors in the conversion of scores to letter grades and at the same time be fast enough to achieve the desired result.
Procedure: 1.
Enter the data into excel worksheet and it will appear thus: 2.
P lace your cursor on G2 and type the following formula =IF(F2>69,"A",IF(F2>59,"B",IF(F2>49,"C",IF(F2>44,"D",IF(F2>39," E","F"))))) 3.
Press the enter key.
The letter grade will appear thus: 10 7  4.
Copy the result in G2 into other cells.
The result would be: Self Assessment Exercises Practice all that you have read so far with solving business problems with Microsoft excel.
Share your experience with your co-students.
4.0 Conclusion There are a lot of ways excel can be used to solve business problems.
But first and foremost, you must identify the prevailing problem and know the possible ways of solving that problem and then approach the possible solution.
Where you do not know the right formula to use, go to the Help function of excel and study the recommended ways each formula can be applied.
You should always use the help function.
5.0 Summary For excel to effectively help in solving business problems, the user must be able to identify the problem areas and the possible solutions to the problem.
After which the appropriate section of excel is applied.
There is no limitation on the type of business excel can be used.
Excel if properly applied can be useful in all kinds of business – manufacturing or servicing.
108 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Identify a problem in a particular organisation and use Microsoft Office Excel to solve the problem.
Explain how you where able to achieve this.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
Unit 2 Managing Large Worksheet Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Freezing Panes 3.2 Splitting Window 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 10 9  1.0 Introduction Most people usually run into problem with dealing with large data.
At a point it may become cumbersome managing data to derive desirable results.
At this point in time it becomes necessary to look for alternative ways stress can be reduced in achieving the desired goal.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you will be able to manage large data 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Freezing Panes Freezing panes means making some rows and columns visible while you scroll across the work sheet.
Large worksheets usually go beyond the window view at a time.
In this instance the part that is required to supply leading information may be kept in view while other rows or columns scroll.
In this excel sheet, the number of students go beyond 14.
To see the other names would require scrolling the rows.
But once the rows are scrolled, row 9 would no longer be visible because it would scroll up to give space to view the underneath names.
But, the information in row 9 is guide to what data should be entered in each cell of the data.
Therefore you may want to leave row 9 and column A on view while others scroll.
To achieve this, the following steps should be adopted.
110 Procedure: 1.
Place your cursor on B10 2.
On the view menu, click on Freeze Panes and you will have: 3.
C lick on freeze panes Once this is done, as you scroll, column A and row 9 will be on view.
Originally, the data that were on view were S/N 1 – 14.
With freezing of panes, as you scroll you will see more data but column A and row 9 constant.
The table below shows the data after freezing and scrolling.
You will observe that the new data on the screen view shows S/N 15 – 28 but with the headings still on view.
11 1  You could also freeze only row or column instead of freezing both.
It all depends on what you need at a time.
3.2 Splitting Window Another way to manage large data is to split window.
This is very helpful when you want to compare values.
Let us consider the academic result of a set of students for academic year 2005 and 2006.
The data may be entered thus: To be able to scroll and compare, go to view menu, place your cursor in between the two sets of data or any other point as desired.
The placement of the cursor would determine 112 whether the sheet will split horizontally, vertically or both then go to ‘window group’ in the view menu and click on ‘split’.
The resulting effect would be: This view presents two windows.
You can scroll on both.
Thirdly, large data could be managed by hiding the unwanted data at a time.
Supposing in the above data, you are only interested in printing the Matric.
Number and the Grade Point (Letter Grade), but still want to retain the data in the database.
You could take the following steps: Step 1: Highlight the unwanted row, right click, and select ‘Hide’.
Repeat this for all unwanted rows and columns.
At the end only the desired columns or rows would be left.
See the example below: 11 3 From the above, only columns A, C and G are on view, the other columns in between are hidden.
To unhide, highlight the columns, right click and select ‘Unhide’.
Self Assessment Exercise Practice working on an excel worksheet with the above examples.
Share your experience with your colleagues and facilitator.
4.0 Conclusion In conclusion always identify the area of problem encountered in managing large worksheet.
This would help you sort out the right solution to the problem using excel.
5.0 Summary There are three basic ways of managing large worksheets.
It could be done through freezing of panes, splitting of window and hiding of rows and columns.
The prevailing problem would determine the type that may be applied at a time.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Present data involving large worksheet and explain how you where able to manage the data.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
114 Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
Unit 3 Present ation of Data with Charts Contents 11 5  1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction In the previous units, chart was discussed as an illustration device which enhances business documentation.
This unit shall be more elaborate on how charts are used in presenting data, not just for illustration only.
Data well presented in charts are easier to understand than those presented in elaborate texts and figures.
Some people do not have the patience to read and deduce facts, thereby may run into wrong conclusion or ignoring the data.
This is why in business, presentation of data in charts is encouraged.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to present data in charts for maximum interpretation.
3.0 Main Content Before we go on problem solving, let us have a review on creating charts in excel.
Creating Charts in Excel Step 1: Enter the data for the chart in excel worksheet.
The type of chart to be used would determine how the data would be entered into the worksheet.
This would be discussed later.
Step 2: Select the cells that contain the data for the chart.
Step 3: On the Insert tab, in the Charts group, click the chart type as desired.
Step 4: Follow the given instruction to complete the chart.
To create charts in a way that will make them meaningful to your audience, you need to decide what exactly you want the audience to understand and the type of audience that is 116 target because some charts are easier to understand than others.
Knowing what you want will help you to select from the wide range of charts.
Things to remember in the use of chart types are the types of charts and the arrangement of figures.
The type of charts excel provided are:  Column charts  Line charts  Pie charts  Bar charts  Area charts  XY (Scatter) charts  Stock charts  Surface charts  Doughnut charts  Bubble charts  Radar charts Arrangement of Values in Charts The type of chart to be used determines the way the values would be entered into the worksheet.
Let us briefly look at what should be noted when entering values into worksheet for a chart Column Charts – The categories are entered in the horizontal axis and the values are entered in the vertical axis.
Line Charts – The categories are distributed evenly along horizontal axis, while the values are distributed evenly along the vertical axis.
Pie Charts – shows size of items in one data series, proportional to the sum of the items.
Data points are displayed as percentage of the whole pie.
Therefore in a pie chart data are arranged in one column or row only.
Bar Charts – Illustrate comparison among individual items.
Data are arranged in rows and columns.
Area Charts – Data are arranged in rows and column of the worksheet.
For example, data that represent profit over time can be plotted in an area chart.
XY (Scatter) Charts – Data is arranged in rows and columns.
Scatter charts show the relationships among the numeric values in several data series, or plots two groups of 11 7 numbers as one series of XY coordinates.
In arranging data on a worksheet for a scatter chart, place the X value in one row or column, and then enter the corresponding Y value in the adjacent rows or columns e.g.
Predicted Weather Days Weather Forecast Forecast Monday 32oC 35oC Tuesday 36oC 38oC Wednesday 24oC 42oC Thursday 30oC 34oC X values Y values Stock Charts – Data are arranged in columns and rows in a specific order on a worksheet.
E.g.
to create a simple high-low-close stock chart, you should arrange your data High, Low, and Close entered as Column Headings, see below: Date High Low Close 2/09/09 58 53 55.5 7/09/09 57 56 56.5 11/09/09 52 50 51 The sub-types of stock charts are:  High-Low-Close  Open-High-Low-Close  Volume-High-Low-Close  Volume-Open-High-Low-Close Surface Charts – These charts are useful when you want to find optimum combinations between two sets of data.
As in topographic map, colours and patterns indicate areas that are in the same range of values.
Data for surface charts is arranged in columns and rows on a worksheet.
You can use surface chart when both categories and data series are numeric values.
Doughnut Charts – Data are arranged in rows and columns only.
A doughnut chart shows the relationship of parts to a whole, it can contain more than one data series.
Doughnut charts are not easy to read.
118 Bubble Charts – Data are arranged in columns on a worksheet.
The X values are listed in the first column and corresponding Y values and bubble size values are listed in the adjacent columns e.g.
No of Products Sales (N) Market Share % 15 21,500 3 25 66,200 10 20 23,000 5 Radar Charts – Data are arranged in columns or rows on a worksheet.
Radar charts compare the aggregate values of number of data series.
You can equally create charts in other Microsoft office environment, such as Office Power Point 2007 and Office Word 2007.
The process of creation is the same as it is in excel.
You can equally copy charts from excel to PowerPoint 2007 and Word 2007.
Modifying Charts You can modify charts after they have been created.
To modify charts, you can:  Change the display of chart axes  Add titles and data labels to a chart  Add legend or data table To make your chart eye-catching, you can format your chart to:  Fill chart elements.
This will enable you use colour, textures, pictures and gradient fills  Change the outline of chart elements  Add special effects to chart elements  Format text and numbers For help, visit the ‘Help Function’ in 2007 Microsoft Excel.
Now let us see how we can present some data with the use of charts.
Example 1 Present the following data with an appropriate chart.
Enrolment in XYZ Primary School 2005 2006 2007 2008 11 9  Boys 234 244 342 234 Girls 231 240 321 231 Column or bar charts will be appropriate for this data.
But for the purpose of this study, we shall use the column chart.
To do this, follow the following procedure: 1.
Enter the data into a worksheet 2.
Select the cells that contain the data 3.
On the Insert tab, in the charts group, click the column chart type and select as desired 4.
A click on selected column chart will appear thus: 120  5.
Click outside the chart and re-click on it, left click without releasing your hand and move the chart to desired position.
6.
To add title, click on the chart, and select layout menu 7.
Click on chart title, and select as desired 12 1  8.
Type in the title of the chart in the box “Chart Title”.
9.
Click outside the chart, your chart is ready.
10.
You may want to remove the border.
To remove the border, right click on the chart and from the drop down menu select “format Chart Area”, after selection you will have: 122  11.
Select ‘Border Color’, and click on ‘no line’, then close.
The resulting effect would be: 12.
You can remove the gridlines.
To remove the gridlines, select click on the chart and select ‘layout menu’, then click on gridlines and select as desired.
The resulting effect would appear thus: 12 3  You can get more effect as desired.
Self Assessment Exercise Get as many data as you can and present them in charts.
You may work in group, or share your experience with your facilitator or colleagues at the completion of the task.
4.0 Conclusion There are various types of charts which can be used to present different types of data.
The kind of data to be presented would determine the type of chart that may be use.
To have a desirable result chart data should be entered appropriately into the excel worksheet.
5.0 Summary There are eleven types of charts in excel.
These include column charts, line charts, pie charts, bar charts, area charts, XY (scatter) charts, stock charts, surface charts, doughnut charts, bubble charts and radar charts.
The type of data to be presented would determine the type of chart that should be used at a time.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Collect data from any form of business and present the data in: a. Pie chart b.
Bar chart 124 c. Bubble chart d. XY (Scatter) chart 7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
12 5  Module 4 Other Applications in Business Unit 1 Graphics Unit 2 Database Unit 3 Microsoft Office Outlook Unit 4 Desktop Tools/Data Communication/Creating Website Unit 1 Graphics Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Graphics are essentials in enriching business documents.
There are major graphics that require special training, which is usually categorised under desktop publishing.
126 However, in the day-to-day business, one may not require major training.
What are these graphics?
Computer graphics refer to any pictorial representation that can be produced by computer, either on the display, printer, plotter, or other output devices (Allen and Klooster, 1990).
Graphics could be charts, diagrams or pictures.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Give examples of computer graphics  Describe the use of paint programs  Solve business problems with simple computer aided graphic designs 3.0 Main Content There are different types of graphic software, some require special skills and others may easily be integrated into documents.
The following are examples of graphic software:  Paint Programs – This allows the user to integrate arts into a document.
 CAD programmes – This is used for computer-aided drafting and used to assist designers of products in drawing plan.
CAD could be contrasted to paint.
 Graphing programs – these include pie, charts, bar graphs etc.
For the business of this course, the paint programme shall be discussed in details.
But before we go on to discuss paint, it is important to know that computer graphics are used in every kind of business e.g.
education, media, manufacturing companies, health etc.
Paint Paint forms a good tool when you want to add special effect to your document e.g.
shapes, this can be duplicated, flip, rotate, tilt the image and as well perform other desired operations.
To access paint, do the following Click start All programmes 12 7  Accessories Paint The arrows indicate the steps.
A click on paint would produce the following: Working under paint environment is very easy.
All you need to understand know is the functions of each tool.
To know what each tool does, place your cursor on a tool, do not click, and it would prompt the function e.g.
This means the “A” sign is a “text” tool.
A click on the text tool would give you a ‘+’ sign.
Draw a rectangle with the sign in the free space and type what ever you desire to 128 type.
As soon as the rectangle shape is drawn a text menu bar comes up.
See the example below: While within the text box, you can format your text as desired using the text tools.
Now let us discuss the function of the other tools: Free – Form Select Eraser/Colour Eraser Pick Colour Pencil Airbrush Line Rectangle Ellipse 12 9 Select Fill with colour Magnifier Brush Text Curve Polygon Rounded Rectangle The tools you will often require to do your work include select, eraser, text, line, pencil and pick colour or fill with colour.
The select tool will enable you to move text or object from one position to another.
To do this, click on select tool and draw a rectangle around the text or object, click and move to desired position.
For any of the tools you want to use, click on it and apply.
Self Assessment Exercises Perform the following task with paint software: a.
Type the words “I love paint software”.
b.
Draw this as it is 130  c. Draw the following.
You may use different colours.
Share your experience with your colleagues.
4.0 Conclusion The use of paint software helps to improve the effect on our documents.
You can copy or cut text or object from paint environment to other environments such as word and excel.
Other graphics software include CorelDraw and Photoshops.
5.0 Summary Graphics help to enhance our business documents.
There are different types of graphic software, but the one that can easily be learned is the paint software.
Others may require more time to train.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) With reference to a particular business problem, present a typed work in which you combine Microsoft word and Paint.
Explain how you achieved your task.
7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office 13 1  Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
Unit 2 Database Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 132 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction A database is a collection of organised data with relationship in their elements.
This can be achieved by using software usually referred to as database management system (DBMS).
Database helps to maintain all relevant data in such a way that it will be useful to its owner for record keeping and decision making.
There are commercial database management soft wares, but apart from the commercially produced database management software, an organisation can have its own customised database software with the help of programmers to meet with the day-to-day running of the organisation.
With the use of commercial database software, you will be able to enter data, manipulate data, and report information from the data without programming.
These functions can be categorised as:  Creating the structure of database  Adding data to the database  Editing data already in the database  Retrieving data  Designing reports  Modifying the structure of the data base The type of computer and the brand of software used would determine how these functions are accessed by commands, by menu choices selected with the keyboard or by making selection with a mouse.
The database software that shall be used for analysis in this unit is Microsoft Office Access 2007.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Identify a database  Solve business problems with Microsoft Office Access 3.0 Main Content 13 3 Database is a collection of related information on a particular subject or purpose.
This may involve tracking customers orders.
Information is usually not from one source.
A database is formed when a collection of information is organised for quick and easy retrieval of needed information.
Database started in paper-based, examples of paper- based database are telephone directories and dictionaries.
A database file divides data into separate storage containers called tables.
You can view, add and update table data through online forms.
This unit will be devoted more to solving business problems with Access.
The basics of Access have been discussed in BED 211 – Microsoft Office.
You should make reference to BED 211, and never forget to use the help function (just press F1 key) any time you need more assistance.
But for the purpose of reminder the following table is presented.
Table 1: General Preview Objects Functions Table To store data.
Create a table for each information that you track.
Query To find and retrieve data.
Query can also be used for updating and deleting multiple records at the same time.
Form A form helps you to view, enter and change data directly in a table.
Report Report helps to analyse your data 134  and present it in the format for printing.
Data Access Page This helps to make data available on the internet fro interactive reporting.
Columns Columns in a table are called fields Rows Rows in a table are called records Table Datasheet View This enables you to add, edit, view and work with data in a table.
Table 2: Working with formulas Use with the data Function Description type(s) Calculates the av erage val ue for a column.
The col umn must Number, Currency, Average contai n numeric, currency, or Date/Ti me date/ti me data.
T he function ignores null values.
13 5  Returns the item wi th the highest val ue.
For text data, t Number, Currency, Maximum he Date/Ti me highest val ue is the last al phabetic value — Access i gnores case.
ThRee ftuunrcntsio tnh eig inteomre ws in thu ltlh vea lues.
lowest value.
For te xt data, the Number, Currency, Minimum lowest value is the first alphabetic Date/Ti me value — Access i gnores case.
The function ignores null values.
Meas ures how widely values are Standard dispersed from an average val ue Number, Currency Deviation (a mea n).
Adds t he items i n a column.
Sum Works only on numeri c and Number, Currency currency data.
Meas ures the statistical variance of al l values in the column.
You can use this functi Variance on Number, Currency only on numeric and currency data.
If t he table contains less than two rows, Access r eturns a null valueS.o urce: Mi crosoft Offi ce Access 2007 For the purpose of solving problems in business, let us look at the following: Working with Query Before you start have a table.
To build a query, do the following as suggested by Microsoft Office Access 2007.
1.
On the Create tab, in the Other group, click Query Wizard.
2.
In the New Query dialog box, click Simple Query Wizard, and then click OK. 3.
Under Tables/Queries, click the table that has the data that you want to use.
In this case, click Table: Customers.
Note that a query can also use another query as a record source.
136 4.
Under Availabl e Fields, double-click the Contact, Address, Phone, and City fields.
This adds them to the Selected Fields list.
When you have added all four fields, click Next.
5.
Name the query London Contacts, and then click Finish.
Access displays all of the contact records in Datasheet view.
The results show all of the records, but show only the four fields that you specified in the query wizard 6.
Close the query, and note that your query is automatically saved.
Calculating Grand Totals Using Query In business transactions, there is often the need to calculate figures, which are used for decision making.
Here are examples: The Order Table Order Order Ship Ship Shipping Fee (N) ID Date Date City 1 11/8/2007 8/12/2007 Benin 1,000.00 2 11/8/2007 8/12/2007 Kano 2,500.00 3 8/15/2007 8/18/2007 Abuja 2,500.00 4 8/20/2007 8/21/2007 Lagos 500.00 5 8/20/2007 8/21/2007 Ibadan 800.00 Order Details Table Detail Order Product Unit Price Quantit Product Name Discount ID ID ID (N) y 1 1 Deep Freezer 12 11,800.95 4 0.05 2 1 Desktop 1 70,000.25 3 0 Computer 3 2 Horse Fan 3 15,000.75 9 0.03 4 2 Giant Size 5 62,875.00 12 0.04 13 7  Order Details Table Detail Order Product Unit Price Quantit Product Name Discount ID ID ID (N) y Generator 5 2 Laptops (Acer) 8 68,699.00 11 0.06 8" 6 3 Microwave oven 9 12,375.00 4 0.09 7 4 Typist Chair 10 868.00 8 0.08 From the above tables, calculate: a.
Simple grand total b.
Calculate grand total that exclude some records To achieve this follow the following procedure as stated in Microsoft Office Access 2007: a.
To calculate simple grand total, do this: i.
On the Create tab, in the Other group, click Query Design.
Then: ii.
In the Show Table dialog box, 138  double-click the table that you want to use in your query, and then click Close.
If you use the sample data, double-click the Orders table.
The table appears in a window in the upper section of the query designer.
iii.
Double-click the field that you want to sum.
Make sure that the field is set to either the Number or Currency data type.
If you try to sum values in non-numeric fields, such as a Text field, Access displays the Data type mismatch in criteria expression error message when you try to run the query.
If you use the sample data, double-click the Shipping Fee column.
NOTE You can add additional numeric fields to the grid if you want to calculate grand totals for those fields.
A totals query can calculate grand totals for more than one column.
iv.
On the Design tab, in the Show/Hi de group, click Totals.
The Total row appears in the design grid and Group By appears in the cell in the Shipping Fee column.
13 9  v. Change the value in the cell in the Total row to Sum.
vi.
Click Run to run the query and display the results in Datasheet view.
TIP Note that Access appends "SumOf" to the beginning of the name of the field that you sum.
To change the column heading to something more meaningful, such as Total Shipping, switch back to Design view, and click in the Field row of the Shipping Fee column in the design grid.
Place the cursor next to Shipping Fee and type the words Total Shipping, followed by a colon, like so: Total Shipping: Shipping Fee.
vii.
Optionally, save the query and close it.
Then the following appears: b.
To calculate a grand total that excludes some records.
Do the following: 1.
On the Create tab, in the Other group, click Query Design.
2.
In the Show Table dialog box, double-click the Order table and Order Details table, and then click Close to close the dialog box.
Then this appears: 140  3.
Add the Order Date field from the Orders table to the first column in the query design grid.
4.
In the Criteria row of the first column, type Date() -1.
That expression excludes the current day's records from the calculated total.
5.
Next, create the column that calculates the sales amount for each transaction.
Type the following expression in the Field row of the second column in the grid: Total Sales Value: (1-[Order Details].
[Discount]/100)*([Or der Details].
[Unit Price]*[Or der Details].
[Quantity]) Make sure your expression references fields set to the Number or Currency data types.
If your expression refers to fields set to other data types, Access displays the message Data type mismatch in criteria expression when you try to run the query.
6.
On the Design tab, in the Show/Hi de group, click Totals.
The Total row appears in the design grid and Group By appears in the first and second columns.
7.
In the second column, change the value in the cell of the Total row to Sum.
The Sum function adds the individual sales figures.
8.
Click Run to run the query and display the results in Datasheet view.
9.
Save the query as Daily Sales.
NOTE The next time that you open the query in Design view, you might notice a slight change in the values specified in the Field and Total rows of the Total Sales Value column.
The expression appears enclosed inside the Sum function, and the Total row displays Expression instead of Sum.
14 1 For example, if you use the sample data and create the query (as shown in the previous steps), you see: Total Sales Value: Sum((1-[Order Details].Discount/100)*([Or der Details].Unitprice*[Or der Details].Quantity)) The use of Microsoft Access is not restricted to buying and selling, it could equally be used in educational institutions.
Access enhance student database.
Self Assessment Exercises Practice the examples given above and share your experience with your colleagues.
4.0 Conclusion Database software enhances decision making in business especially in critical times of solving problems.
But correct data need to be fed into the database so as to be able to get accurate information that would be required for decision making.
5.0 Summary There are different types of database software.
Some are commercially produced while some are customised.
To have a customised software requires a programmer who will programme what is required in the organisation.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) Students' Data First S/N Surname Name School State of Origin 1 Adegoke Judith Education Ondo Arts and Social 2 Okonofua Otihbor Sciences Edo 142  3 Okoro John Law Aba 4 Adeboye Caroline Education Oyo 5 Ujagbe Mary Law Edo 6 Abanikannda Adegoke Business Lagos 7 Amekhiena Maria Business Edo 8 Oyakhilome Ebi Education Ondo Arts and Social 9 Okoruwa Ani Sciences Delta Arts and Social 10 Abraihim Adako Sciences Kano Examination Scores for 2007 Exam First Lev Scores S/N Surname Name School Programme el Course (100%) Business 1 Adegoke Judith Education Education 100 BED 112 40 Arts and Social 2 Okonofua Otihbor Sciences Theology 300 TH 321 50 3 Okoro John Law Criminal Law 200 LAW 55 14 3  223 Primary 4 Adeboye Caroline Education Education 100 PRI 134 66 LAW 5 Ujagbe Mary Law Civil Law 200 222 65 Entrepreneu BHM 6 Abanikannda Adegoke Business rship 300 342 56 Banking and BHM 7 Amekhiena Maria Business Finance 300 223 67 Business EDU 8 Oyakhilome Ebi Education Education 200 223 55 Arts and Social 9 Okoruwa Ani Sciences French 100 FRE 111 68 Arts and Social ENG 10 Abraihim Adako Sciences English 200 221 67 i.
Prepare a database for the above data in the tables ii.
Show the results of serial numbers 2,3,5,6, and 10 with other details of the students 7.0 References/Further Readings 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
144  Unit 3 Microsoft Office Outlook Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction 14 5  Microsoft Office Outlook is very useful in office management.
It has four major areas where its value is very essential in business.
These include mail, calendar, contacts and tasks.
Though the basics of this software has been taught in BED 211 – Microsoft Office, a review of it shall be made in this unit, while the main focus would be on solving business problems using Microsoft Office Outlook 2007.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Organise meetings effectively using Microsoft Office Outlook  Monitor tasks adequately using Microsoft Office Outlook 3.0 Main Content Microsoft Office Outlook 2007 as earlier mentioned has four major features – calendar, contacts, tasks and mail.
We shall discuss these briefly and apply them to some problems that may often arise in business.
With calendar, you can:  Create appointments and events – This can be achieved just the same way you write in a notebook, click anytime slot in the outlook calendar and begin typing.
The current time is highlighted in colour.
You could have message reminder of meetings, appointments, and events.
You can easily colour items for quick identification.
 View group schedules – With calendar you can show the schedules of a group of people or resources simultaneously.
For instance you can view the schedules of all the persons in your department or other units.
 Organise meetings – to organise a meeting, select calendar and create a meeting request.
 View Calendars Side by Side – Different Calendars created by you can be viewed side-by-side and at the same time calendars shared by other outlook users.
Appointments can also be copied and moved between the displayed calendars.
 View Calendars on top of each other in overlay view – This display multiple calendars that you have created as well as calendar shared by other outlook users.
 Manage another user’s calendar – You can manage another person’s calendar with the use of Delegate Access feature.
For example an administrative assistant can manage the calendar of a manager or his boss.
146 With Contacts you can create contacts from within contacts, from an e-mail message that you receive and from electronic Business Cards that you receive.
Tasks – To create a task the following are applicable:  To create and track assigned tasks – after you have completed a task and assign to some one, you may still need to manage it.
For example, you might need status report and updates of the task in progress.
To assign a task, first create the task, and send it as task request to someone.
The person can decline the task, accept the task or assign the task to someone else.
The task is returned to you if it is declined, but even when the declined task is returned to you, it is still owned by the recipient until you reclaim ownership by returning the task to your own task list.
But if you assign a task to more than one person at a time, you would not be able to keep an update copy of that task in your task list.
 To assign a task to someone the following steps are suggested by Microsoft Office 2007: 1.
To assign new task do the following: On the file menu Point to New Click Task Request, then the following will appear 14 7  2.
To assign existing task, do the following: Go to the task list Open the desired task On the Task tab in the manage Task group, click Assign Task  In the box ‘To’, enter the name or e-mail address of the person to whom you want to assign the task.
 Type the name of the task in the subject box.
For an existing task, the subject box is already filled in except you want to change.
 Select the due date and status options as desired.
 Select or clear the keep an updated copy of this task on my task list check box and the send me a status report when this task is complete check box.
 To repeat the task, on the Task tab in the options group, click Recurrence, select desired options and click ok.  In the body of the recurring task, type any information you want to include in the task.
 Click send.
To forward a task to someone else to track, do the following: 1.
Open the task you want to send 2.
On the Task tab, in the manage Task group, click forward 3.
Enter recipient names or e-mail addresses in the, “to” and “cc”, boxes 4.
Type the message at the body of the task 5.
Click send To reclaim a rejected test management, do the following: 148 1.
Open the e-mail message that contains the task request, which you will find in Sent item Folder.
2.
On the Task tab, in the manage Task group, click Return to Task list.
Task can also be reclaimed from the declined task message by clicking Return to Task List.
To track tasks that you have assigned, do the following: Automatically copies of the tasks assigned are kept and you receive automatic status reports.
1.
On the tools menu, click options 2.
Click Task Options 3.
Select the keep updated copies of assigned tasks on my task list check box 4.
Select the send status reports when assigned tasks are completed check box To view Tasks Assigned to others, do the following: 1.
Click Tasks 2.
On the View Menu, point to Current View and then click Assignment To view the list of people who received updated copies of an assigned task, do the following: 1.
Open the assigned task you want to view the list 2.
From the Details tab, view the names in the Update list box To Accept or decline a task assignment, do the following: 1.
Open the task or task request 2.
On the Task tab, in the manage Task group, click Accept or Decline 3.
Then: a. Click edit the response before sending, type your comment in the message and click send.
b. Click send the response now To send a status report or a comment about a task assignment, do the following: 1.
Open the task for which you want to send a status report or comment 2.
On the Task Tab, in the Manage Task group, click either Send Status Report, Reply or Reply to All 3.
Enter recipient names or e-mail addresses in the To and cc boxes 4.
Type any information that you want to include at the status report in the body of the message 5.
Click send 14 9  To create an e-mail message, do the following: This is the most frequent task that is performed in Microsoft Office Outlook.
Follow the process of creating the usual e-mail.
Click on the e-mail option and follow the display on the menu.
To set the delivery Options: Setting message in the order of importance enables the recipients to sort their message important.
To do this, go to the message Tab in the option group, click High Importance or Low Importance.
To set message expiring date, do the following: 1.
On the option tab, in the more options group, click the message Options group, click the message options Dialog Box Launcher 2.
In the Message Options dialog box, under Delivery Options, select the Expires after checkbox and click a date or time.
In Delay Sending a Message, do the following: 1.
On the options tab, in the More Options group, click delivery 2.
Click delivery date and time that you desire With this review of our Microsoft Office Outlook, let us look at the following problems: Proble m A Company XYZ has it’s headquarters office at Abuja but with branches in the 36 states of the country Nigeria.
The company runs a central administration from the headquarters at Abuja.
The Head of Administration has new tasks to assign to all heads of units at the various branches which must be accomplished within one week of assignment.
He has the following information to pass across.
Head of Start Date S/N e-mail Address Branch Message Unit of Task Mr. K.O.
1 oakaka@xyz.com Kano Akaka Mr. E. B.
2 badeboye@xyz.com Ibadan To send the update of all transactions within Adeboye the last four months to the headquarter on or 1/10/2009 Mrs. H. E. 3 eikejama@xyz.com Benin before 7th October, 2009 Ikejama Ms. K. K. 4 kudoh@xyz.com Warri Udoh 150  Mr. Ada 5 aada@xyz.com Lagos Ada Mr. J. K. 6 kokouwa@xyz.com Minna Okouwa Mr. J. J.
7 jjohnson@xyz.com Zaira Johnson From the above information and with the use of Microsoft Office Outlook, a.
Assign task to heads of units b.
Forward the task to the head of units in the specified branches c. Track the assigned task to head of units d. Send a status report on the assigned task To achieve these tasks the following procedure would be taken: 1.
Assign task to heads of units To do this, click on file menu, point to the New Then click Task Request, and the following will appear: 15 1  In the box ‘To’, enter the name or e-mail addresses.
In this instance, we shall use head of units.
In addition, the name of the task, due date and status options, keep an updated and other necessary boxes were filled.
See below: Then click send.
2.
Forward the task to the head of units in the specified branches 152 To forward the task to the head of units, their e-mail address would be used.
Every other entry may remain the same.
After entry the necessary data, your box will appear thus: A click on ‘forward’ on the Task tab, will give you: Enter the recipient names or e-mail addresses in the to and cc boxes and type the message at the body of the task, then you will have: 15 3  Click send 3.
Track the assigned task to head of units To track the assigned task, on the tool menu, Click options, you will have 154  Then click Task options, and you will have: Then click OK. 4.
Send a status report on the assigned task To send status report, open the task for which you want to send a status report or comment.
In this instance, we will open the task we are using currently, which we call ‘Task on Going’.
Then on the task bar, in the manage Task group, click send status Report.
15 5  Enter recipient names or e-mail addresses in the To and cc boxes and type any information that you want to include at the status report in the body of the message.
Self Assessment Exercises Practice these steps once more and share your experience with your colleagues.
4.0 Conclusion The use of Microsoft Office Outlook enhances communication within an office.
It could be used to replace paper memoranda.
5.0 Summary Microsoft Office Outlook 2007 covers the management of mail, calendars, contacts and tasks; which are basic requirements for the smooth running of any type of business.
Go through the steps above to ensure adequate usage of Outlook.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) With reference to a particular business, identify the problem areas that require the use of Microsoft Office Outlook.
Explain how Microsoft Office Outlook can be used to solve the problems.
7.0 References/Further Readings 156 2007 Microsoft Office Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
Unit 4 Desktop Tools/Data Communicati on/Creati ng Website Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 15 7 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction We have discussed some major software that enhance business transactions, such software Microsoft Office Word, Microsoft Office Excel, Microsoft Office Access and Microsoft Office Outlook.
In this unit, we shall discuss other features, though not very major are essential in electronic office administration.
This includes Desktop tools, Data Communication and creating website.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  Apply simple desktop tools in solving business problems with ease  Choose adequate communication hardware and software to solve diverse business problems  Direct the basics of web creation 3.0 Main Content The three main areas of concentration in the desktop tools in this unit shall be ‘the Address Book’, ‘Calculator’ and ‘Notepad’.
But the address book shall be discussed in details.
The address book provides convenient way storing important information about people; finding business partners; creating contact; sending and receiving business cards electronically.
The calculator is simplified for any user to be able to solve simple mathematical challenges and the notepad is designed for easy typing of data.
To launch these tools; click start, point to programmes, point to accessories and click on the desired tool.
Storing Contact There are different ways of adding contact to address book.
These shall be discussed as detailed by the package (See Help Function in Address Book).
To add names directly from e-mail messages to your Address Book, You can set up Outlook Express so that when you reply to a message, the people you reply to are automatically added to your Address Book.
In addition, any time you send or 158 receive a message in Outlook Express, you can add the recipient's or sender's name to your Address Book.
To add all replies recipients to your Address Book 1.
In Outlook Express, on the Tools menu, click Options.
2.
On the Send tab, click Automatically put people I reply to in my Address Book.
To add an individual name to your Address Book from Outlook Express  In a message you are viewing or replying to, right-click the person's name, and then click Add to Address Book.
 In the message list of your Inbox or other mail folder, right-click a message, and then click Add Sender to Address Book.
To import an address book from another program You can import address book contacts from other Windows Address Book files (.wab), as well as from Netscape Communicator, Microsoft Exchange Personal Address Book, or any text (.csv) file.
For Windows Address Book files: 1.
In Address Book, on the File menu, point to Import, and then click Address Book (WAB).
2.
Locate and select the address book you want to import, and then click Open.
For all other address book formats: 1.
In the Address Book, on the File menu, point to Import, and then click Other Address Books.
2.
Click the address book or file type you want to import, and then click Import.
If your address book is not listed, you can export it to either a text (.csv) file or an LDIF (LDAP Directory Interchange Format) file, and then import it using that file type.
To add a contact to your Address Book 1.
On the Outlook Express toolbar, click Tools, and then click Address Book.
2.
In the Address Book, select the folder to which you want to add a contact.
3.
On the Address Book toolbar, click New, and then click New Contact.
4.
On the Name tab, type at least the first and last name of the contact.
This is the display name.
A display name is required for each contact.
If you enter a first, middle, or last name, it will automatically appear in the Display box.
You can change the display name by typing in a different name or by selecting from the drop-down list.
The drop-down list will contain variations of the first, middle, and last name, as well as 15 9 anything you typed in the Nickname box or the Compa ny box on the Business tab.
5.
On each of the other tabs, add any information you would like to include.
Notes  Be sure to include an e-mail address for your contact.
While your Address Book can be used for many purposes, its most immediate benefit is in providing e-mail addresses when you are composing mail.
 If you include a contact's street address on the Home tab or the Business tab, you can click View Map located on each of these tabs to display a printable street map showing the contact's address.
To find people and businesses on the Internet 1.
In the Address Book, click Find People on the toolbar.
2.
From the Look in drop-down list, select the directory you want to search.
3.
On the People tab, type the name or e-mail address of the person you want to look for, and then click Find Now.
-or- On the Advanced tab, define the search criteria you want by filling in the top three boxes, and then click Add.
Add all the search criteria you want, and then click Find Now.
(To remove a search criterion you added, select the item you want to delete from the Define Criteria list, and then click Remove.
Or, if you want to delete all criteria and start over, click Clear All.)
Notes  Your search will be most efficient if you use starts with or is.
The options for contains, ends with, or sounds like can make your search take much longer, possibly so long that the search fails.
The more exact your search criteria, the faster the result.
 If your search is too broad, the number of matches might exceed the limits of the server, or your directory service settings might not be set up to handle all of the returned matches.
You can change these directory service settings.
To import a business card 1.
In the Address Book, on the File menu, point to Import, and then click Business Card (vCar d).
160 2.
Locate the business card file on your computer or a network drive, select it, and then click Open.
Note  When the business card is added to your Address Book, a dialog box appears where you can modify or add to the contact information as necessary.
 Once the contact's street address is entered on the Business tab, you can click the tab's View Map button to display a map pinpointing the address.
When you click View Maps, Expedia Maps opens in your browser with a printable street map showing the contact's address.
To change contact information  In the Address Book list, locate and double-click the name you want, and then change the information as needed.
Click the tabs to access different information sections.
Note  To delete a contact, select the contact name in the Address Book list, and then click Delete on the toolbar.
If the contact is a member of a group, the name will also be removed from the group.
To create a group of contacts You can create a single group name (or alias) to use when sending a message to several contacts at once.
Simply create a group name and add individual contacts to the group.
Then, just type the group name in the To box when you send e-mail.
1.
In the Address Book, select the folder in which you want to create a group.
Click New on the toolbar, and then click New Group.
2.
The Properties dialog box opens.
In the Group Name box, type the name of the group.
3.
There are several ways to add people to the group: o To add a person from your Address Book list, click Select Members, and then click a name from the Address Book list.
o To add a person directly to the group without adding the name to your Address Book, type the person's name and e-mail address in the lower half of the Properties dialog box, and then click Add.
o To add a person to both the group and your Address Book, click New Contact and fill in the appropriate information.
16 1 o To use a directory service, click Select Members, and then click Find.
Select a directory service from the drop-down list at the end of the text box.
After finding and selecting an address, it is automatically added to your Address Book.
4.
Repeat for each addition until your group is defined.
Note  To view a list of your groups separately from the Address Book listings, in the Address Book, on the View menu, make sure that Folders and Groups is selected.
 You can create multiple groups, and contacts can belong to more than one group.
To add a contact to an existing group 1.
In the Address Book list, double-click the group you want.
The group's Properties dialog box opens.
2.
You can add people to the group in several ways —and in some cases you can add them to your Address Book as well.
o To add a person from your Address Book list, click Select Members, and then click a name from the Address Book list.
Click Select, and then click OK. o To use a directory service (use the drop-down list at the end of the text box to see directories you have added to Outlook Express), click Select Members, and then click Find.
Select a directory service to search, enter your search criteria, and when you find the person, click Select, and then click OK.
This person's name and e-mail address is added to your Address Book.
o To add a person directly to the group without adding the name to your Address Book, type the person's name and e-mail address in the boxes provided in the lower half of the dialog box, and then click Add.
o To add a person to both the group and your Address Book, click New Contact, fill in the appropriate information, and click OK. To create a business card The easiest way to exchange contact information with people over the Internet is by attaching a business card to e-mail messages.
A business card is your contact information from the Address Book in vCard format.
The vCard format can be used with a wide variety of digital devices and operating systems.
You must have your contact information in your Address Book before you can create a business card.
162  1.
In the Address Book, create an entry for yourself, and then select your name from the Address Book list.
2.
On the File menu, point to Export, and then click Business Card (vCar d).
3.
Select a location in which to store the file, and then click Save.
Note  To add your business card to an e-mail message, on the Insert menu, click My Business Card.
To add a contact's digital ID to your Address Book To send someone encrypted mail, you must have the recipient's digital ID, and that ID must be associated with the recipient's name in your Address Book.
Outlook Express automatically adds digital IDs to your Address Book when you receive digitally signed mail.
If you have turned off this option, you will need to manually add a contact's digital ID.
1.
Open the digitally signed message.
2.
On the File menu, click Properties.
3.
Click the Security tab, and then click Add digital ID to the address book.
When a contact has a digital ID, a red ribbon is added to their card in your Address Book.
To add a digital ID to your Address Book from another source 1.
In the Address Book, create a new entry for the contact, or double-click an existing one in the Address Book list.
2.
On the Digital IDs tab, click Import.
3.
Find the digital ID file, and then click Open.
Notes  To automatically add a contact's digital ID to your Address Book, on the Tools menu, click Options.
Then on the Security tab, click Advanced, and select Add senders' certificates to my address book.
 You can also get someone's digital ID by downloading it from a certification authority's Web site.
(See the Microsoft Internet Explorer Digital ID site for links to certification authorities.)
To organize names in your Address Book 16 3 When you have a large Address Book, you can organize it in several ways to make it easy to retrieve contacts and groups.
 To sort contacts by name, e-mail address, or phone number, click the appropriate column heading above the name list.
 To switch columns between ascending and descending sort order, click the column heading.
 To change the order of the columns, point to a column heading (Name, E-mail Address, Home Phone, and so on), and then drag the column to the left or right until it's located where you want it.
 To view a list of your mailing groups, on the View menu, select Folders and Groups.
What are identities?
Creating identities is a way for several people to use Outlook Express and the Address Book on the same computer.
For example, you and a family member may share a computer.
If you each create an identity, you would each see your own mail and your own contacts when you log on under your identity.
Once your identity is created, you can organize your contacts the way you want them by creating subfolders.
Usually, you will create identities while you are using Outlook Express (or other applications that use identities).
You can create identities from your Address Book only when you open your Address Book from the Start menu rather than from Outlook Express.
To open Address Book from the Start menu, click Start, point to All Progra ms, point to Accessories, and then click Address Book.
Organizing contacts and folders You can keep contacts in your main folder, as well as organize them into subfolders.
If you have contacts you would like to share with the other people with whom you share Outlook Express, you can move contacts into the Shared Contact's folder, where other identities can view them when they use the Address Book.
Subfolders are always in alphabetical order; you cannot reorganize them.
If you cannot see the folders on the left, point to the View menu and select Folders and Groups.
Deleting contacts from your Address Book You can easily remove contacts and groups from your Address Book.
When you delete a contact from a group, the name is removed from the group but the entries for both the 164 group and the individual remain in your Address Book.
Likewise, deleting an entire group does not remove the entries for the individual members who made up the group.
To print Address Book information 1.
In the Address Book, select the contacts you want to print.
o To select a block of names, press and hold down the SHIFT key, click the first name in the block and then click the last name in the block.
o To select individual names, press and hold down the CTRL key while you click the names.
2.
Click Print on the toolbar.
On the Print dialog box, under Print Style, select a printing style: o To print all Address Book information about the contacts, click Memo.
o To print business-related information about the contacts, click Business Card.
o To print a list of phone numbers for the selected contacts, click Phone List.
Note  You may be able to customize the size and orientation of your printed Address Book pages.
To view your printer's options, in the Print dialog box, click Properties.
Finding People using Directory Service What are directory services?
A directory service is a powerful search tool that you can use to find people and businesses around the world.
The Address Book supports LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) for accessing directory services, and it comes with built-in access to several popular directory services.
You can also add additional directory services from your Internet service provider.
Like the Internet search tools, directory services use different methods for collecting data, so when you are trying to find people or businesses online, you might try more than one service.
To add a directory service To add a directory service to your Address Book, you will need the name of the computer server (available from the directory service provider).
1.
In either the Address Book or Outlook Express, on the Tools menu, click Accounts.
16 5 2.
In Outlook Express, select the Directory Service tab, click Add, click Directory Service, and then follow the instructions in the Internet Connection Wizard.
In the Address Book, click Add, and follow the instructions in the Internet Connection Wizard To find people and businesses on the Internet 1.
In the Address Book, click Find People on the toolbar.
2.
From the Look in drop-down list, select the directory you want to search.
3.
On the People tab, type the name or e-mail address of the person you want to look for, and then click Find Now.
-or- On the Advanced tab, define the search criteria you want by filling in the top three boxes, and then click Add.
Add all the search criteria you want, and then click Find Now.
(To remove a search criterion you added, select the item you want to delete from the Define Criteria list, and then click Remove.
Or, if you want to delete all criteria and start all over, click Clear All.)
Notes  Your search will be most efficient if you use starts with or is.
The options for contains, ends with, or sounds like can make your search take much longer, possibly so long that the search fails.
The more exact your search criteria, the faster the result.
 If your search is too broad, the number of matches might exceed the limits of the server, or your directory service settings might not be set up to handle all of the returned matches.
You can change these directory service settings.
To set up a directory service to check for e-mail addresses When you can't remember someone's complete e-mail address, you can enter a partial name and then use the Check Names command on the Tools menu to search for matches.
Outlook Express first searches your Address Book and if no matches are found, searches the directory services you have set up to check e-mail addresses.
1.
In the Address Book or Outlook Express, on the Tools menu, click Accounts.
2.
If you are in Outlook Express, click the Directory Service tab.
3.
Select a directory service, and then click Properties.
4.
On the General tab, select the Check names against this server when sending mail 166  Using Your Address Book with other Programmes To export your Address Book contacts to other programs You can export your Address Book contacts to other Windows Address Book (.wab) files, as well as to Microsoft Exchange Personal Address Book, or any text (.csv) file.
To export your Address Book files to another Windows Address Book: 1.
In Address Book, on the File menu, point to Export, and then click Address Book (WAB).
2.
Locate and select the Windows Address Book file you want to export to, and then click Open.
For all other address book formats: 1.
In the Address Book, on the File menu, point to Export, and then click Other Address Book.
2.
Click the address book or file type you want to export to, and then click Export.
To set up a conference call from the Address Book If you use Microsoft NetMeeting or other conferencing software, you can store conferencing account information (such as e-mail and server addresses) along with other contact information and then make a conferencing call directly from the Address Book.
1.
In the Address Book, double-click the contact name.
2.
On the NetMeet ing tab, type the Conferencing Server address.
(If NetMeeting is not installed, this tab is named Conferencing).
3.
Type the Confere ncing Address for the contact.
This address must be the one used for conferencing, which could be different from the contact's e-mail address.
4.
Click Add to add this information to the contact's properties.
Now, whenever you want to initiate a conference call, you can click Call Now on the NetMeeti ng (or Conferencing) tab of the contact's properties.
Note  You can have multiple e-mail addresses and directory servers listed for one contact.
16 7  Communicati on No business can function without communication.
Data communication is achieved by using communication hardware, software and transmission carriers.
Computers that are connected to communicate with each other are referred to as ‘being network.’ Advantages of Data Communication A good data communication leads to the following advantages:  More individuals have access to available hard and software  Expensive equipment can be shared  Data can be shared among users  Many tasks can be completed more conveniently and effectively Disadva ntages of Data Communicati on Apart from the advantages associated with the use of data communication, there are equally disadvantages as stated below:  There would be no work once the mainframe computer goes down  High cost for backup systems and maintenance  Cost for transmission carriers can be high  Needs high trained and experienced personnel  Problem of incompatibility among hardware and software that may highly arise Uses of Communicati on Hard and Software 1.
Bulletin Board Systems.
This involves sharing and exchanging ideas and information, which could come in: a.
Electronic mail b.
General messages and announcements c. File library that the user can download 2.
Information Services.
The area of information services include: a.
Local and national news b.
Weather c. Travel d. Recipes e. shopping 3.
Bibliographic Services.
This is connected with library, and is as used in the library.
168 4.
Stock Exchange Services.
This includes: a.
Comprehensive company profile as per investors, earning forecast, price/volume, charts, financial history b.
Up-to-date stock prices and quotes c. Individual customer portfolio management 5.
Electronic banking and transfer of funds Creating a Web Site It is advisable to have basic ideas about web site creation.
You are not required to be an expert.
With the advent of electronic marketing, you may be required to customise your company’s web site.
To develop a web site requires the creation of a team.
The team includes: 1.
Graphic designers – they develop the visual appearance and create graphic images of the site.
2.
Marketing representative – Sets the goals for the web side and controls the presence of the organisation.
3.
Content developer and editor – prepares and evaluates the content.
4.
Director – This could also be referred to as webmaster.
He co-ordinates teams’ activities and at the same time manages web development.
5.
Programmer – Creates HTML documents and develops server processing.
6.
Systems administrator – Conversant with web server limitations, manages security and access and maintains system hardware.
Developing a website involves the following activities:  Define the goal and purpose of the web site.
This will include: o Primary intent o Short and long-term goals o Intended audience o Website plan – objectives, requirements and results.
 Determine and prepare the web site’s content.
After the plan, the next stage is to develop the website content.
(gather relevant documents), you may re-visit the planning team for information.
 Designing the website.
This may include: o Working with the organisation objectives o Preparing a sitemap o Building the site  FrontPage is used to build and create a web site  In building and creating web site, you need to:  Determine the number of page web site 16 9  Specify the browser version  Specify the page size o Text in web page – to determine the type of text a web page should have you need to:  Determine the format  Proofread the content o Language used – The common language used is Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), which can be viewed with the use of FrontPage.
Self Assessment Exercise With the aid of the above illustrations, organise your Address Book.
Share your experience with your colleagues.
4.0 Conclusion In conclusion, it should be noted that there is no business that will be able to achieve a desired goal in this technological age without effective use of the computer in the administration of the business.
A good use of the computer application leads to effectiveness and efficiency in business.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have discussed elaborately, the use of Address Book.
But we should not forget the use of calculator and Notepad.
The Notepad can be likened to a note pad used in long hand.
Microsoft Power Point was not discussed in this course because it has been fully taught in BED 211.
But for the purpose of completeness, PowerPoint is very essential during presentation, especially when you want to have a demonstration of your product.
All the required effect can always be added for the purpose of illustrations.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) With reference to a particular organisation, explain how Address Book would help the business achieve its goal.
Demonstrate the process.
7.0 References/Further Read 2007 Microsoft Office 170  Allen C. and Klooster (1990).
Computers and Information Processing.
U.S.A. South- Western Publishing Co.
Bowling Green State University – College of Education and Human Development – Busine.
http://www.bgsu.edu/catalog/EDHD/EDHD31.html.
Retrieved 13th February, 2006 Burke L. and Weill B.
(2000).
Information Technology for the Health Professions.
U.S.A. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey.
Debra Cross/Frank Akaiwa karleen Nordquist/Jessica Evans (2006).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A., Thomson Course Technology.
Gross D., Akaiwa F., Nordquist K. and Evans J.
(2008).
Business Computing Using Excel and FrontPage.
U.S.A. Thomson Course Technology.
Peter Norton (1999).
Introduction to Computers (3rd Edition).
Glencoe McGraw – Hill, New York, Woodland Hills, California, Peoria, Illinois.
17 1
