 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA COURSE CODE :BED 115 COURSE TITLE: FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION  BED 115 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Course Writer Victor-Igue, Juliet Federal College of Education (Technical) Umuneze Anambra State Course Developer Inegbedion, Juliet O National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor Associate Prof L.E.
Ekpenyong Faculty of Education UNIBEN Course Coordinator Inegbedion, Juliet O National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii  BED 115 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-091-3 All Rights Reserved iii  BED 115 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………………… 1 What You Will Learn in the Course…………………………….. 1 Course Aims …………………………………………………….
1 Course Objectives…………..…………………………………… 1 Working through this Course…………………………………….. 2 Course Materials……………………………………………..….. 2 Study Units……………………………………….……………… 2 Textbooks and References …………………………………..….. 3 Assignment File………………………………………………….
3 Presentation Schedule…………………………………………….
3 Assessment ……………………………………………………… 3 Tutor-Marked Assignment ……………….……………………… 4 Final Examination and Grading ……………………………….… 4 Course Marking Scheme……………………………………….... 4 How to Get Most from this Course……………………………… 4 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials……………………..………….. 6 Conclusion ……………….……………………………………... 6 iv  Introduction Foundations of Vocational Education.
This is a 2-credit unit course designed to equip the learners with basic knowledge/information about the concept of vocational education especially in Nigeria.
Some technical words/terms will be explained and you will be enabled to appreciate vocational education as a field of study.
You will be taken through the concept, basic foundations and the need assessment of vocational education, vocational areas and services, the future of vocational guidance as well as the evaluation of vocational education in Nigeria.
What You Will Learn in the Course You will be taken through the concept and need assessment of vocational education, vocational areas and services, the future of vocational guidance as well as evaluation of vocational education in Nigeria.
Course Aims There are nineteen study units in the course and each unit has its objectives.
You should read the objectives of each unit and bear them in mind as you go through the unit.
In addition to the objectives of each unit, the overall aims of this course include: (i) To produce teachers who can teach the concept of vocational education at the secondary school and industrial levels.
(ii) To have well-informed teachers who can appreciate and apply the knowledge of vocational education in teaching and learning.
(iii) To produce an effective work force for various industries and establishments.
Course Objectives The objectives of this course are: To explain the basic terms/concept of vocational education.
To provide information on the various foundations of vocational education.
To educate learners on the need assessment of vocational education.
To enlighten learners on various vocational areas and services To educate learners on the future of vocational guidance in Nigeria.
BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION To equip the learners with skills for the evaluation of vocational education in Nigeria.
Working through this Course You have to work through all the study units in the course.
There are five modules and nineteen study units in all.
Course Materials The major components of the course are: 1.
Course guide 2.
Study units 3.
Textbooks 4.
CDS 5.
A tutor/facilitator 6.
Assignments file 7.
Presentation schedule Study Units The breakdown of the five modules and nineteen study units are as follows: Module 1 Concept of Vocational Education Unit 1 Introduction Unit 2 Philosophical and Historical Foundations Unit 3 Sociological and Economic Foundations Module 2 Need Assessment of Vocational Education Unit 1 Objectives of Vocational Education Unit 2 Importance of Vocational Education Unit 3 Problems and Prospects of Vocational Education Module 3 Vocational Areas and Services Unit 1 Agricultural Science and Home Economics Education Unit 2 Business and Distributive Education Unit 3 Computer Education Unit 4 Fine and Applied Arts Education Unit 5 Industrial Technical Education Module 4 Future of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria ii  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Unit 1 Meaning of Vocational Guidance Unit 2 Importance of Vocational Guidance Unit 3 Present State of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria Unit 4 The Future and Prospects of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria Module 5 Evaluation of Vocational Education Unit 1 The Meaning of Evaluation Unit 2 The Need for Evaluation Unit 3 Types of Evaluation in Vocational Education Unit 4 Post-Evaluation Follow-Up Textbooks and References Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try to get all or some of the textbooks and materials listed.
The textbooks and materials are meant to deepen your knowledge of the course.
Assignment File In this file, you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for this course.
Further information on assignments will be found in the assignment file itself and later in this course guide in the section on assessment.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment Your assessment will be based on tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and a final examination which you will write at the end of the course.
Tutor-Marked Assignment iii  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit them for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select four; which will be marked and the best three will be selected which will constitute the 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignments may be presented to you in a separate file.
Just know that for every unit there are some tutor-marked assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
Final Examination and Grading At the end of the course, you will write a final examination which will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination which shall last for two hours, you will be requested to answer three questions out of at least five questions.
Course Marking Scheme This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignment Four assignments, best three marks of the four count as 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks How to Get Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecturer.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, but the study units tell you when to read, and which are your test materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The iv  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your text books or from a reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor‟s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
In addition do the following: 1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment.
2.
Organize a study schedule; design a „Course Overview‟ to guide you through the course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information, e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
You will need your text book and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
6.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
7.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 weeks before the due dates), keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
v  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit‟s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor‟s comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials The dates, times and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and the address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to the comments your tutor might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Conclusion This course will furnish you with the requisite knowledge or information you need to understand and appreciate the concept of vocational education.
Best wishes as you read though this course.
vi  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION MAIN COURSE Course Code BED 115 Course Title Foundations of Vocational Education Course Writer Victor-Igue, Juliet Federal College of Education (Technical) Umuneze Anambra State Course Developer Inegbedion, Juliet O National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor Associate Prof L.E.
Ekpenyong Faculty of Education UNIBEN Course Coordinator Inegbedion, Juliet O National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA vii  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2009 ISBN: 978-058-091-3 All Rights Reserved viii  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Concept of Vocational Education …………….….
1 Unit 1 Introduction………………………………….….….. 1 Unit 2 Philosophical and Historical Foundations……….….
7 Unit 3 Sociological and Economic Foundations……….….. 20 Module 2 Need Assessment of Vocational Education ……… 30 Unit 1 Objectives of Vocational Education………..……….
30 Unit 2 Importance of Vocational Education…………..…… 36 Unit 3 Problems and Prospects of Vocational Education….. 41 Module 3 Vocational Areas and Services …………………… 49 Unit 1 Agricultural and Home Economics Education…..….. 49 Unit 2 Business and Distributive Education………………… 54 Unit 3 Computer and Science Education…………………….
57 Unit 4 Fine and Applied Arts Education…………………….. 60 Unit 5 Industrial Technical Education……………………….
62 Module 4 The Future of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria ….
65 Unit 1 The Meaning of Vocational Guidance ……………… 65 Unit 2 The Importance of Vocational Guidance…………….
71 Unit 3 The Present State of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria……………………………………………….
77 Unit 4 The Future and Prospect of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria…………………………………….……… 84 Module 5 Evaluation of Vocational Education …………….. 89 Unit 1 The Meaning of Evaluation………………………….
89 Unit 2 The Need for Evaluation…………………………….
96 Unit 3 Types of Evaluation in Vocational Education……… 99 Unit 4 Post-Evaluation Follow-Up…………………..……… 105 ix   BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION MODULE 1 CONCEPT OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION This module is designed to introduce you to the basic concepts of the foundations of vocational education.
Taking time to digest these concepts will enhance your understanding and appreciation of the entire course.
To gain the required basic understanding, you will be taken through the following units: Unit 1 Introduction Unit 2 Philosophical and Historical Foundations Unit 3 Sociological and Economic Foundations UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Terms 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education is the most valuable treasure any nation can give to its citizens.
Functional education should be geared towards the acquisition of knowledge and information as well as relevant competencies (skills, attitudes, aptitudes, etc).
Effective education therefore should go beyond mere literacy - ability to read and write.
It should incorporate ability to “do” and “apply” that is, it should equip the learners with some form of technical know-how.
The number of unemployed graduates in Nigeria suggests that most of them do not possess relevant, saleable, employable or even entrepreneurial skills that are needed in the society.
This partly explains why the nation has remained economically dependent till date.
This is because most nations who are economic giants today, started by equipping their citizens with the right type of education - education that will enable them use both their heads and hands.
The type of education 1  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION that equips its recipients with such abilities to think is generally described to work as vocational education.
This type of education is very crucial to every nation particularly those that are still “developing” such as Nigeria.
The reason is that economic stability and independence is a product of technological status and independence.
Nations and in fact individuals should therefore aspire to acquire education that is “work-oriented”.
This material is prepared to equip you with the basic information and knowledge that will enhance your understanding and appreciation of the concept of vocational and technical education (TVE).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: explain various words/terms used in technical and vocational education describe the philosophical and historical foundations of technical and vocational education explain the sociological and economic foundations of vocational education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Terms An explanation of the following words and terms within the context of technical and vocational education will enhance your understanding and appreciation of the course.
A. Vocation: This can be described as a job you do because you strongly feel that doing it is the purpose of your life.
It can also be seen as a job you do by way of rendering service or help to others.
A vocation can also refer to those work activities in which one is specially gifted.
People generally are committed to their vocations; find them intrinsically rewarding and perform them with great autonomy as well as feelings of satisfaction, importance and relevance.
B.
Job: This refers to anything you do to earn your living especially if you work for someone else.
Jobs are task-outcomes and organization-centred.
2  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION C. Work: This can be defined as a regular physical or mental activity for which someone is paid.
Work can also be voluntary (when you are not paid) or entrepreneurial (when you are working for yourself).
Work is a task that must be performed, i.e.
it is obligatory.
It is a kind of identity because it gives you a sense of purpose; affects your attitudinal behaviour, values, priorities, e.t.c, and even determines the kind of people you interact with.
Job and work are inter-related and are sometimes substituted for each other.
D. Occupation: An occupation is a definable work activity that occurs in various settings.
It is an individual‟s main source of living - the kind of work one does on a regular basis.
This means that your occupation refers to the kind of work or job you do over a period of time.
E. Profession: This refers to the kind of work or job that requires special training and education e.g.
law, accountancy, architecture, nursing, e.t.c.
Some professions such as medicine, teaching and nursing can also be called vocations because some people do them not just to make a lot of money but as service to humanity.
F. Career: This can be defined as the type of work or job an individual has been trained for and which he does or hopes to do for a long time i.e.
most of his working life.
It refers to the total sequence or pattern of jobs performed throughout a person‟s working life.
What we have learnt so far can be summarized with the simple diagrams below: Work Job Occupation Means of livelihood Vocation Profession Career More than mere means of livelihood 3  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION G. Education: This can be defined as the process of acquiring knowledge, skills, aptitudes, and attitudes necessary for effective living.
H. Vocational Training: This refers to any training that equips you with the skills you need to do a particular job.
It can be described as any skill training where the basic scientific knowledge behind the said skills are ignored or not emphasized.
I. Pre-Vocational Education: This refers to that level of skill training for skill acquisition, which may or may not enable one to gain entry into gainful employment; but rather forms a basis for actual vocational education.
J.
Vocational Education: This is education designed to prepare individuals or skilled personnel for one or a group of occupations, trader or jobs.
In Nigeria, vocational education is usually offered as the senior secondary schools or technical colleges and includes general education, practical skills and recounted theories required by the chosen occupation .
K. Technical Education: This is the form of education which is offered at the upper secondary level, lower tertiary institutions (e.g.
polytechnic) to prepare middle level (technical and middle manager, etc), and as the university and the HND levels to prepare, engineers, businessmen managers and technologists for higher management positions.
Technical education includes general education, technical studies and related skills training .
L. Vocational and Technical Education: Vocational education or technical and vocational education is a term used comprehensively to refer to the educational process to which involves, in addition to general education, the study of technologies and related sciences skills and knowledge relating to occupations in various sectors of economic and social life.
M. Formal Education: This refers to all educational programmes provided within approved public institutions.
N. Non-Formal Education: This is described as all types of functional education offered outside the formal school system.
It is any organized educational activity outside the established formal system of education.
O.
Informal Education: this is a generally unorganized process whereby every individual acquires attitudes, values, skills and 4  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION knowledge from daily experiences and the educative influences and resources in his/her environment including family and neighbours, work, play, books, library and the mass-media, etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE In your own word state the difference between „Education‟, and „Training”.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is vital that you know the operational definitions and meanings of various words and terms used in vocational and technical education.
This will enhance your understanding and appreciation of the entire course.
I suggest you go through this unit slowly once more before proceeding to unit 2 where we shall be discussing the philosophical and historical foundations of vocational education.
5.0 SUMMARY The concept of Vocational Education aims at equipping individuals to use their heads and hands in order to survive in a world that is essentially work-oriented.
Words and terms such as vocation, job, work, occupation, profession, career, education, vocational training, pre- vocational training, Vocational Education, e.t.c need to be thoroughly understood in order to appreciate the various forms of Vocational Education as we have it today.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What constitute the following?
(i) Education (ii) Technical and vocation (iii)Technical education 2.
How would you explain to the novice the differences among the following?
(i) Formal education; informal education (ii) Non formal education 5  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amadi, U. P. N. Orikpe, E. A. and Osinem, C. E. (1998).
“Introduction to Vocational and Technical Education”.
Owerri: Alphabet Nigeria‟s Publishers.
Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Ekpenyong, L. E. (1989).
“The Contribution of Human Resources to Economic Growth “Some Unfolding Realities of African Education Policy”.
African Journal of education 1(1).
Ekpenyong, L. E. & Nwabuisi, J. N. (2003).
“Business Teacher Education in Nigeria: Projecting a New Direction”.
Journal of Vocational Education Training 55(1) United Kingdom: Tnangle Journals Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
“National Policy on Education” Revised.
Lagos: Federal Ministry of Education, Printing Division.
Ogwo, B.
A.
& Oranu, R. N. (2006).
“Methodology in Formal and Non- Formal Technical/Vocational Education”.
Enugu: Ijejas Printers & Publishers Company.
6  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION UNIT 2 PHILOSOPHICAL AND HISTORICAL FOUNDATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Philosophical Foundation of Vocational Education 3.2 Historical Foundation of Vocational Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Vocational Education has a philosophical and historical framework or foundation.
The philosophical framework has to do with a general understanding of the values, concepts, fundamental beliefs and purpose of vocational education.
While the historical framework is a summary record of significant events and developments in vocational education in Nigeria.
This unit will present both frameworks to you.
A good understanding of this will enhance your appreciation of the concept of vocational education.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: explain the philosophical and historical foundations of Vocational Education in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Philosophical Foundation of Vocational Education in Nigeria Generally, philosophy has to do with an understanding of values, concepts, fundamental beliefs and purposes.
The national policy on education (2004) states that the philosophy and values of education in Nigeria include the following: i.
Integration of the individual into a sound and effective citizen 7  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION ii.
Respect for the work of the individual iii.
Faith in man‟s ability to make rational decisions iv.
Moral and spiritual values in interpersonal and human relations v. Shared responsibility for the common good of the society and; vi.
Social, cultural, economic, scientific and technological progress.
(Federal Republic of Nigeria 2004).
The philosophy of technical and vocational education in Nigeria hangs mainly on the above-stated philosophy of education.
This implies that any programme that will qualify as “education” in Nigeria should not just offer “certificates” but must be work-oriented.
This will go a long way in solving under-employment/un-employment and the attendant problems.
It will also empower the graduates to become relevant producers of goods and services as well as become sensible consumers of same.
The philosophy of Technical and Vocational Education is basically to enhance human dignity and enthrone work and labour by making individuals acquire and/or develop enough saleable and employable skills, competencies, attitudes as well as knowledge to enable them gain and maintain basic employment or self-reliance for a comfortable living.
The Nigerian dream of building a truly egalitarian society can only be achieved through the effective use of Technical and Vocational Education.
It offers life-long education to all types of learners and enables them realize and develop their self-potentials maximally.
Even special and adult education relies heavily on Vocational Education.
The 5 main national objectives of Nigeria, which it expects to achieve through the instrument of education, are the building of: i) a free and democratic society; ii) a just and egalitarian society; iii) a united, strong and self-reliant nation; iv) a great and dynamic economy; v) a land of bright and full opportunities for all citizens.
One of the major philosophies of education in Nigeria is based on the integration of the individual into a sound and effective citizen.
This and most of the national educational aims, objectives and values can only be achieved through a functional education for “life” and for “living” – Vocational Education.
According to the National Policy on Education, (2004), some of the national educational aims and objectives to which the philosophy is linked are: 8  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 1.
The inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society.
2.
The acquisition of appropriate skills, abilities and competencies both mental and physical as equipment for the individual to live in and contribute to the development of the society.
The document also acknowledges the right type of education as the greatest investment the nation can make for the quick development of its economic, political, sociological and human resources.
Moreover, Beaumont (1971) as quoted in Amadi, Orikpe and Osine (1998) states that the philosophical concepts of Vocational Education include: i) Vocational Education (or programmes) should be developmental and not terminal.
It should provide maximum options for learners to advance or branch out into gainful employment.
ii) Vocational Education is needed to make or liberal or general education concrete and understandable while general education should point out the vocational implication of all educational experiences.
iii) There is need for pre-vocational orientation of pupils in the world of work.
iv) The development of attitudes, basic educative skills and habits appropriate for work is imperative just like training in skill competence.
v) Vocational Education should satisfy the demands of the society that is technology-oriented and the needs of man for liberalizing experience in his educational growth and similar undertakings.
The various areas of Vocational Education have their specific philosophies, which will be handled in Module 3 but all revolve around the basic philosophies as already stated in this unit.
3.2 Historical Foundation of Vocational Education in Nigeria 9  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION This refers to a summary of the origin, significant events and developments in technical and vocational education in Nigeria.
This type of education dates back to the beginning of the human race on this planet; though in an informal and unorganized way.
This is because there has always been the need for man to do things for himself in order to provide practical answers and solutions to the problems and challenges of living.
This is the essence of Vocational Education.
Some forms of Vocational Education existed even before the arrival of the missionaries.
Ekpenyong and Nwabuisi (2001) describe vocational education as the “Cinderella” of Education.
This implies that it was erroneously neglected and relegated to the background when it was supposed to be the real essence of the education industry.
The history and development of Business Education, (and infact Vocational Education generally) has also been likened to that of a child whose father abandoned because he felt he already had the types of children he wanted; it was later picked up by a childless man who knew it‟s usefulness, nurtured and groomed it to adulthood – (Ekpenyong 1992).
This implies that historically, Vocational Education in Nigeria did not enjoy government‟s attention and support from the onset.
Rather a few Nigerian entrepreneurs took the much needed initiative having realized the relevance of Vocational Education not just to their personal lives or businesses but also to national economic growth and development as well as societal stability.
This explains why the organized, formal and structured Vocational Education as it exists in various institutions today is relatively new and faced with peculiar challenges compared with the “conventional” disciplines such as law, English language, mathematics, medicine etc.
The historical development of vocational education in Nigeria will be presented under the following sub-headings to make it easier for you to understand.
i.
Vocational Education in the Pre-colonial Era ii.
Vocational Education in the Colonial Era iii.
Vocational Education in the Post-Colonial Era i.
Vocational Education in the Pre-Colonial Era 10  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION This refers to Vocational Education before the arrival of the missionaries into Nigeria.
During this era, Vocational Education had cultural inclinations and undertones.
It was more of Traditional Vocational Education.
According to Ali (2000), before the introduction of formal, western education in Nigeria, at about 1892, different ethnic groups were already “training” young men and women in various occupations, trades as well as production of different materials and services such as: brewing, building, carving, spinning, fishing, hair-dressing, pottery, mining, herbalism, agriculture, gold-smithing, iron-smithing, etc This was done at family and sometimes community levels.
Appropriate character training and disposition were also taught.
This was the era traditional vocational education.
At this time, certain skills, trades or vocations were traceable to or said to “run” in particular families, ethnic groups, villages etc.
Each tried to be perfect in and jealously guard the skills or occupations for which they were known.
During the era of traditional vocational education, people generally engaged in vocations such as various types of farming (poultry, snail, livestock, etc), fishing, hunting, carving, carpentry, sculpturing, painting, building, decoration, catering, boat-making, mat-making, dyeing, hair plaiting, barbing, traditional medicine, trading, etc.
During this period, skills, knowledge, competencies and attitudes were inculcated in the youths in two major ways: i) Informal and ii) Non-Formal Methods i) Informal Traditional Vocational Education: Here the teaching team comprised of parents, senior siblings and relatives.
It appeared that some children unconsciously acquired special vocational skills by just being part of specific families or villages while other children also unconsciously acquired relevant vocational skills in their families such as house-keeping, hair- plaiting, baby-care, cooking, vegetable farming, trading and so on, for the girls; or hunting, fishing, livestock-keeping, barbing, traditional medicine, goldsmithing, etc.
for the boys.
At the time it was almost mandatory that all children born into a family should learn their fathers‟ crafts (for the male children), or mothers‟ vocation (for the female children).
Young men and women were thus identified and traced to specific lineages as a result of the type of craft or vocation they practiced.
11  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION ii) Non-Formal Methods: According to Evans (1981) quoted in Ekpenyong (2005), in non-formal (out of school) education, there is a conscious effort on the part of both the source of information (e.g.
parents, relatives or master craftsmen) and the learners to promote learning.
This was mainly achieved through the apprenticeship system.
Apprenticeship: This refers to a system whereby youths usually from the age of 12 were sent or bonded or apprenticed to relatives, family friends or master craftsmen or women to learn a special vocation or trade for a given period of time.
The duration of training varied from trade to trade.
During the training period, the apprentice usually lived with and served the master‟s or mistress‟s household while the latter provided him with shelter, food, clothing, religious, civic as well as moral training along with the specified vocational training.
The apprenticeship system could be informal, less formal or formal.
During the pre-colonial era, the informal method was mostly practiced.
At that time, the apprenticeship system was more like an institution guarded by customs, traditions and sometimes rituals.
After the specified period of time, the apprentice would be set free with a kind of ceremony as well as basic requirements or materials for starting off on his own.
Generally, the teaching method during the era of traditional vocational training included direct instructions, demonstrations, and question asking among others.
While the learners had to listen, observe, respond to and ask questions, as well as engage in practicals at appropriate time.
The formal method of apprenticeship is still practised today though it is not as domincent or popular as it used to be.
It is important to mention that during this time, the Birom people of Plateau State and their counterparts at Awka in Anambra State were famous in blacksmithing, the „Benis‟ were famous in bronze and Ivory carving, Abia State and environs were famous in “Akwete” weaving, Bida people were famous barbers, etc.
Some of these crafts are still traceable to these respective communities till date.
It is equally pertinent to state that during that era, the society really appreciated and valued the dignity of labour.
Vocational training then was highly relevant to societal needs, goals and values.
Oranu (1995) quoted in Ile, Asoegwu and Chukwugbo (2005) asserted that before the advent of the white man in Nigeria, labour and hard work were glorious and highly esteemed.
However, the white-collar jobs of the white men gradually but systematically paved the way for the erosion of the dignity of labour.
It appears that gradually, the functional and valuable 12  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION traditional vocational training that our fore-fathers worked so hard to establish was relegated to the background, as it was referred to as “blue collar” job and considered inferior to “white collar” jobs that merely involved the use of “pen and paper”.
ii Vocational Education in the Colonial Era Formal education came into Nigeria in 1842 when the Christian missionaries arrived Badagry in Lagos with the primary aim of evangelizing the natives through the instrument of literary education.
This type of education was less expensive and less demanding in terms of human and material resources though less relevant to the needs of the people.
They considered literary education as essential element to the spread of Christianity.
This was a kind of dislocation to the already thriving traditional vocational education in Africa.
This is because going to school then did not seem to specifically emphasize the various skills in agriculture, hunting, trading, weaving, etc.
Rather students merely acquired reading and writing skills.
Our former British colonialist equally came with a system of education that did not meet the needs of the colonized people of Africa.
What we have said earlier does not imply that vocational education was totally ignored during the colonial era.
The British government and the missionaries actually made some efforts at developing vocational education.
A summary of such efforts include: For instance, as early as 1842, the mission school at Behule, (Abeokuta) had workshops for blacksmithing, wheel wrights, carpentry and shoe-making.
In 1876, the first technical school in Nigeria (the Roman Catholic Agricultural School) was established at Topo near Badagry.
By 1905, the Hope Waddle Training Institute in Calabar had included vocational subjects such as tailoring, carpentry, printing, agriculture, etc, to other crafts and literary subjects taught in the school.
In 1909, an institution at Nassarawa (Northern Nigeria) was established which operated vocational and technical programmes.
Book-binding, carpentry, weaving, etc were taught.
The 1920 – 21 witnessed the Phelps-Stokes Commission Reports on Education in Africa.
13  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION This document was a positive landmark as it made positive recommendations on vocational and technical education.
In 1925, the memorandum on the education policy in British Tropical Africa and a subsequent government white paper on it was published.
Among other things, the white paper provided that: a.
Education should be adopted to the mentality, aptitudes, occupations and traditions of the various peoples, b.
Technical and industrial training should be provided in government workshops provided a proper instructor was available.
It is pertinent to note that little or nothing was done to implement this policy as general education continued to be emphasized.
In 1944, there was a Ten Year Development Plan which proved defective.
It dismissed further development in vocational and technical education claiming that a big trade school or a technical college was not necessary at that stage.
It‟s reasons were that such a school would be extremely expensive to build and equip; would require large European and African staff and that there would be no great demand for the products when trained.
Of course, this was far from the truth.
Subsequently another Ten – year development and welfare plan was put in place in 1946.
The 1946 Ten-Year Development and Welfare Plan for Nigeria was a “miracle” for vocational technical education because it contained an official statement by the colonial administration that: - Technical Education is of much importance that a separate plan has been made for it outside the general education plan.
The shortage of properly trained artisans and technicians is at present one of the limiting factors of any real and rapid development.
Unless quick action is taken to provide facilities for proper training for such men, there must be a serious log in the work of development.
The importance of quick action is therefore obvious.
(Nigerian Official Report, 1946 as quoted in Ekpenyong 2005).
- The 1946 Ten-Year Development Plan proposed that three trade centres be established at Yaba, Enugu and Zaria/Kaduna.
It was also proposed that craft centres be established in all provinces of the Federation.
14  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION - 1949 witnessed another major breakthrough in the development of vocational technical education when a two-man committee on Technical Education presented a report that led to the establishment of the Nigerian College of Arts and Technology with branches at Enugu (East), Zaria (North) and Ibadan (West).
- In 1959, the Ashby Commission was set up in preparation for the nation‟s independence.
Their report was submitted in September 1960 just before the independence and gave a positive push to the development of Vocational Education.
Meanwhile from 1900, various colonial government departments and private firms were operating in-house/on-the jobs vocational training programmes for their workers or prospective workers.
Participants were sponsored by the employers or admitted with a view to being employed on successful completion of the training.
Such government departments or corporations include: 1.
Nigerian Railway Training School (1901) 2.
Government Survey School, Lagos, (1908) 3.
Marine Department Training School, (1928) 4.
Public Works Department (PWD) Training School (1931) 5.
Post and Telecommunications Training School (1931) Some private establishments and companies also organized special training courses that were deigned to meet specific existing and predictable man-power needs within their respective organizations.
Such establishments include John Holt, United African Company (UAC), United Trading Company (UTC), Paterson and Zochonis (PZ), Shell BP, etc.
iii.
Vocational Technical Education in the Post-Colonial Era By October 1960, when Nigeria gained her independence, it was obvious that the so-called education we inherited from the British government was not adequate to the societal and economic needs of Nigeria.
It was clear that old the inherited British literary curriculum would not meet the educational and economic challenges of the emerging Nigerian nation.
Consequently, vocational education began to receive the much needed attention in the proposes national curriculum through the 1969 National curriculum conference.
The Ashby Commission was a major landmark in the development of vocational education in Nigeria.
To closely study how the Ashby report affected them, the three regions resolved to do so by setting up regional commissions or committees as follows: 15  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION a) The Dike Committee for the Eastern region b) The Banjo Commission for the Western region c) The Oldman Commission for the Northern region The reports of the various committees led to the advancement of Vocational Education in their respective regions.
This is because the reports attracted financial aids from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) that was used for the establishment of vocational technical institutions in the three regions respectively.
The reports also re-echoed the need to replace the “grammar” and “high” schools with “comprehensive” schools because the latter would offer a broader curriculum comprising both general and vocational subjects - such as science, agriculture, technical, studies, business studies, etc.
This was implemented with the assistance of USAID.
A panel on comparative Technical Education which published its reports in 1966, recommended the need for a national plan for vocational and technical education in Nigeria.
Its recommendation made the National Educational Research Council (NERC) to organize and sponsor a critical curriculum conference in 1969, as earlier indicated.
This was followed by a seminar in 1973 which culminated in the formulation of the National Policy on Education in 1977 (revised in 1981, 1998 and 2004 respectively).
This blue print on Education in Nigeria gave due attention to the issue of vocational education.
The seminar, in addition to other achievements, led to the establishment of the National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) in 1976.
It is pertinent to point out that in the 1960s, vocational education was primarily in the hands of voluntary and private individuals and agencies.
However, by the 1970s, government‟s participation in the establishment of vocational technical institutions was on the increase.
Government‟s achievements towards the development of vocational education in Nigeria after the independence include the following: Establishment of a specialized ministry - The Federal Ministry of Science and Technology Introduction departments of vocational technical education in some universities (though relatively few).
Establishment of some universities of technology, agriculture, etc.
Establishment of technical colleges, polytechnics and colleges of education (Technical).
Establishment of monotechnics such as Petroleum Training Institute (PTI), Mettallurgical Training Institute (MTI), etc.
The Technical Teacher Training Programme (TTTP) The Industrial Training Fund (ITF) - 1973 The National Directorate of Employment (NDE) - 1987 16  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION The National Open Apprentice Scheme (NOAS) The School on Wheel Scheme (SWS) The Waste-to-Wealth Scheme (WWS) The Disabled Work Scheme (DWS) The National Business and Technical Education Board (NABTEB).
Till date, efforts are still being made (though more in principle than in practice) to give vocational education its pride of place in the country‟s educational system.
Most of these efforts do not meet with full implementation, funding and adequate monitoring.
Others appear to sabotaged and crippled so that they hardly achieve the purpose(s) for which they were initiated.
However, there is a ray of hope for vocational education as a result of its functionality and relevance to any nation, particularly Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Access the relevance of Beaumont‟s philosophy of vocational education in Nigeria?
4.0 CONCLUSION We all know that where one is coming from is almost as important as where one is going to.
The philosophical and historical foundations of vocational education are critical to the future of this broad, career- oriented field of academic study.
In the next unit (Unit 3), we shall be looking at the economic and societal foundations of vocational education.
5.0 SUMMARY The philosophical and historical foundations of vocational education are very necessary to enable you appreciate the fact that vocational education indeed has come a long way (and probably still has a long way to go) in Nigeria.
We tried to examine the philosophical basis for Vocational Education.
In other words, why Vocational Education?
Then we looked at the history from the pre-colonial era, when we practised traditional vocational education, through the colonial era when vocational education was more or less neglected; and to the present post-colonial era when the discipline seems to be making some progress.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the main features of TVE in the colonial era in Nigeria.
17  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 2.
Discuss the main features of development of TVE in the ten years Nigeria before and after the civil war 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ali, A.
(2000).
“Educating Nigerians for the Next Century: Vocational and Technical Imperatives”.
In Esomonu, N.P.M and Obumneke, O. I.
(eds).
The Imperatives of Vocational and Technical Education for a Developing Nation.
Umunze: Research and Publication Unit, F.C.E.
(T).
Amadi, U. P. N. Orikpe, E. A. and Osinem, C. E. (1998).
Introduction to Vocational and Technical Education.
Owerri: Alphabet Nigeria‟s Publishers.
Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Ekpenyong, L. E. (1992).
“Business Teacher Education in Nigeria Prospects and Challenges for the 21st Century”.
Perspectives on Teacher Education in Nigeria, APQEN, Vol.
3.
Ekpenyong, L. E. & Nwabuisi, J. N. (2001).
“Curriculum and Human Resource Development issues in Business Education”.
Current Issues in Educational Management in Nigeria, NAEAP Vol.
1. pp.
167-168 Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1974).
History of Education in Nigeria: London: George Allen and Urwin.
Federal Government of Nigeria (1944).
The Ten-Year Education Plan: Session Paper No.
6.
Lagos: Government Printer.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
National Policy on Education (3rd Ed) Yaba.
NERDC press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education (4th Ed) Yaba.NERDC Press.
Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for beginners.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
18  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION UNIT 3 SOCIOLOGICAL AND ECONOMIC FOUNDATIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 19  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 3.1 Sociological Foundation of Vocational Education 3.2 Economic Foundation of Vocational Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The sociological and economic foundations of vocational education in Nigeria are very important as we strive to understand and appreciate this field of study.
The sociological framework refers to the relationship between the society and vocational education; while the economic framework considers the relationship between the economy of the nation as well as that of its citizens and vocational education, i.e.
an economic view of vocational education.
In this unit, the framework for both will be presented to you, to further enhance your understanding and appreciation of the course.
2.0 OBJECTIVE By the end of the unit, you should be able to: discuss the sociological and economic foundation of vocational education in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sociological Foundation of Vocational Education in Nigeria This deals with societal attitudes and perception of vocational education, the society‟s expectations of vocational education and the various implications as well as the way forward.
It is important to remind you that society can be described as a group of people living together within a particular geographical location (for instance, within a country e.g.
Nigeria) and share common laws, organizations, government, customs, etc.
The society is made up of individuals, families, villages, towns, etc.
We are going to look at the relationship between the Nigerian society and vocational education under the following sub-headings: Societal perception and attitude towards vocational education Societal needs/expectations from education The implications 20  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION The way forward a) Societal Perception and Attitude towards Vocational Education In the previous unit, (unit 2), we mentioned that prior to the colonial era, the Nigerian society had enthroned labour and valued the dignity of working and producing goods and services with one‟s hands as the only way of surviving and living a useful life.
Then, everyone was proud of whatever he/she could do or produce.
Everyone worked.
No one wanted to be lazy because wealth and success were seen as products of hard work.
People‟s vocations/occupations were responsive to societal needs in terms of goods and services the society needed or wanted in order to survive.
Unemployment and unproductivity were strange phenomena.
Crime rate was low; moral standards were relatively high and people generally lived in peace with one another.
Traditional vocational education was the only and most valued form of education.
Infact, we can say that societal attitude towards vocational education then was positive.
This beautiful scenario gradually but steadily gave way with the coming of western/liberal education which emphasized mainly book learning rather than the use of the hand.
Education at this time meant mere literacy - ability to read, write, speak a lot of grammar and produce little or nothing.
At that time, education and the needs of the society became inversely related.
Going to school became apparently out of tune with meeting societal needs.
During the period, the following perception seemed to have influenced societal values: Vocations and vocational training was generally despised and neglected if not totally ignored Jobs relating to vocational training were described as “menial” or “blue-collar” while others were glorified as “white-collar” jobs.
Vocational education was seen as inferior to liberal education.
Education was not planned to help people serve the society better by becoming better farmers, goldsmiths, weavers, builders, etc.
People got duly certificated for studying Latin; philosophy, grammar etc.
even when they could contribute little or nothing towards the solution/answers to the challenges and problems of life and living.
Vocational education was seen as education for the less privileged, less intelligent, physically challenged and maybe, women.
People avoided “getting their hands dirty or soiled”; it was more civilized to sit around, do nothing but be „clean‟.
Vocational education was seen as expensive and not worth spending so much on.
21  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION b) Societal Needs and Expectations from Education According to the National Policy on Education (2004), some of the national goals which the society intends to achieve through education include the building of: i) a united, strong and self-reliant nation; ii) a great and dynamic economy; iii) a land full of bright opportunities for all citizens; The national policy on education also states clearly that the society believes that: i) education is an instrument for national development; ii) education fosters the worth and development of the individual, for each individual‟s sake and for the general development of the society; The document further states the national education goals to include: i) The inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society; ii) The acquisition of appropriate skills and the development of mental, physical and social abilities and competencies as equipment for the individual to live in and contribute to the development of the society; In view of the above we can then conclude that the society expects education to do the following: i) Equip its recipients with relevant, saleable, employable knowledge, skills, competencies and attitudes to enable them gain and retain meaningful means of livelihood.
ii) Be responsive and sensitive to the needs of the society rather than being “lofty and abstract”.
iii) Produce citizens who are problem-solvers and who can provide practical answers to the various needs and challenges of the society.
iv) Be work and career-oriented.
v) Help in building a peaceful, stable and safe society free from various types of societal ills.
c) The Implications 22  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION The implications of the regrettable neglect of vocational education which started from the colonial days and has eaten deep into the fabrics of the society can be summarized to include the following: i) General unproductivity or under-productivity because people lack “Technical know-how”.
ii) Unemployment and under-employment at different levels iii) An ailing economy with generally low standard of living among the masses.
iv) Disillusioned individuals who having realized their inability to become gainfully occupied; turn out to become deviants and misfits in the society.
v) High crime rate e.g.
armed robbery, toutism, prostitutions, money laundering, murder, riots, kidnapping etc.
Infact, Thurow (1994:50) sums it up in his statement that: Show me a skilled individual, a skilled company or a skilled country, and I will show you an individual, a company or a country that has a chance to be successful.
Show me an unskilled individual, company or country and I will show you a failure in the 21st century.
d) The Way Forward The national blue print on education (2004:6 - 7) states that: (i) There is need for functional education for the promotion of a progressive, united Nigeria; to this end, school programmes need to be relevant, practical, and comprehensive, while interest and ability should determine the individual‟s direction in education.
(ii) Education shall continue to be highly rated in the national development plans because education is the most important instrument of change; any fundamental change in the intellectual and social outlook of any society has to be preceded by an educational revolution.
The document further called for a repositioning of science, technical and vocational education in the scheme of national education for optimum performance.
The above sums up all that needs to be done in principle.
We can only hope and pray that it shall be so in practice.
Expanding prisons, increasing the penalty for crimes, instituting more criminal laws and decrees should not seen as a better option enough to free our society from the scourge of “wrong education”.
All that is needed is indeed an 23  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION “educational revolution” - vocationalization of education, i.e., making education career/work-oriented at various levels.
In order to achieve this, there is need for the following: i.
More financial commitment to vocational education from individuals, government and the society.
ii.
Enlightenment campaigns from the grassroots to the apex of the society in order to eradicate the negative stigma on vocational education inherited from our colonial days.
iii.
Effective guidance and counseling for the youth to enable then see the need to acquire functional education – vocational education; even in addition to whatever certificates they already have.
iv.
Total support for various aspects of technical and vocational education.
3.2 Economic Foundations of Vocational Education in Nigeria The economy refers to the system by which a country‟s money and goods are produced and used.
We all know that despite several economic strategies and reforms, the Nigerian economy tends to continue to nose-dive.
Nigeria does not appear to be able to gain economic independence!
Inflation, low living standards for the masses, unemployment, under-employment, etc.
are all economic ailments that are still plaguing the nation.
Nigeria is still indebted and the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) or Goss National Product (GNP) still leaves much to be desired.
The reason may be attributable to Nigeria‟s inability to equip it‟s citizens (human resources) with the right kind of education.
A lot of evidence are available to prove that technological breakthroughs must precede economic breakthrough.
Most of the world economic giants of today e.g.
USA, Japan, Germany, e.t.c.
attained that status by first developing their people technologically.
Harbison (1973:39) as cited in Ekpenyong & Nwabuisi (2001) rightly sees human resource as being more important than other factors of production.
He warned that any nation which is not able to develop the skills and knowledge of it‟s people and utilize them effectively in the national economy will be unable to do any other thing.
This is indeed a great challenge to developing economies such as Nigeria.
We will consider the relationship between vocational education and the Nigeria economy under the following sub-headings: 24  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Economic demands of Vocational Education Economic expectations from Vocational Education Funding of Vocational Education i.
Economic Demands of Vocational Education Vocational education is a capital-intensive field of study because it is based on skills and practicals.
A lot of tools, equipment, machinery, buildings, e.t.c.
are usually involved unlike in liberal education where a piece of chalk and chalkboard would normally suffice.
You will recall that some colonial officials felt vocational education was too expensive and not “really necessary” for Nigerians.
This wrong impression was passed on to Nigerians themselves and tends to eaten deep into the fabric of the nation‟s life.
By the time we realized the consequences of this negligence, much water had passed under the bridge.
Our economy and society was already suffering for it.
Unfortunately, we did not show (and probably) have not shown enough commitment financially and otherwise to this field of study.
This explains why vocational education is still undeveloped when compared with other conventional fields of study.
Even the National Policy on education (2004:60) describes education generally as an expensive social service which requires adequate financial provision from all tiers of government for successful implementation of the education programmes.
This is even truer for vocational education than for conventional type of education.
A lot of money is needed to build and equip laboratories, demonstration farms, keyboarding or fine arts studios, workshops, personnel recruitment etc.
Unfortunately, financial constraints seem to hamper progress in those areas.
The truth is that the nation needs to invest more money into vocational education in order to reap valued returns from this broad, career-oriented field of study.
ii.
Economic Expectations of Vocational Education When vocational technical education has been adequately invested upon, intelligently articulated, and properly executed it should be able to meet the following economic needs and expectations of the nation and it‟s citizens.
1.
Development of individuals who are equipped with the requisite knowledge and skills for productive work life; 25  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 2.
Development of individuals who are capable of meeting modern technological challenges.
3.
Development of a pool of competent and reliable technical manpower capable of being mobilized in times of national and economic emergency and crisis.
4.
Development of the youths, with right attitudes, skills and aptitudes towards work; 5.
Equipping of the youth with requisite knowledge and skills for paid employment or self-employment.
6.
Preparing the youths for meeting community, state and national human resource needs.
7.
Enabling the individuals to choose and perfect knowledge and skills in those vocational areas for which they have interests and aptitudes.
8.
Enabling individuals to develop sound economic reasoning and make good economic decisions, in the production and/or consumption of goods and services; 9.
Enabling youths to relate their knowledge, skills and expertise to the needs of their local communities.
10.
Preparing industrial managers/Chief Executive Officers who are capable of meeting the technological and managerial complexities of a modern industrial society.
11.
Establishing and maintaining a functional link between school and industry in matters affecting vocational education and the world of work.
(adapted from Ekpenyong and Nwabuisi 2001) Generally this will inject vibrancy into the economy by increasing productivity while checking unemployment and inflation.
In the long run the Gross Domestic Product (GPD) the nation will also step up the living standards of the people.
iii.
Well Improve and Funding of Vocational Education As has already been maintained, the funding of education generally is supposed to be the responsibility of the various tires of government.
26  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION However, because of the enormous cost implications, the blue print on education (2004:60) states that: The financing of education is a joint responsibility of the Federal, State and Local Governments and the private sector.
In this connection, government welcomes and encourages the participation of local communities, individuals and other organizations.
This is particularly true for vocational education.
We as a nation generally need to actually invest more on vocational education; not just on paper but in practice.
The document further states that sectoral bodies such as the Education Tax Fund (ETF) have been established to respond to the funding needs of education.
In addition, other funds from which the burden of financing education can be eased are: i.
Industrial Training Fund (ITF) ii.
National Science and Technology Fund (NSTF) iii.
Petroleum Trust Fund (PTF).
Apart from the above stipulations, sources of funding for vocational education can be classified into two: 1.
External Sources: This refers to sources outside the various institutions.
These include the various tiers of government.
Such funds can be in the form of budgetary allocations, donations, subsidies, various funds and grants, e.g.
Education Trust Fund (ETF), NSTF, PTF etc.
It could also be in the form of aids from foreign countries and organizations e.g.
UNICEF.
2.
Internal Sources: This refers to sources within the various institutions.
These include: levies, launching programmes, donations, fees from sandwich, remedial and consultancy services, contributions from Alumni Associations, business outlets such as school canteens, bookshops, cybercafe, business centres, mechanical workshops, farms etc.
It is however pertinent to note that government remains the major financier of education.
However there is need for philanthropic organizations, private company‟s non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and individuals to get more actively involved in vocational education if the nation is to make headway in this direction.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 27  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Summarise the main features of our discussion so far.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have just examined the Sociological and Economic Foundations of Vocational Education because education does not take place in a vacuum.
The society as well as the economy naturally inter-relate with Vocational Education due to its nature.
It may be necessary for you to go through this module all over again for a better understanding before moving to module 2 where we shall be discussing the Need Assessment of Vocational Education.
5.0 SUMMARY The sociological and economic foundations of vocational education refer to the relationship between vocational education and the Nigeria society as well as the economy.
This is because education is a social service and is expected to meet economic needs of the people.
We looked at the societal perception of and expectations vocational education.
We considered the implications as well as the way forward.
We then took a step further to examine the economic demands of and the economic expectations from vocational education as well as an overview of funding of vocational education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the internal and external sources which vocational education may be funded on Nigeria?
2.
Discuss the public perception of vocational education.
3.
Discuss the relevance of vocational education to the national economics.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ali, A.
(2000).
“Educating Nigerians for the Next Century: Vocational and Technical Imperatives”.
In Esomonu, N.P.M and Obumneke, O. I.
(eds).
The Imperatives of Vocational and Technical Education for a Developing Nation.
Umunze: Research and Publication Unit, F.C.E.
(T).
Amadi, U. P. N. Orikpe, E. A. and Osinem, C. E. (1998).
“Introduction to Vocational and Technical Education”.
Owerri: Alphabet Nigeria‟s Publishers.
28  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Ekpenyong, L. E. (1992).
“Business Teacher Education in Nigeria Prospects and Challenges for the 21st Century”.
Perspectives on Teacher Education in Nigeria, APQEN, Vol.
3.
Ekpenyong, L. E. & Nwabuisi, J. N. (2001).
“Curriculum and Human Resource Development issues in Business Education”.
Current Issues in Educational Management in Nigeria, NAEAP Vol.
1. pp.
167-168 Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1974).
“History of Education in Nigeria”: London: George Allen and Urwin.
Federal Government of Nigeria (1944).
“The Ten-Year Education Plan” Session Paper No.
6.
Lagos: Government Printer.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
“National Policy on Education” (3rd Ed) Yaba.
NERDC press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
“Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for Beginners”.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Thurrow, L. (1994).
“New Game, New rules, New Strategies”, RSA Journal Vol.
CXLII, pp.
50 & 56.
MODULE 2 NEED ASSESSMENT OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION This module presents to you the need assessment of vocational education.
In other words, it is designed to answer the question of whether there is really any need for this field of study.
A good understanding of this need will make it possible for you to understand and appreciate the rest of the course.
To enable you understand the need for vocational technical education, we shall go through the following units: 29  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Unit 1 Objectives of Vocational Education Unit 2 Importance of Vocational Education Unit 3 Problems and Prospects of Vocational Education UNIT 1 OBJECTIVES OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Aims/Objectives of Vocational Education 3.2 Features/Characteristics of Vocational Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Various stakeholders in education (the graduates, parents, the society, and the various establishments, and the nation) are generally disillusioned and dissatisfied with the returns they receive from education.
It appears education has failed to deliver its “promises” to the nation.
In the streets of Nigeria it is easy to find many certificated but unskilled and consequently unemployable graduates.
Nearly 50 years after political independence, the nation can be said to be technologically and economically dependent.
It could be very disappointing to young graduates that after going through the rigours of acquiring one or even more certificates/degrees from various institutions, they are unable to secure employment or become employed.
Parents seem caught in the vicious circle of training children and watching them “waste” away owing to unemployment.
The society has become a victim of those who should help in building it; as most of the social upheavals and crimes in the society are generally traced to restore and unemployed youth social graduates.
Although there seem to be a large population of unemployed graduates, many employment agencies appear unwilling to recruit them in order not to incur additional expenses in training them.
30  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Various establishments, firms, companies, etc continue to suffer for lack of manpower/relevant human resources to perform certain duties.
The above scenario is typical of Nigeria and has led to the clamour for the addition of more practical/skill-oriented courses in the curricular of various academic programmes at all levels of education, which implies the vocationalisation of education.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of the unit, you should be able to: state the aims, goals and the objectives of vocational education 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Aims and Objectives of Vocational Education According to the National Policy on Education (revised 2004), the 5 main national goals specifically aims of Nigeria which are expected to be achieved through the instrument of education are the building of: a free and democratic society; a just and egalitarian society; a united, strong and self-reliant nation; a great and dynamic economy; a land full of bright opportunities for all citizens.
From what we have already studied, it should be clear that the above aims may only be achieved through functional, utility-based kind of education such as vocational education.
The blue print on education goes on to state that: Technical and vocational education is used as a comprehensive term referring to those aspects of the educational process involving in addition to general education, the study of technologies and related sciences and the acquisition of practical skills, attitudes, understanding and knowledge relating to occupations in various sectors of economic and social life.
technical and vocational education is further understood to be: - an integral part of general education 31  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION - a means of preparing for occupational field and for effective participation in the world of work; - an aspect of lifelong learning and a preparation for responsible citizenship; - an instrument for promoting environmentally sound, sustainable development; - a method of alleviating poverty (Federal Republic of Nigeria, 2004: 28 – 29) Furthermore, the blue-print on education (1981, 2004) assert that the aims and objectives of technical and vocational education are to: a) provide trained manpower in the applied sciences, technology and business particularly at craft, advanced craft and technical levels; b) provide the technical knowledge and vocational skills necessary for agricultural, commercial and economic development; c) give training and impart the necessary skills to individuals who shall be self-reliant economically; d) provide people who can apply scientific knowledge to the improvement and solution of environmental problems for the use and convenience of man; e) enable our young men and women to have an intelligent understanding of the increasing complexity of technology; f) give an introduction to professional studies in engineering and other technologies.
It is important to mention here that aspects of vocational education should be part of basic primary, junior secondary and senior secondary school education.
At the post secondary level, institutions that offer technical and vocational education include tertiary technical institutions such as science and technical colleges, polytechnics, monotechnics, colleges of education (technical) and universities.
It is also important to note that vocational education should by part of the on-going mass literacy campaigns, adult education, non-formal education as well as special education for the physically challenged e.g.
the blind, deaf, dumb.
This is to ensure that such programmes are relevant and meaningful to the individuals (recipients) and to the society generally.
3.2 Features of Vocational Education The features or characteristics of anything are marks of identity for that thing.
They refer to those distinguishing and special traits that make 32  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION something whatever it is and different from all other things no matter how similar.
Vocational education has some clearly noticeable features that should make it what it is expected to be.
In other words in TVE the following features should prevail: 1) The training environment for Vocational Education should replicate the working environment itself; or the actual working environment (same tools, machines, tasks, procedures, operations, etc) 2) The training should be directly and specifically job-oriented; i.e.
each task should be done in the same way it is expected to be done at the place of work.
3) The trainees (students) should be specifically trained on the manipulative and thinking habits required in the real working situation.
4) This type of education should help the students to maximize their interests, abilities, aptitudes and potentials.
Consequently training should be given to those who need it, want it and are able to benefit from it.
5) Adequate repetitive training in tasks and experiences from the place of work should be used to establish the right habits of doing and thinking to the degree necessary or acceptable for employment.
6) The teacher should be a master of the knowledge and skills that he teaches.
7) The training should be continued to the point where the students acquire a productive ability with which they can gain and retain an employment.
8) A vocational education programme must strive to meet the requisite market demands for labour (acceptable standard) in a given occupation.
There should also be enough room for improving set standards.
9) Education and training should be given on actual jobs not just on simulated and pseudo jobs.
33  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 10) Vocational education curriculum contents should be generated by masters and successful practitioners of the occupation; not from ordinary theorists.
11) Vocational education and training should emphasize functional and specific body of content materials relevant to each occupation.
12) Vocational education should meet the peculiar training needs of any group whenever and however they require it; and hope to benefit maximally from it.
13) The training in vocational education should consider the peculiar characteristics of those it serves – in terms of choice of instructional methods and personal relationship with them.
14) The administration of vocational education should be elastic, fluid and flexible.
Unnecessary rigidity should be avoided.
15) Vocational Education is capital intensive.
Therefore, the funds invested in training must at least be adequate for good training to be done.
Adapted from Prosser & Qugley (1949).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
List and explain ten roles of vocational education to the society 2.
In what areas of the Nigerian society should vocational education play major roles?
4.0 CONCLUSION The objectives of vocational education as they relate to the national goals of Nigeria are vital.
It is, therefore necessary for you to know the features they make that vocational education a career-oriented field of study.
In unit 2, we shall discuss the importance of vocational education.
5.0 SUMMARY 34  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION The objectives and features of vocational education have been highlighted so that you can understand what is expected from you in this field of study.
You need to keep the objectives and features you have studied in focus in order for you to have a clear idea of what the course is all about to be and for it to deliver value returns to all stakeholders.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the expectations of vocational education the Nigerian society?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (1992).
“Business Teacher Education in Nigeria Prospects and Challenges for the 21st Century”.
Perspectives on Teacher Education in Nigeria, APQEN, Vol.
3.
Ekpenyong, L. E. & Nwabuisi, J. N. (2001).
“Curriculum and Human Resource Development Issues in Business Education”.
Current Issues in Educational Management in Nigeria, NAEAP Vol.
1. pp.
167-168.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
“National Policy on Education” (3rd Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
“Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for Beginners”.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Prosser, C. A. and Quigley, T. A.
(1949).
“Vocational Education in a Democracy”.
Chicago: American Technical Society.
UNIT 2 IMPORTANCE OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Need for Vocational Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 35  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The question we are about to answer in this unit is: What is actually the need and rationale behind vocational education?
If you have understood our discussions so far, you should at this point be able to answer this question to some extent.
However it is important to note that vocational education delivers benefits to: (1) individuals learners, (2) employers and employees, (3) the economy, and (4) the nation.
You will see these from our discussion in this unit.
2.0OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: identify the various benefits and importance of vocational education to the individuals, the economy as well as to the nation.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Need for Vocational Education Vocational Education can be described as one of the most viable solutions to the industrial, technological, economic, societal and national problems of any nation.
We shall now consider the usefulness of vocational education to: a) Individuals; b) The society; c) Technology and the economy; and d) The nation a.
Individuals Vocational education is important to individuals in the following ways: i.
It increases the number of options i.e.
choices of available occupational areas from which individuals can choose.
36  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION ii.
It boosts the earning power of individuals by ensuring that everybody profits from one form of training or instructions or other depending on the individuals‟ abilities and aptitudes; iii.
It empowers individuals economically if they possess saleable and relevant skills to enable them gain and maintain gainful employment or become self-reliant; iv.
It acts as a vehicle towards self-actualization; v. It makes individuals to be psychologically balanced and physically fit because work gives a sense of identity, purpose and value; vi.
It reduces idleness and tendency to crimes and other deviant behaviours; vii.
It helps individuals maximize their potentials, talents and aptitudes thereby inducing in them a sense of achievement and worth; viii.
It makes individuals conscious of the technical and economic implications of their activities or in activities; ix.
It enables people make sensible economic decisions and contributes as producers and consumers; x.
It leads to improved standard of living, which results in healthier and longer lives.
b.
The Society The importance of vocational education to the society includes the following: i) It leads to practical solutions to various challenges and problems in the society owing to technological breakthroughs and advancement; ii) The society avoids being a victim of those who should help in building it.
This means that crime, deviant behaviour and various societal ills become drastically reduced; iii) It helps the society to become truly free and democratic; iv) It helps in building a just and egalitarian society; v) Education, which is a key social service, stands to enjoy more patronage and confidence from the people.
This is because vocational education gives meaning and value to general education; vi) It creates opportunities for women, the physically challenged and even the retired but not too old citizens to join the labour force, thereby giving them a sense of belonging and relevance; vii) It enables the nation to look inwards and exploit and protect her local resources.
c. Technological and the Economic Empowerment of a Nation 37  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Vocational education is of great relevance to the technological and economic status of a nation.
Its importance in this direction includes: i.
Technological breakthroughs and advancement which naturally lead to economic emancipation and independence; ii.
Appropriate development and proper positioning of the technological and economic power of a nation through appropriate human resource development; iii.
Improvement the per-capita income of citizens, thereby boosting the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and Gross National Product (GNP); iv.
Effective poverty alleviation programmes; v. Effective mobility of labour through training and re-training; vi.
Boosts in economic activities and services; vii.
Effective handling the issue of transfer of technology and its attendant problems; viii.
Reduction of over-dependence on imported products; ix.
Conservation of the resources that could have been spent in engaging the services of foreign experts; x.
Creation of a technological identity for the nation.
d. The Nation Vocational education plays a vital role in the survival and development of any nation especially, the developing ones such as Nigeria.
This point can never be over-emphasized.
The importance of Vocational Education to the nation includes: i.
Increase in the productive power of the nation; ii.
It meets the manpower needs of the nation; iii.
Propelling of the nation towards all-round independence, stability and elf-reliance.
This implies a situation whereby a nation is able to provide for and face her various needs and challenges with little or no assistance from other nations.
This is the case with the developed nations of the world such as Britain, America and Japan; iv.
Emphasis on career-education boosts the workforce thereby promoting national growth and development; v. Conservation and development the vast of natural resources with which the country has been blessed; vi.
Correction of the discrepancy that often exists between the number of graduates and the number of existing job opportunities in the nation; vii.
Attraction of more people into the labour market through increase in the occupational/study options available the citizens; 38  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION It is important to note that the various attributes of vocational education are not water-tight or mutually exclusive.
Rather, they are inter- dependent as one enhances the other.
4.0CONCLUSION Vocational education may not be a panacea to all the problems and challenges of life.
However, it can be described as one of the most viable solutions to the industrial, technological, economic, societal and national problems of nations, particularly developing ones such as Nigeria.
5.0SUMMARY The idea of Vocationalizing education is not just a myth.
It is a radical change we must make in order to reap maximum benefits and rewards from education.
In this unit, we tried to establish the Need for vocational education by x-raying its importance to individuals, the society, the economy, the employers, employees, individuals and the nation at large.
In unit 3, we shall take a step further by looking at the problems and prospects of this very important field of study.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is the benefit of vocational education to the individual learners?
2.
Identify the role of vocational education of the employers, employees and the nation generally.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (1992).
“Business Teacher Education in Nigeria Prospects and Challenges for the 21st Century”.
Perspectives on Teacher Education in Nigeria, APQEN, Vol.
3.
Ekpenyong, L. E. & Nwabuisi, J. N. (2001).
“Curriculum and Human Resource Development issues in Business Education”.
Current Issues in Educational Management in Nigeria, NAEAP Vol.
1. pp.
167-168 39  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
“National Policy on Education” (3rd Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
“Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for Beginners”.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Prosser, C. A. and Quigley, T. A.
(1949).
“Vocational Education in a Democracy”.
Chicago: American Technical Society.
UNIT 3 PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of Vocational Education in Nigeria 3.2 Prospects of Vocational Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 40  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION From our previous discussions, it should be clear that vocational education has had and is still has several problems and challenges in its development as a formally organized field of study.
This explains why it is still viewed as a relatively new area when compared with other conventional fields of study such as law, education, and medicine.
This unit focuses on these issues and challenges 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to: enumerate some of the problems that face vocational education in Nigeria identify the solutions to the said problems highlight the prospects of vocational education in Nigeria.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problems of Vocational Education in Nigeria Generally, problems refer constraints, difficulties, challenges, hindrances or obstacles.
The problems of vocational education therefore refer to those factors or issues that affect the rapid development of technical and vocational education in Nigeria.
The problems include the following: 1) Wrong Perception of Vocational Education The general Nigerian public tends to give wrongly perception to vocational education some seem to think of it as education for under- achievers, unintelligent people, school drop outs, and the less-privileged.
It has also been wrongly perceived as a “dirty” kind of education due to its, practical nature.
These wrong perceptions are traceable to our colonial days and lead to the next problem.
41  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 2) Societal Stigma As can be seen from the points above, vocational education has for some time now seem to have received negative stigma.
For instance, parents would rather have their wards and children study more „prestigious‟ and „glamorous‟ courses such as medicine, law and engineering.
3) Lack of Vocational Guidance and Counselling Lack of adequate vocational guidance has made it difficult to correct wrong perceptions pupils have about vocational education to be removed at the right time, remove the consequent societal stigma.
There is therefore, strong need to mount vocational guidance and counseling programmes for the public and in various academic institutions for appropriate enlightenment on the subject.
4) Financial Constraints Technical and vocational education is a capital intensive discipline.
Hence it is benefits to the learners and the nation are to be easily evident, then adequate amount of funds must be made available for its execution.
These should adequately meet the cost of personnel, building equipment laboratories, studios, demonstration farms, etc.
5) Lack of Physical Resources These include basic infrastructure, such as buildings, laboratories workshops and studios.
Most schools that offer vocational education courses are not provided with enough appropriate equipment and materials for training.
Most of the so called studios and laboratories, instructional are just a caricature of what they should be.
Sometimes, appropriate materials are available but no teachers or instructors to use for instruction.
6) Government Policies Initially, government policies on education reflected the already discussed societal misconceptions and stigma – regarding vocational education as it was considered inferior to secondary.
Although the current National Policy on Education (2004), places emphasis on vocational implementation education its does not reflect the enthusiasm expressed in the policy document.
7) Dearth of Qualified Vocational Personnel 42  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION A walk round most of the Nigerians vocational training centres, technical colleges and even tertiary institutions would show that these institutions are not adequate in the quality and quantity personnel.
This situation is partly responsible for the low quality of graduates coming out of them.
Some of the teachers that were sent abroad in the early 1980s for vocational training under the TTTP programme never returned.
Some that returned took up more lucrative jobs in other establishments; others established enterprises of their own; thus the incident of lack of qualified vocational teachers continues to affect the nation.
As a result of the versatile nature of vocational education, graduates from this area find it easy to secure employment in various establishments or become self-employed, instead of remaining in the classroom to train others.
This tendency is often worsened by poor remuneration and unattractive working conditions of teachers.
This has continued to affect vocational education negatively.
Presently, only a few federal universities offer full-blown technical and vocational education programmes and even some of the few, are yet to mount PhD programmes in this specialized field of study thereby compounding the problem further.
In some institutions, some machinery and equipment supplied several years ago are still lying waste-in their various crates or containers – unopened and unused due to lack of qualified personnel to operate, service or repair them.
8) Lack of Power Supply In some parts of the country, effective vocational education is hindered by lack of or inadequate power supply to run the necessary equipment and machines.
Moreover, sometimes the necessary spare parts for servicing and repairing the equipment are not readily available.
Lack of water supply can equally pose a problem in some technical institutions.
9) Poor Student Motivation It is common to find that in some TVE institutions, the laboratories, studios and workshops are often not used.
Those that are in use at all, are used rather infrequently and rigidly as enough time usually is not allocated for practicals while students are often not allowed to use the laboratories at their spare time.
43  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION All these lead to poor motivation, lack of confidence and uncertainty about the students‟ ability to succeed or perform well enough on the programme of the students.
10) The Gap between Institutions and Industry There is need for a functional link, understanding and co-ordination between institutions and schools.
This is because the institutions produce for the industries.
A good TVE curriculum or programme benefits from the linkage between school and industry.
It is the gap between institutions and industry that pretty account for the high rate of unemployment among TVC graduates.
This is because students are trained based on procedures and equipment that are no longer needed in various industries.
The students therefore graduate to discover that they do not actually possess any employable/entrepreneurial skills and competencies expected of them.
11) Lack of Indigenous Textbooks From observation the quality and quantity of indigenous textbooks in vocational education courses are rather poor.
Some of the said textbooks do not have accompanying workbooks to facilitate practical work.
Some of the books are sub-standard and poorly written.
Foreign textbooks are very scarce and even when they are available; they are not only expensive but not very relevant to the Nigerian situation.
12) Lack of Effective Entrepreneurship Education Entrepreneurship education aims at equipping students with occupational skills, sharp business acumen and ingenuity to enable them create employment for themselves and others.
It should therefore be an integral part of effective vocational education.
It is not enough to just include “Entrepreneurship” as a course for vocational education students.
The course content and method of delivery should have a practical orientation to make the programme really beneficial to the students.
13) Insufficient Industrial Work Experience for Student In 1973, the Industrial Training Fund (ITF) launched the “Students Industrial Work Experience Scheme (SIWES)”, which was aimed at 44  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION creating opportunity for vocational technical education students to acquire relevant practical skills in typical work environments.
It is sad to note that this laudable scheme doesn‟t seem to be making any meaningful contributions towards achieving the goals for which it was established.
This can be seen as a big set back because most of the expensive, state of the art machines and equipment necessary for effective vocational education can only be found in companies and firms.
Some industrial organizations do not accept students for industrial attachment, some only assign the students to menial and irrelevant jobs where they manage to accept them and do little or nothing to encourage or motivate them during the exercise.
Sometimes the duration of the training is rather short for any meaningful impact and also some of the students regard the period as part of their holidays.
All these affect vocational education as the acquisition of the needed practical skills and competencies tend to be impracticable.
14) Administrative and Curriculum Problems Vocational education curricula in most cases have been criticized as being either too academic, certificate-crazy or theory based with very little proportion of the content given to practice or field works.
This explains why modern TVE curricula emphasize at least 70% practical and 30% theory – at the lower level.
15) Non-involvement of Vocational Education Practitioners in Policy Making and Planning When practitioners who are actually the implementers of TVE programmes are excluded at the policy and planning stage, it becomes rather difficult to get them totally committed to its successful implementation.
3.2 Prospects of Vocational Education in Nigeria As enormous as the problems of technical and vocational education to be, they are not beyond solution in Nigeria.
The following possible solutions to the problems of technical and vocational education are outlined below: 45  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 1) Effective Vocational Guidance and Counselling should be mounted from the primary to the tertiary level of education at various levels to correct the wrong perception social stigma on vocational education.
2) Improved funding should be given to equipment and update the infrastructure, and instructional facilities at all levels of TVE institutions.. 3) A general enlightenment campaign on the importance and essence of TVE in nation building should be mounted nation- wide to correct the marginalization syndrome by the society.
4) More universities and other institutions should be encouraged to mount full-fledged programmes on vocational education and the graduates of such programmes should be encouraged to stay in the field.
5) Efforts should be made to provide basic amenities such as water, electricity, in all towns and villages in the country where TVE institutions are located.
6) Vocational educational curricula should be kept as broad, dynamic and practical-based as possible.
The curricula should be designed by experts in the various areas and subjected to periodic review by experts too.
7) There should be a link, understanding and co-operation between institutions offering vocational education programmes and industry.
Both work on areas that would make TVE programmes relevant to industry.
8) Vocational education practitioners should be encouraged to write good quality textbooks in their disciplines at the books should be practically based.
9) Students Industrial Work Experience Scheme (SIWES) and entrepreneurship education programmes should be made more meaningful and relevant to the students.
10) Institutions should equip their laboratories, workshops and farms not just for accreditation purposes but also for students‟ practical use.
This will encourage and motivate, as well as build up self- confidence in them.
11) Vocational technical education practitioners should be involved in curricula decision/policy making and planning as much as 46  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION possible.
This will ensure hitch-free implementation of such decisions, policies and plans curricula.
If the above solutions are actually put in place, the future and indeed the prospects of are very bright vocational technical education in Nigeria.
12) Every university in the country should mount full-fledged vocational technical education programme up to the PhD level.
13) All Colleges of Education in the country should also have full- fledged vocational technical education programmes.
14) Science and vocational education should receive government‟s priority attention both financially and otherwise.
This is already so in principle (see National Policy on Education Revised 2004).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Should business education teachers and students be involved in?
4.0CONCLUSION The already discussed problems, solutions and prospects of vocational education are by no means exhaustive.
The picture we just want to paint is that vocational education as a formal academic field of study is currently facing serious of problems.
These problems could be solved and with their solution, for vocational education in Nigeria are very high.
5.0SUMMARY In this unit, we have tried to highlight some problems that vocational education discipline in Nigeria could be has faced and is still facing in the country.
We discussed some possible solutions to the said problems and then made a projection the future to visualize the prospects of vocational education in Nigeria.
It is obvious that one day, vocational education will compete favourably with other conventional, celebrated courses and the nation will be the better off for it.
In module three, we shall be discussing various vocational areas and services.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 47  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 1.
What should be the role of NGO‟s in the development of vocational education?
2.
What prospects is there for TVE in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (1992).
“Business Teacher Education in Nigeria Prospects and Challenges for the 21st Century”.
Perspectives on Teacher Education in Nigeria, APQEN, Vol.
3.
Ekpenyong, L. E. & Nwabuisi, J. N. (2001).
“Curriculum and Human Resource Development issues in Business Education”.
Current Issues in Educational Management in Nigeria, NAEAP Vol.
1. pp.
167-168 Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
“National Policy on Education” (3rd Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
“Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for beginners”.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Ogwo, B.
A and Oranu, R. N. (2006).
“Methodology in Formal and Non Formal Technical/Vocational Education.” Enugu: Ijejas Printers & Publishers Company.
MODULE 3 VOCATIONAL AREAS AND SERVICES This module aims at introducing you to the various vocational areas and services available in various institutions of higher learning in the country.
This refers to the various occupational areas or aspects of vocational services available.
Carefully read through and try to grasp what each area is all about.
This will enhance your overall understanding and appreciation of the discipline as a career-oriented academic field of study.
48  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION To gain the necessary basic understanding, you will be taken through the following units: Unit 1 Agricultural and Home Economics Education Unit 2 Business or Education Unit 3 Computer and Science Education Unit 4 Fine and Applied Arts Education Unit 5 Industrial Technical Education The diagram below represents vocational education and the component sub/related disciplines.
Computer Science Edu.
Computer Chemistry Edu.
Computer Biology Edu.
Computer Integrated Sci.
Edu.
Computer Maths Edu.
Computer Physics Edu.
Computer Physical & Heath Edu.
Computer Science Education Business Education Agricultural Science & Home VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Economics Education Accounting Office Technology & Management.
Fine & Applied Arts Education Distribution Industrial Technical Education Marketing Entrepreneurship Automobile Technology Edu.
Fine Arts Edu.
and Building Technology Edu.
Electrical Electronics Tech Edu.
Applied Arts Edu.
Metal work Tech.
Edu.
UNIT 1WoodAwoGrkRTIeCchU.
ELduT.
URAL SCIENCE AND HOME ECONOMICS EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Agricultural Science Education 3.2 Home Economics Education 49  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Agriculture has to do with the practice or science of all aspects of farming poultry, fishing and animal husbandry.
This generally involves the various aspects and types of farming both at the subsistence and mechanized levels.
Home Economics on the other hand can be described as the study of the art of cooking, housekeeping, fashion designing, and other related skills necessary for the smooth running of the hospitality industry as well as the home.
Agriculture and home economics education are usually put together in some institutions of higher learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: describe the scope of Agricultural Education outline the scope of Home Economics Education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Agricultural Education We have already said that agricultural education is the study of the science, and practice of farming and other related activities.
Agriculture is the oldest vocation/occupation that ever existed.
Infact, traditional agriculture (at the subsistence level) is as old as the human race.
The importance and relevance of agriculture can never be over-emphasized because it appears to be the main essence of life and living.
All other activities and vocations necessarily depend on and revolve around it.
This is because it sustains and nourishes lives and it takes being alive to be involved in any other activity.
This explains why most countries that are economically and technologically advanced today, have given it pride of place in the scheme of things.
In such countries, farming is noble and the governments ensure that farmers are well-respected and comfortable.
The United States of America and Canada are cases important.
50  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Agriculture has continued to improve in practice, equipment, personnel and products.
It has progressed from the subsistence level to the mechanized stage; and even to the highly mechanized stage as obtained by most of the western world.
It is pertinent to mention that the shabby treatment farmers generally receive in Nigeria, account for the slow pace development we are witnessing in the country presently.
A positive change is necessary and possible.
The Scope of Agricultural Education In the country presently, Agricultural Education as a formal academic field of study is being offered by a few universities, the universities of agriculture and colleges of education, particularly the Federal Colleges of Education (Technical).
It is offered as a 5-year, 4-year, or 3-year programme depending on whether the institution is university of technology or agriculture, in some universities, a conventional university or a college of education.
Agricultural education is aimed at producing professional agriculturists (practitioners) as well as teachers of agricultural science at various levels.
Agricultural science is sometimes broken into departments.
For instance, some of the courses are offered in departments designated as agricultural science animal science, animal husbandry, horticulture, agricultural mechanization, economics of production, crop science, weeds and pests control, fishery, piggery, agriculture, snail farming, horticulture, forestry, wild life conservation, food preservation, poultry farming, landscaping etc.
3.2 Home Economics Education In a narrow sense home economics education is the study of the art and science of good cooking, house-keeping, childcare, fashion and designing plus other related skills that make for effective and smooth running of a home or hospitality organization.
Home economics, as a vocation is also as old as the human race and was a vibrant part of our traditional vocational education.
It enhances excellent performance in other vocations because a healthy home produces healthy individuals who will make positive impact in the society.
51  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION The Scope of Home Economics Education Today, formal home economics education includes options such as (a) foods and nutrition, (b) home management, (c) clothing and textiles, (d) childcare development, (e) catering and hotel management etc.
Some of the courses offered include: cookery, house keeping, childcare, fashion and designing, homemaking, consumer education, housing and home furnishing, food processing, dietetics, meal planning, food science and technology etc.
Home economics education is aimed at producing professional home economists as well as home economics teachers at various levels.
It is important to mention that students of both agricultural education and home economics are expected to take several courses from supporting disciplines i.e.
applied, natural and behavioural sciences.
It is worth mentioning also that all vocational education students are required to take additional courses in education, general studies and computer appreciation in addition to their various specific subject areas.
Courses in entrepreneurship and related skills are also embedded in each of the vocational areas and services.
4.0 CONCLUSION Agricultural education and home economics education are integral part of vocational education and their relevance to life and living cannot be over-emphasized.
They still remain integral aspect of traditional vocational education and are now part of formal vocational education in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY As has been pointed out often in this course, vocational education as a formally organized academic field of study covers various areas and services.
They include Agricultural Science and Home Economics, which usually located in the same department in some institutions of higher learning.
Both areas are still developing and their scope will likely expand as vocational education continues to develop and stabilize.
52  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION In unit 2, we shall look at another very important area of Vocational Education – Business Education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
In what ways can home economic and agricultural education contribute to the growth and development of TVE in Nigeria?
2.
How adequate is the scope of agricultural and home economics education at the lower levels of education in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
“Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for beginners”.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Allen & Co. UNIT 2 BUSINESS AND DISTRIBUTIVE EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Business Education 4.0 Conclusion 53  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Business education is that aspect of vocational education that deals with the acquisition of relevant employable and marketable skills, competencies and attitudes required for various office occupations.
Business education cuts across all other disciplines and vocations because everyone is naturally a consumer of business products and services.
Life and living is essentially about business; while education is the biggest business we have on earth.
2.0OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: describe Business Education discuss the scope of Business Education.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Business Education Business education has been described as education for and about business.
Business Education is multi-disciplinary and trans- organizational.
This means that it cuts across other disciplines and is relevant to all types of organizations.
For instance; basic keyboarding which is a course in business education is now pre- requisite for everybody no matter the discipline, occupation or profession.
Moreover, no organization can exist without an office and at least an office staff.
Life itself is very serious business and must be lived like one.
The Scope of Business Education Business education can be broken into various departments or options.
These include: a) Accounting b) Office technology and management formerly secretariat studies c) Distributive/Marketing .
54  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Some institutions also have a department for general office education under business education.
Some of the courses offered under business education include: keyboarding, accounting, auditing and taxation, commerce, economics, marketing, business management, business law, secretarial duties, personnel management, advertising, banking and finance, note taking and transcription, etc.
In the past, business education was left in the hands of private individuals who operated commercial schools in which business subjects were taught.
A few government-owned technical colleges also offered some business courses.
Today however, a few universities, polytechnics and colleges of education (both technical and conventional) run business education programmes.
Graduates from such programmes fit easily into the world of work as practitioners e.g.
managers, accountants, secretaries, personal assistants and marketers.
Others become job-creators by starting their own private businesses; while some others teach business subjects in various institutions and at various levels.
4.0CONCLUSION Business education has come to stay as an effective antidote for unemployment.
Unemployment can simply be described as lack of skills or acquisition of wrong skills.
Because business education is multi- faceted, multi-disciplinary and trans-organizational in nature, it has the potential of checkmating unemployment.
5.0SUMMARY Business education is an integral part of vocational education.
It appears to be the broadest and most far-reaching aspect of vocational education which cuts across disciplines, organizations and people.
It is obvious that Business Education is highly relevant to almost area of human life.
Let us now take a look at the next vocational area– Computer and Science Education (see Unit 3).
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What was the status of business education in the pre-NPE?
2.
How acceptable is business education at that tertiary education level today.
55  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 7.0REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
“Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for Beginners”.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Allen & Co. UNIT 3 COMPUTER AND SCIENCE EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Computer and Science Education 4.0 Conclusion 56  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The entire world is going computer and this permeates every field of human endeavour.
Science as we all know, is the bedrock of every technological advancement and breakthrough.
Computer and science play very important roles in the solution of the problems and challenges of living.
They have therefore, become an essential and fundamental aspect of vocational education in the 21st century.
2.0 OBJECTIVE By the end of the unit, you should be able to: discuss and appreciate Computer and Science Education as an aspect of vocational education.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Computer and Science Education Computer science is the study of computers and their various uses and functions.
It usually involves both computer appreciation and application.
Science on the other hand has to do with knowledge about the composition of the world and the things in it, usually based on experiments, tests and facts that have been or can be proved.
Science is made up of several parts or aspects e.g.
biology, chemistry, mathematics and physics.
The Scope of Computer and Science Education Computer and science education involve the study of computer science plus any other aspect of science in addition to education courses as well as other general courses.
Such combinations enhance the relevance and functionality of the graduates.
There are various options/areas under computer and science education.
These include: 57  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION a.
Computer Science Education b. Computer/Chemistry Education c. Computer/Biology Education d. Computer/Integrated Science Education e. Computer/Mathematics Education f. Computer/Physics Education g. Computer/Physical and Health Education SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Assess the place of computer education in relation to other technology science based courses in the Nigerian universities?
4.0CONCLUSION The fact is that everyone irrespective of profession/occupation needs some knowledge of computer to enhance his/her skills and productivity especially in this age globalization.
The combination of computer science with various aspects of science is therefore a step in the right direction.
5.0SUMMARY Computer science combined with any other aspect of science enhances the relevance and functionality of the graduates in a computer and science–driven society such as ours.
In the next unit (Unit 4) we shall briefly discuss Fine and Applied Arts Education as an area in vocational education.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Computer education has often been combined with other science and none science courses in teacher education institutions.
Is this a normal development?
2.
How many computer education curriculum has been improved upon?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 58  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education": New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
“Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for Beginners”.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Allen & Co. UNIT 4 FINE AND APPLIED ARTS EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Fine and Applied Arts Education 4.0 Conclusion 59  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Fine and applied arts education has to do with the study of how to use paintings, drawings, music, sculpture, and other related skills to represent things or express ideas.
It still remains an integral aspect of Traditional Vocational Education because then, people were taught skills in drawing, painting, weaving, carving, moulding, dancing, music, etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVE By the end of the unit, you should be able to: briefly discuss and appreciate fine and applied arts as an area of vocational education.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Fine and Applied Arts Education This aims at developing students‟ aesthetic perception, artistic talents and expression as well as stimulating their interests and exploration skills at the practical and theoretical levels.
It is equally aimed at developing and promoting the nation‟s artistic/cultural heritage.
The study of fine and applied arts enables people to communicate through the Arts.
The Scope of Fine and Applied Arts Education Fine and applied arts are made up of two options that are not really mutually exclusive.
These are: Fine Arts Education and Applied Arts Education.
Some of the courses offered include: Art history, Art education, painting, ceramics, sculpture, textiles, graphics, weaving, dyeing, carving, pottery, photography, computer-graphics, drawing, display and exhibition techniques, designing, among others.
4.0CONCLUSION 60  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Fine and applied arts education equips people with saleable skills with which they can secure paid employment or become self-reliant or even do both.
5.0SUMMARY Fine and applied arts education is a veritable instrument for checking idleness, unemployment and poverty.
When properly done, it can be used to create employment and generate wealth.
It can also serve as a hobby as well as a channel of giving expression to one‟s natural gifts, talents and endowments.
In Unit 5, we shall briefly take a look at industrial technical education as an area in vocational education.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Assess the relevance of fine arts to vocational education?
2.
What are the skills that are expected from students who study fine arts as a vocational subject?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
“Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for Beginners”.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Allen & Co. UNIT 5 INDUSTRIAL TECHNICAL EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Industrial Technical Education 4.0 Conclusion 61  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Industrial technical education is that aspect of education that leads to the acquisition of practical and applied skills as well as basic scientific knowledge.
It has to do with the study of „technologies‟.
This implies the acquisition of technical „know how‟ or knowledge of how to solve problems or get things done using basic scientific knowledge.
It was a part of traditional vocational education and was a very popular component of the apprenticeship system of skill acquisition even till today.
„Industrial Education‟, „Technical Education‟ or „Industrial Technical Education‟ are various terms used to describe this aspect of vocational education as a formal and organized field of study.
2.0 OBJECTIVE By the end of the unit, you should be able to: briefly discuss industrial technical education as an area in vocational education.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Industrial Technical Education Industrial technical education is a very significant aspect of vocational education.
It involves the application of basic scientific knowledge and techniques to solve man‟s problems and make his environment better.
The Scope of Industrial Technical Education Industrial technical education involves the study of education courses, general courses, the core sciences as well as various technologies.
The options/department under industrial technical education includes the following: Automobile Technology 62  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Building Technology Electrical Electronics Technology Metal work Technology Wood work Technology Through industrial technical education, people are taught how to use their brains and hands to fabricate, repair, manufacture, dismantle, build and couple things.
As with other vocational education occupations, graduates can get paid jobs in industries/institutions, they can become self-reliant or combine both.
4.0CONCLUSION Industrial technical education has been and is still a very important aspect of vocational education.
Its relevance in the area of technological breakthroughs and advancement cannot be over-emphasized.
5.0SUMMARY We have tried to briefly discuss industrial technical education as a vital area in vocational education.
The various options/departments under Industrial Technical Education were also mentioned.
It is obvious that Nigeria will definitely be better off with more of such skilled graduates than merely certificated ones.
Try to go through this unit (and infact the entire module) once more before you proceed to module 4, where we shall be discussing the future of vocational guidance in Nigeria.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and describe the types of courses under industrial technical education?
2.
Define industrial technical education as against the traditional vocational education?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
63  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Ile, C. M., Asoegwu, M. N. N. & Chukwugbo, G. C. (2005).
“Essentials of Vocational Education and Technical Education for beginners”.
Awka: Marpat Educational Research and Publishers.
Allen & Co. MODULE 4 THE FUTURE OF VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE IN NIGERIA In this module, we shall be discussing the meaning and importance of Vocational Guidance.
We shall also be looking at the present state of Vocational Guidance as well as its future and prospects in Nigeria.
We shall therefore be going through the following units under this module: 64  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Unit 1 The Meaning of Vocational Guidance Unit 2 The Importance of Vocational Guidance Unit 3 The Present State of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria Unit 4 The Future and Prospects of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria UNIT 1 THE MEANING OF VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Vocational Guidance 3.2 What is Guidance?
3.3 Principles of Guidance 3.4 Types of Guidance 3.5 What is Vocational Guidance?
3.6 Aims/Objectives of Vocational Guidance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The choice of a career or vocation is one of the most important decisions an individual makes in life.
This is because apart from being a means of livelihood and survival, a person‟s career is a kind of identity.
Moreover your vocation/career determines the kind of friends you have, and affects your attitude behaviour, values as well as priorities.
Since the choice of a vocation has such far-reaching effects in the life of individuals, it does invariably affect the family, the society and the nation in various ways.
Such a critical choice should therefore not be based on mere guesswork, chance or even circumstances.
As much as possible, it should be a clearly objective and informed decision.
This is the essence and aim of vocational guidance.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: define and briefly discuss the concept of guidance 65  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION define and discuss the meaning of vocational guidance.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Vocational Guidance It is necessary for us to first of all understand what „Guidance‟ means before we start discussing vocational guidance.
3.2 What is Guidance?
Guidance generally involves helping, advising, steering, guiding, leading, piloting, channeling and directing an individual towards specific, desirable actions, behaviours, decisions and opinions that are most beneficial to him/her and to some extent, the society.
Guidance can also be described as an on-going process aimed at helping an individual towards decisions/actions that can lead to self-realization, self-fulfillment, self-reliance and self-actualization while ensuring that the environment/society benefits maximally from such decisions/actions.
Guidance is an art as well as a systematic process aimed at helping individuals achieve, self-consciousness, self-understanding and self- direction necessary for maximum adjustment at home, school and in the society.
Guidance involves several services provided for an individual to help him/her deal effectively with his/her needs, challenges and problems of life.
It is important to mention that “Guidance and Counselling” is a comprehensive term given to guidance activities.
The difference between the two is rather slim and mutually over-lapping.
Both the word “Guidance” and “Counselling” are therefore seen as two sides of the same coin.
3.2 Principles of Guidance Since guidance involves some systematic principles, those principles, must be properly followed in order to achieve the desired goals.
The principles of guidance: 66  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION i.
Guidance is concerned primarily with the all-round development and well being of the individual.
ii.
Guidance is based primarily on individual behavioural processes.
iii.
Guidance is geared towards co-operation, not compulsion or coercion.
iv.
Guidance is based on recognizing the dignity and worth of individuals as well as their right to choose.
v. Guidance is a continuous, sequential, educational process.
vi.
Guidance is for everybody, irrespective of age or status.
vii.
Guidance focuses on the welfare of the individual and that of the society.
3.3 Types of Guidance There are three major types of Guidance.
They are: a.
Vocational Guidance or career guidance b.
Educational Guidance c. Personal-Social Guidance Other Guidance services include the following: a.
Informal services b.
Appraisal services c. Counselling services d. Planning, placement and follow-up services, and e. Referral services However, we must remember that our major emphasis in this course is on vocational guidance.
Our discussions therefore will be mainly on this type of guidance.
3.4 What is Vocational Guidance?
Vocational or career guidance is that aspect of guidance that is geared towards helping an individual to prepare for a successful career or vocation.
It is the process of assisting an individual to make a wise and informed choice concerning an occupation, prepare for it, enter into and progress in it.
67  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION It can further be defined as a systematic process of exposing individuals to the existence of various careers, directing and helping such individuals in making informed and functional choices of the careers or vocations for which they are best suited considering identified potentials, personal abilities, talents, dispositions, aptitudes as well as available opportunities.
Vocational guidance prepares a person for participation in a meaningful and rewarding occupation in order to meet his/her personal and family needs as well as contribute his/her quota towards the economic, technological and social development of the society.
The recipient of Vocational Guidance can also be called a „client‟.
Even in the era of Traditional Vocational Education, some form of Vocational Guidance was still being practiced, even though non-professionals such as parents, guardians, elders provided such services, master craftsmen/women and even traditional native doctors or the „babalawos‟.
The Features of Career Guidance i.
Career guidance should be gender-friendly and must be done within the context of age and geographical location.
ii.
It should also extend to various but relevant the types of training as well as monitoring to ensure the acquisition of requisite skills and competencies that would enhance the individual‟s functionality and relevance in his/her chosen career.
iii.
It should involve fundamentals of entrepreneurship within the chosen vocation.
iv.
Individuals should be helped to realize and appreciate the fact that careers and jobs do not exist in watertight pidgin-holes but rather in clusters of related occupations.
v. It should also embrace the strategies/techniques of copying with, adjusting to and excelling in already chosen careers and jobs.
3.5 Aims/Objectives of Vocational Guidance The aims and objectives of vocational guidance include the following: i.
To enable one to examine discover and realize one‟s strengths and weaknesses.
68  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION ii.
To increase one‟s understanding of one‟s abilities, interests, values and other personality traits as distinct from those of others.
iii.
To enable one to use the said understanding to identify those occupational areas for which one is best suited.
iv.
To help an individual develop an acceptable self-image and realistic attitude towards academic achievements as a necessary prelude to vocations/careers.
v. To enable individuals understand the prevailing circumstances in the world of work and that legitimate occupations are worthwhile.
vi.
To motivate oriented towards appropriate career and orientation as well as creation of awareness of opportunities.
This involves helping people identify different occupational areas that are available both in the immediate and distant future; as well as the nature, purpose and direction to which each may lead to.
vii.
Surveying of employment and training prospects for special groups like girls, women, the physically challenged, school drop- outs and even the educationally disadvantaged groups.
To enable the government and other relevant agencies to determine the population of people in training, at work or out of work.
viii.
To inculcate in individuals the dignity of labour.
The basic principles of career guidance, therefore, is that an individual should be better equipped to make realistic and beneficial occupational plans or decisions after doing the following: 1. determining his/her own personal characteristics, talents, knowledge, skills, aptitudes, etc; 2. examining information about the various existing careers/jobs in terms of requirements, prospects and opportunities; and 3. matching or relating the two sets of facts above with the help of a skilled guide.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE List the major types of guidance, and describe the different guidance services.
4.0 CONCLUSION 69  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION When it comes to very important decisions or choices such as the choice of a career/profession job, square pegs must be fitted into square holes to enhance functionality, progress, as well as maximum productivity.
Individuals, families, the society, organizations and the nation are better off when this is achieved.
This can be done through effective career guidance.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have tried to examine the meaning of vocational or career guidance.
In doing this, we first discussed the meaning, the principles and types of guidance, before answering the question.
“What is Vocational Guidance?
We also discussed the aims and objectives of vocational career guidance.
It will be helpful for you to go through this unit once more, before moving on to unit 2, where we shall be looking at the importance of vocational guidance.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List and explain the objectives of vocational guidance?
2.
Identify the features of vocational guidance 3.
Discuss the importance of the students of vocational education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Iwuama B. C. (1991).
“Foundations of Guidance and Counselling”.
Benin City.
Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Miller J. V. and Vetter L. (1996).
“Vocational Guidance for Equal Access and Opportunity for Girls and Women in Technical and Vocational Education”.
Paris.
UNESCO.
UNIT 2 THE IMPORTANCE OF VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 70  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Importance of Vocational Guidance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is designed to assess the need for, and importance of vocational guidance to the following questions.
The brief assessment or examination will enable you recognize and appreciate the rationale for vocational guidance as an indispensable instrument for the achievement of the goals of the education generally and vocational education specifically.
You will also be able to explain why individuals, families, organizations, societies and nations who want all-round success and development cannot do without effective vocational or career guidance.
2.0OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: highlight the need for vocational guidance outline the importance or benefits of vocational guidance.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Importance of Vocational Guidance To enable you understand our discussions on the above topic, it is necessary for us to consider the fact that wrong choice of career/vocations could lead to the following: Various shades of unemployment including under-employment followed by attendant problems such as idleness, un-productivity, poverty, ill-health or premature death.
Lack of employment or job dissatisfaction could lead to frustration which in turn could lead to various anti-social behaviours such as quarreling, fighting, cheating, fraud, robbery, suicide, drunkenness and murder.
Low income, low standard of living, low per-capita income and general economic slavery and frustration both on the part of individuals and the nation.
71  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Technological over-dependence and insignificance.
Lack of fulfillment, anger, violence, waste of skills and talents, weak and frustrated labour force, as well as waste of human, financial and material resources.
In order to avoid the problems associated with wrong choice of careers as listed above, there is need for individuals to be guided, enabled and helped to make wise, viable, informed and profitable choices of careers and progressions for which they are best suited.
This will lead to job satisfaction, self-motivation, creativity, high productivity, fulfillment and achievement of organizational goals.
The Need for Vocational Guidance The specific situations or needs that make Vocational Guidance an imperative therefore include: 1.
The Dynamic Nature of the World of Work: Now more than ever, employment trends and requirements seem to vary in ways that are difficult to predict.
While new jobs are being created some old ones seem to be fading away or even varnish completely.
For instance, manual labour of various types particularly on farms will keep decreasing as farming/agriculture become mechanized and more sophisticated.
New occupations are appearing in areas such as computer, ecology and vocational technical fields.
Some types of equipment/ machines and office work are no longer necessary because new and sophisticated equipment that virtually run themselves (i.e.
need very little human attention) are coming up; therefore newer skills/knowledge are necessary to replace older ones.
2.
The increasing complexity and sophistication in the world of work plus the proliferation of career choices make the task of career choice and planning even more difficult.
3.
Predicting the nature of careers/occupations and the number of workers needed is becoming increasingly difficult.
Yet such prognoses are essential for planning education and training programmes.
4.
The Problem of Discrimination: There is an increasing need to help those who are faced with various forms of discrimination in career choice, planning and placement.
Though some barriers are gradually being removed, girls, women, and the physically challenged still face different types of obstacles including employer and societal prejudice in trying to get into certain profession/careers.
This should not be.
Therefore vocational 72  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION guidance is necessary to help break down such barriers and reduce the complications arising from deeply ingrained and often baseless stereotypes by reaching out to parents, the society and government for action.
5.
The Problem of Career Change: While career change at ages 30-50 is not new, their frequency is increasing.
Some of these changes are necessitated by the following factors: a) acute job dissatisfaction; b) increased self-discovery, realization, and understanding as well as awareness of options/alternatives; c) development of a life-styles that take the individual in a different direction from that originally chosen; d) retirement or disengagement from service; e) wives or mothers who return to the labour market after having their babies; f) young women who suddenly need employment because of the loss of their husbands; etc.
All these represent need for career change.
In most cases, there is an interaction of these factors with one or the other playing the leading role.
6.
The Problem of the Drop-Outs: The drop-outs who leave school due to one reason or the other are poorly equipped to find rewarding jobs in this science, computer and technology driven age.
You must remember that jobs appropriate for the unskilled and unprepared drop-outs are fast disappearing.
They need effective career guidance in order for them to be useful to themselves, their families and the economy as well as avoid their becoming a nuisance in the society.
7.
Wrong Societal Perception of Occupations: The society wrongly describes work that should be fulfilling and self- enhancing as degrading, menial, de-humanizing, blue collar, etc.
This confuses and puts a lot of pressure on individuals with low or no qualifications to go into them.
Some „celebrated‟ professions or careers may not meet the importance further to attach to them.
Vocational guidance is necessary to help remove the stigma and clear the confusion thereby encouraging individuals to go into careers they are best suited.
The Importance of Vocational Guidance 73  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION In view of the above, let us now consider the Importance of vocational guidance i.e.
what benefits individuals, the society and even the nation may derive from vocational guidance.
The importance and benefits of effective vocational guidance may be listed below for your guidance.
1.
It empowers individuals with socio-economic, political and vocational competencies.
2.
It helps the recipients to face prevailing economic realities by making necessary preparations/adjustments when necessary.
3.
It encourages career diffusion by exposing individuals to a world of possibilities for them to explore suitable career options.
4.
Individuals are made aware of available training opportunities in related/allied occupations.
5.
It challenges individuals to be creative, take initiative, and improvise useful economic strategies for survival.
6.
It leads to higher employment rates thereby boosting the nation‟s workforce.
7.
It creates enhanced vocational aspirations in individuals.
8.
It results in greater employment even into non-conventional occupations/careers.
9.
It creates in the individual the awareness of employment and entrepreneurial opportunities available through individuals various communication channels such as the internet.
10.
It enables the individuals develop appropriate educational and vocational training plans 11.
It leads to the acquisition/development of specific work and entrepreneurial skills.
12.
It equips recipients with the knowledge of legal rights and protection as these pertains to various occupations and careers.
13.
It increases retention and drop-outs/failures rates from various educational programmes.
74  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 14.
Vocational guidance when properly done, makes it possible for partakers to overcome various challenges/barriers to successful career lives.
15.
Enables individual to develop and sustain self-motivation as a result of self-discovery.
4.0CONCLUSION The importance of vocational guidance are numerous, as they are all geared towards injecting vibrancy into the economy and reducing and or eradicating unemployment/under-employment, economic/technological dependence and waste of human resources.
Developing economies such as Nigeria therefore need vocational guidance at, best, in order to stop or slow down the vicious circle of under-developed.
5.0SUMMARY In this unit, we have tried to x-ray the various situations that necessitate vocational guidance.
We have also highlighted the benefits/importance of vocational guidance.
Since vocational guidance is a life-long developmental process, it is never too late to embrace its services.
In unit 3, we shall be discussing the present state of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why is the world of work described as unique?
2.
What problems are associated with vocational guidance programmes in the Nigerian secondary school system?
7.0REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
75  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Iwuama B. C. (1991).
“Foundations of Guidance and Counselling”.
Benin City.
Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Miller J. V. and Vetter L. (1996).
“Vocational Guidance for Equal Access and Opportunity for Girls and Women in Technical and Vocational Education”.
Paris.
UNESCO.
UNIT 3 THE PRESENT STATE OF VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 76  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 A Brief History of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria 3.2 The Problems of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria 3.3 The Present State of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit presents a brief history of vocational guidance in Nigeria as a basis for you to appreciate/assess its present state in the country.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to: briefly outline the history of vocational guidance in Nigeria discuss the problems facing vocational guidance in Nigeria discuss the present state of vocational guidance in Nigeria.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Brief History of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria Vocational guidance is as old as the vocations.
Vocations on the other hand are as old as the human race because man has always needed to do something (engage in a vocation) as a means of livelihood; in order to survive on this planet.
The need to guide human beings in their choice of vocations has always existed.
Vocational guidance in crude, in simple terms could be said to be as old as the human race.
It is worth mentioning that vocational guidance has always been associated with vocational education although it actually permeates all the academic disciplines.
The need for vocational guidance has continued to grow with development and the consequent complexities of human societies.
Formal and organised Vocational Guidance originated from the United States of America as far back as 1900.
In Nigeria, traditional vocational guidance (TVG) was extensively practiced for a long time.
However, development and complex problems due to radical changes in the society rendered the practice of TVG 77  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION grossly inadequate.
As a result, from the 1940s, Nigeria began to borrow a leaf from the USA with regards to more formal and organised vocational guidance.
The history of the development of formal and organized vocational guidance in Nigeria can be summarized as follows: 1959: Some Revd.
Sisters at St. Theresa‟s College Oke-Ado in Ibadan out of concern about the welfare of their products (secondary- school leavers) after graduation, organized a kind of careers day for their final year students.
The success was resounding as fifty-four out of the sixty graduating students that year benefited from the exercise by getting good job placements.
This is generally accepted as the beginning of organized or formal Vocational Guidance in Nigeria.
1961: A guidance and career unit was established by the Federal Ministry of Education.
1962: As a result of the said success, the team of professionals who spoke at the careers day, came together to form the Ibadan Careers Council.
Other Careers Councils sprang up in different parts of the country e.g.
Enugu, Kano, Kaduna, Lagos, etc A 16-man team of Nigerian education officials/practitioners visited Sweden, France and the U.S.A to understudy their various educational systems with a view to adapting the same in Nigeria so as to improve the country‟s educational system.
The team recommended that adequate guidance and counseling was vital and that many Nigerian teachers should be trained in vocational guidance in order to act as guidance officers, in various secondary schools.
1963: This marked the establishment of the Aiyetoro Comprehensive High School as a model/demonstration school.
It had a Harvard and USAID staff (a trained counselor) who started a guidance programme in the school.
Later, more of such counselors were sent to the school to solidify the guidance programme and train more Nigerians in vocational as well as educational guidance.
The Test Development and Research Office (TEDRO) – a branch of WAEC was established.
It was charged with the responsibility of constructing and analyzing psychometric instruments such as standardized personality, interest or aptitude tests.
78  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 1967: The various careers councils in the country merged to form the nucleus of the Nigerian Careers Council with headquarters at Ibadan.
The council organised series of talks, seminars, workshop and symposia on vocation-related matters.
It also published a journal known as CAREERS.
1975-1980: The Third National Development Plan emphasized the need for adequate vocational guidance in order to meet the manpower needs of the Nation.
Government declared that career counseling would institutionalized in all the nation‟s educational and training institutions with adequate Federal and State Government encouragement.
1976: The Counseling Association of Nigeria (CAN) was launched as an umbrella association to accommodate both counselors and careers masters.
1977: The CAN was affiliated to the American Personnel and Guidance Association (APGA), and started publishing a journal called “The Counsellor” In the first National Policy on Education that was published in 1977.
Government re-echoed the need for vocational guidance in post-primary institutions in the country and re-affirmed its commitment to the training of interested teachers in guidance and counseling.
Guidance and counselling was also declared a major feature in teacher education programmes in the country.
Since then, government has continued to re-affirm it‟s appreciation of, and commitment to vocational guidance even in subsequent editions of the National policy on education (the latest being the 2004 edition).
It is however sad to observe that this appears to be more in principle than in practice since it is grossly inadequate to take vocational guidance to the height it is supposed to have attained in the country by now.
3.2 The Problems of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria Although formal vocational guidance services are about five decades old in Nigeria, rather it is unfortunate that its services are still at their “baby” stages of development and are still plagued by several teething problems.
Some of these problems include: 79  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION i.
Poor Societal Perception of Guidance and Counselling Services: The society sees guidance services as a waste of time and for those who have one problem or the other.
There is a kind of stigma associated with going to see a “counselor” and so most people do not like going for such services.
ii.
Poor Publicity: Generally, publicity and awareness for guidance and counseling services are rather poor in the country.
Infact, most people see guidance and counseling as being restricted to the secondary school pupils.
iii.
Inadequately Trained Personnel: The number of qualified guidance counsellors in the country is grossly inadequate to cope with the needs of the ever-increasing population in schools, let alone the society at large.
iv.
School-Related Problems: Even in the secondary schools, where guidance and counseling services are supposed to be very popular, there are still problems such as: Counselors combining counseling functions with other teaching/administrative responsibilities.
Insufficient time allocation for guidance activities.
This forces counselors to operate at unfavourable periods such as in-between teaching periods, break periods and even after school hours.
This has a negative impact on counseling activities.
Inadequate facilities such as counseling offices with the basic privacy and comfort needed for guidance and counseling.
Inadequate funding for guidance and counseling.
Unwillingness on the part of students and even parents.
Lack of co-operation from principals and other teachers v. Counsellor-Created Problems: These include: Not liaising with, or seeking the support and involvement of appropriate authorities in guidance activities.
Mismanagement of resources/funds.
Professional misconduct such as divulging secrets, sexual other forms of harassment, etc.
These create doubts and loss of confidence in the counsellors as well as the services they are supposed to render.
vi.
Lack of co-operation from employers of labour, and other establishments, with regards to releasing information that have to do with job descriptions, vacancies, trainings, remunerations and 80  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION other conditions of service that has to do with their various establishments.
3.3 The Present State of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria The present state of vocational guidance in Nigeria can be summed up with the following statement from National policy and education (Federal Republic of Nigeria, 2004): “In view of the apparent ignorance of many young people about career prospects, and in view of personality maladjustment among school children, career officers and counselors shall be appointed in post-primary institutions.
Since qualified personnel in this category are scarce, government shall continue to make provisions for the training of interested teachers in guidance and counseling.
Guidance and counseling shall also feature in teacher education programmes.
Proprietors of schools shall provide guidance-counsellors in adequate number in each primary and post-primary school.” Specifically, the present state of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria can be broken down as follows: Guidance services exist in some secondary schools especially in Federal Government Colleges across the country.
Some Government Secondary Schools not even offer such services; some do not have adequate and qualified guidance counselors and so have to depend on quasi-professionals in the field (career masters) who offer skeletal services.
In most schools, facilities for guidance and counseling are minimal or non-existent.
Most Primary Schools (Public and Private), as well as most private secondary schools do not have provisions for guidance counseling services.
Presently, vocational guidance programmes are primarily staffed by teachers of other subjects while counselors play a supervisory role to the teachers.
The responsibility for the organization and administration of guidance services fall on the Federal, State and Zonal levels of the ministries of education.
Guidance and counseling units in the Ministries supervise the guidance programmes in their secondary schools.
However, there seems to be a chronic shortage of qualified counselors to meet the expected target of at least one counselor per school (which is grossly inadequate); let alone extending such services to the public.
81  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Guidance and Counselling services are not popular with the Nigerian populace.
Such services are hardly available (outside schools, hospitals and churches).
Even where they exist, they enjoy little o no patronage due to ignorance and poor publicity.
The students who receive and use guidance services where provided, benefit tremendously from them.
Most Federal Universities in the country have established guidance and counseling departments under their various faculties of education to train potential counselors both at the undergraduate and post-graduate levels.
Yet most of such departments do not offer guidance services to the public or even to the university community.
Enrolments into such departments have remained relatively low due to poor image of the profession in Nigerians.
In the colleges of education, guidance and counselling courses are mainly introduce to the trainee teachers at the rudimentary level perhaps to prepare them for auxiliary counselor roles in the absence of trained/professional guidance personnel.
The Counseling Association of Nigeria (CAN) has all along made efforts to make the impact of guidance and counselling felt especially in the Nigerian educational system but the impact of such efforts does not seem to be felt generally.
A first degree in Guidance and Counseling is the minimum qualification for CAN membership.
4.0CONCLUSION It is evident that most societal ills, slow pace of development and low standard of living in the country could be directly or indirectly linked to the stunted growth its development of guidance and counseling; after nearly 50 years of formal existence in the country.
Fortunately the high-lighted problems and situations are all surmountable.
All we need in the country is less talk, more action and more commitment as far as vocational guidance is concerned.
5.0SUMMARY In this unit, we tried to high-light the problems facing vocational guidance in Nigeria before going on to discuss the present state of affairs of vocational guidance in Nigeria.
Our discussion has revealed that there are several problems and more is yet to be done to make vocational guidance in Nigeria what it should be.
Hope must be kept alive and merged with necessary action.
82  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION In the next unit (unit 4) we shall be looking at the way forward for vocational guidance in Nigeria.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What factors contributed to the introduction of career guidance in Nigeria?
2.
Outline and discuss the major problems associated with the establishment of career guidance in Nigerian universities and colleges of education?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (1991).
“Integrated Career Education: A Programme for Preparing School Graduates for the World of Work” Journal of Education (UNICROSS) Vo.
1 (1).
Ekpenyong, L. E. (2008).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education: Evolution and Practice”.
Benin City: Ambik Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC press.
Iwuama B. C. (1991).
“Foundations of Guidance and Counselling”.
Benin City.
Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Miller J. V. and Vetter L. (1996).
“Vocational Guidance for Equal Access and Opportunity for Girls and Women in Technical and Vocational Education”.
Paris.
UNESCO UNIT 4 THE FUTURE AND PROSPECT OF VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 83  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 3.1 The Way Forward for Vocational Guidance in Nigeria 3.2 The Future and Prospects of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses the way forward for vocational guidance in Nigeria that is solutions to the problems presented in Unit 3.
It goes further to attempt a prediction of the future prospect of vocational guidance in Nigeria should the said solutions and recommendations be implemented.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to: highlight some solutions to the prevailing problems of vocational guidance in Nigeria discuss the future prospects of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Way Forward For Vocational Guidance in Nigeria The following recommendations are made in order to provide possible solutions to the problems facing vocational guidance in Nigeria: i.
The Counseling Association of Nigeria (CAN) in collaboration with the government (Federal, State and Local), together with educational institutions, parastatals, agencies, should mount serious enlightenment campaigns in order to sensitize as well as educate the Nigerian populace on the importance and need for vocational guidance.
ii.
Government should take more practical steps towards enhancing the training and certification of guidance counsellors for schools and the society at large.
This can be done through increasing student enrolment for guidance courses in the universities and colleges of education.
This can be achieved through scholarship and bursary awards, allowances and in-service training with pay for those who wish to study guidance and counselling.
Moreover, all universities should be made to mount programmes in guidance and counselling.
84  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION iii.
Sufficient funds should be made available by government, school heads, parents, NGOs, industries, parastatals and parents for running guidance programmes.
iv.
Guidance and counselling services should be effectively extended to all levels of the educational system.
v. As much as possible, school counsellors should be exempted from classroom teaching and other administrative responsibilities to enable them concentrate on the challenges of counselling.
vi.
Adequate and convenient time should be provided on the timetable for guidance and counselling services in schools.
vii.
School heads, teachers and non-teaching school staff in should learn to appreciate, co-operate and assist the guidance counselors in the talks.
viii.
Private school owners should be made provide guidance counsellors in their various schools.
ix.
Counsellors should learn to adequately plan for guidance programmes.
They should learn to carry other members of staff along their assignments.
x.
Employers of labour including ministries and parastatals should co-operate with guidance counsellors by providing them with necessary information on opening within their organization.
This will make for enhanced effectiveness in vocational guidance.
3.2 The Prospect of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria If and when the above recommendations are put in place, the future should be very bright for vocational guidance in Nigeria.
Some of the prospects of vocational guidance in Nigeria include: 1) Every school (primary or secondary) will have at least one qualified vocational guidance personnel.
2) Every university will not just have a department of guidance and counselling for training but will extend counseling services (especially vocational guidance) to its community.
85  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 3) Everyone who needs vocational guidance both in and out of the formal school system will be able to receive it from a competent and recognized professional.
4) All practitioners in vocational guidance should have relevant and appropriate training and qualification.
5) Vocational guidance practitioners will be guided by a generally acceptable code of ethics.
6) Vocational guidance will be more organised with adequate facilities as well as proper documentation of procedures and outcomes of services rendered.
7) There will be increased demand for trained counselors of which Universities and Colleges of Education should be ready to meet.
8) Opportunities for continuing education in vocational guidance will be provided through campaigns, workshops, in-service distance-education.
9) A functional vocational research information centre will be established.
10) Proper vocational guidance will result in identification, enhancement and upgrading of existing skills and talents.
11) Vocational Guidance will utilize occupational information materials such as videos, video clips, career leaflets, fliers, films, displays, posters, career corners, careers days/symposia, workshops and even periodical newsletters to expose clients/students/participants to career opportunities and their demands.
12) Appropriate laws and legislation will be put in place to protect people in certain vocations as well as some disadvantaged groups such as school drop outs, the physically challenged, women, etc who will be willing and able to enter into certain careers.
13) Vocational guidance will be expanded to include consultation with parents, employers, of labour in public and private organizations.
14) Effective and functional evaluation system will be put in place to periodically assess the effectiveness of the programme.
86  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 4.0CONCLUSION Effective vocational guidance is critical to the success of any laudable educational programme such as open distance education, mass literacy, adult, non-formal and special education, the Universal Basic Education (UBE), the 6-3-3-4 system of education and of course Vocational Education.
It is equally critical to the ultimate well-being, financial emancipation and development of Nigeria and it‟s citizens.
We cannot afford any further delays in giving Vocational Guidance the attention and actions it deserves so as to yield value returns to our nation and the entire populace.
5.0SUMMARY In this unit, we have tried to put forward some recommendations/solutions to the problems that have kept vocational Guidance in its “babyhood” for close to 50 years of its formal existence in the country.
We have also peeped into the future, and projected some prospects of Vocational Guidance in Nigeria especially if and when the said recommendations are put in place.
All hands should be on deck to actualize these dreams so that we can all benefit from the positive results it is capable of yielding.
In Module 5, we shall be discussing “Evaluation of Vocational Education”.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the sources which vocational guidance may best be funded in Nigeria today?
2.
What role has the CAN played in the popularization of career guidance in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (2008).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education: Evolution and Practice”.
Benin City: Ambik Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
87  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Iwuama B. C. (1991).
“Foundations of Guidance and Counselling”.
Benin City.
Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Miller J. V. and Vetter L. (1996).
“Vocational Guidance for Equal Access and Opportunity for Girls and Women in Technical and Vocational Education.” Paris.
UNESCO.
MODULE 5 EVALUATION OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION This module is designed to introduce you to the basic concepts of evaluation particularly with regards to vocational education.
This will help you consolidate all that we have already discussed in the previous modules.
88  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION To achieve this, you will be taken through the following units: Unit 1 The Meaning of Evaluation Unit 2 The Need for Evaluation Unit 3 Types of Evaluation in Vocational Education Unit 4 Post-Evaluation Follow-up UNIT 1 THE MEANING OF EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Evaluation?
3.1.1 Measurement and Evaluation 3.1.2 Measurement versus Evaluation 3.1.3 The Scope of Evaluation 3.1.4 Limitation in Evaluation 3.1.5 Process of Evaluating Educational Programmes 3.1.6 Criteria for Effective Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Generally, evaluation is seen as an “on-going” process and not just an “event”.
Evaluation refers to a systematic process of examining or considering something in order to determine how valuable, relevant or useful it is.
In education, it can be described as the process of ascertaining the extent to which an educational programme has been able to achieve its aims and objectives.
Evaluation is critical to the success of any educational programme particularly vocational education.
This is because the world of work (industry and commerce) and even the society, which vocational education is supposed to serve, is very dynamic.
This implies that changes are inevitable in the system.
Evaluation therefore provides the basis for necessary changes such as adjustments and modifications of the programme in order to maintain and enhance its relevance, usefulness and functionality 89  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of the unit, you should be able to: discuss the concept of evaluation in vocational education with regards to meaning, relationship and scope.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Evaluation?
Evaluation can be generally described as the systematic process of determining the value, worth or usefulness of something.
When it comes to the field of education, evaluation is the process of determining the value, worth, relevance or usefulness of an educational programme or curriculum.
It can further be described as a complete and systematic process of identifying the objectives of an educational programme, and appraising the extent to which such objectives have been achieved through the use of tests and other types of evidence that could results in effective decision-making.
What is Evaluation in Vocational Education?
Evaluation in vocational education refers to a systematic process of ascertaining the worth, value, effectiveness, relevance and usefulness of the entire vocational education programme.
Consequently, the goals, objectives, standards, learning materials, delivery strategies, trainees as well as trainers in vocational education need to be evaluated.
3.1.1 Measurement and Evaluation These two terms usually appear together or go hand in hand.
However they are not synonymous but complementary in functions.
Measurement always precedes evaluation; while evaluation enhances the use/relevance of the results of measurement.
We can therefore define measurement as the systematic process of getting quantified descriptions of: (a) Performance (in view of objectives); or (b) The degree to which certain traits or behaviours are manifested (in view of expected outcomes; and (c) The extent to which an educational programme has achieved it‟s objectives.
Various kinds of tests are used in such measurement.
90  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Evaluation usually succeeds careful measurement.
It involves a systematic and careful analysis of quantitative records (generated through measurement), qualitative evidence and fairly subjective impressions to arrive at reliable interpretations, value judgments as well as decisions on the extent to which stated objectives and desirable outcomes have been achieved.
3.1.2 Measurement versus Evaluation In a nutshell, the following are the distinctions between measurement and evaluation.
Measurement Evaluation 1) Generates data and information 1) Interprets the said on which the evaluation data/information in order to process can be based.
make value judgments and decisions.
2) Usually expressed in numbers 2) Usually expressed in letters and Figures and words 3) Does not express value 3) Expresses value judgment judgment that lead to decisions 4) Marks the beginning of the 4) Marks the conclusion of the process process 5) Results are not very 5) Results are meaningful to meaningful to non-experts everyone 3.1.3 The Scope of Evaluation Evaluation in education usually covers the following scope: 1) Evaluation of Achievement (Students): This can be broken down into three according to the major domains in education: i.
Evaluation of academic achievement, which has to do with the cognitive domain and is very popular in the school system.
ii.
Evaluation of personal-social adjustment which has to do with the affective domain and iii.
Evaluation of the state of development of specific motor skills, particularly in which has to do with the psychomotor domain.
2) Programme Evaluation: This is done to determine the extent to which programme objectives are being achieved.
In doing this, the major elements of the programme such as the objectives, curriculum contents, target groups, the context and resources (funds, facilities, personnel, equipment, materials, environment 91  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION as well as methods and procedures) are all subjected to evaluation.
Here, the CIPP evaluation model in which the programme is evaluated under four major headings: the Context, Input, Process and Product can be used.
Other evaluation models here include the countenance, the discrepancy, the transactional, the goal-free and the naturalistic models.
3) Evaluation of the System (process): Education is an open system which is made up of: (i) Intakes (students) (ii) Personnel (teaching and supportive) (iii) The curriculum (iv) Teaching methods and materials (availability and use) (v) Administrative organization (at the ministry and institution levels); and (vi) Individual teacher‟s classroom organization and management.
All these make up the “process” of an educational system.
The success of any system therefore depends on the quality of the entire process.
The various techniques/strategies of manipulating the elements in the “process” ultimately determine the performance of the products (graduates) of any educational programme.
4) Evaluation of the Products (Graduates): Generally, education is aimed at turning out graduates who will adjust to and affect the society positively.
Similarly, the main objective of vocational education is to turn out products (graduates) who have acquired appropriate employable/saleable skills to enable them gain, maintain or create employment.
Various stakeholders therefore can evaluate the products (graduates) of various educational programmes.
For instance, the society can assess such products on the basis of their ability to adjust to and affect the society positively; or on how easily they are able to gain, maintain and create employment, etc.
Employers can assess them on their performance on the job that how well they are in doing that which they were trained to do.
Evaluation as described above can be done systematically and objectively to a large extent.
Product evaluation is done to ascertain product quality, the extent to which programme objectives and the execution strategies have been achieved.
3.1.4 Limitation in Evaluation 92  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Effective evaluation is indispensable if any educational programme such as vocational education is to remain qualitative, functional and relevant.
However, some factors tend to limit the effectiveness of the evaluation process.
Some of these are: time the complex nature of human beings and their behaviour the indirect nature of some measuring instruments.
Detailed discussions on this are beyond the scope of this work.
3.1.5 Process of Evaluating Educational Programmes The process of evaluating educational programmes such as vocational education involves the following steps: (i) Stating programme objectives (ii) Establishing the evaluation criteria which should strictly apply to the objectives (iii) Conducting measures in order to generate evidence from which result will be produced.
(iv) Weighing the said evidence against the established criteria or standard.
(v) Making value judgment and taking informed decisions based on the results.
3.1.6 Criteria for Effective Evaluation For any evaluation exercise to be regarded as effective, it should endeavour to meet at least five basic criteria namely: i) Value: This has to do with the worth of the evaluation process – instrument, procedures, materials, etc used for the exercise.
ii) Credibility: This refers to proof of the factual and truthful nature of the evaluation process.
iii) Objectivity: The process should be as fair and objective as possible.
All elements of bias, prejudice, sentiments and subjectivity must be avoided.
iv) Communicability: The process must include a feed-back mechanism where data/information or results, could be presented clearly and unambiguously to various stakeholders.
93  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION v) Utility: The results from the exercise must be relevant enough to guide interested parties in making value judgments and informed decisions.
These five criteria are not mutually exclusive; they are inter-related and inter-dependent SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Show the difference between the term „measurement‟ and „evaluation‟.
4.0 CONCLUSION Effective and consistent evaluation is critical to the success of any educational programme, particularly vocational education.
It spices up and injects vibrancy into the system.
It also puts in place necessary checks and balances aimed at achieving high standards and quality.
The basic concept of evaluation needs to be thoroughly grasped by various stakeholders in vocational education.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit presented an overview of the basic concept of evaluation in vocational education – the meaning, relationship with measurement, scope, limitations and criteria.
The next Unit (Unit 2) will attempt to establish the rationale for evaluation evaluating vocational education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How may you conduct career guidance programme in your school?
2.
What factors would you bear in mind when evaluating a vocational programme?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC press.
94  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Iwuama B. C. (1991).
“Foundations of Guidance and Counselling”.
Benin City.
Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Miller J. V. and Vetter L. (1996).
“Vocational Guidance for Equal Access and Opportunity for Girls and Women in Technical and Vocational Education”.
Paris.
UNESCO.
Ogwo, B.
A and Oranu, R. N. (2006).
“Methodology in Formal and Non-Formal Technical/Vocational Education”.
Enugu: Ijejas Printers & Publishers Company.
UNIT 2 THE NEED FOR EVALUATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Need for Evaluation 95  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is designed to answer the following questions: (a) Is there a real need for evaluation in vocational education?
(b) What are the needs, roles and importance of evaluation in vocational education?
Answers to the above questions will enhance our understanding and appreciation of the concept of evaluation in vocational education.
2.0OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: identify and briefly discuss the need for, and role of evaluation in vocational education.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Need for Evaluation In order to appreciate the need for evaluation, we need to recall the nature of vocational education.
I am sure you remember that vocational education is a relatively new, capital-intensive, practical, and career-oriented academic field of study.
Both the society, families and employers, have great expectation of vocational education.
This implies that vocational education is to enable individuals to produce value returns and benefits to themselves, employers and the society.
Effective evaluation is a veritable instrument for achieving this.
The need for evaluation in vocational education therefore includes the following: i) To ensure that the various programmes are relevant and responsive to the needs and changes in the society as well as the world of work.
96  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION ii) To ascertain and enhance the effectiveness of the programmes in view of the amount of money, facilities, time and effort spent.
iii) To identify in-built problems as well as make necessary adjustments and changes to correct them.
iv) To determine the quality of the products (graduates) of various programmes.
v) To determine the outcome of the said programmes.
vi) To ascertain the effectiveness of teachers, curriculum, teaching methods and materials, etc.
vii) To assess the extent to which various programme objectives are being achieved.
viii) To determine the status-quo (the present situation/practice) as far as each programme is concerned and compare this with the state of the art that is in terms of what it should be.
ix) To select students or who appropriate careers.
x) To determine the relative performance of each student/candidate in career selection.
xi) To inculcate in students the attitude and skills of self-evaluation and healthy competition.
xii) To motivate students and build self-confidence in those who may not perform well.
xiii) To form the basis for assisting and guiding students vocationally and otherwise.
xiv) To provide a yardstick for accrediting various programmes.
xv) To generally contribute to the improvement of the quality of the entire education system.
xvi) To inculcate the spirit of consciousness of quality and accountability required of programme executors and implementers of vocational education programme.
4.0CONCLUSION The need for evaluation in the education system can never be over- emphasized.
This need is even more critical in vocational education 97  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION because of it‟s capital-intensive and practical nature.
Indeed, there is no substitute to effective evaluation if education is to be credible, relevant, responsive, and functional.
5.0SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the need for evaluation particularly in Vocational Education.
We also highlighted some of the roles/needs/functions of evaluation in education.
The next unit (unit 3) shall be discussing the types of Evaluation in Vocational Education.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why is evaluation needed in an academic programme?
2.
Why evaluation necessary in a vocational programme?
7.0REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC Press.
Iwuama B. C. (1991).
“Foundations of Guidance and Counselling”.
Benin City.
Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Miller J. V. and Vetter L. (1996).
“Vocational Guidance for Equal Access and Opportunity for Girls and Women in Technical and Vocational Education”.
Paris.
UNESCO.
Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Ogwo, B.
A and Oranu, R. N. (2006).
“Methodology in Formal and Non-Formal Technical/Vocational Education”.
Enugu: Ijejas Printers & Publishers Company UNIT 3 TYPES OF EVALUATION IN VOCATIONAL EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 98  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 3.1 Types of Evaluation in Vocational Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are different types of evaluation.
Some classifications are based on when such evaluation exercise is conducted.
Others are based on various approaches and models.
Some are particularly relevant to vocational education while others are not.
This unit discusses the various types of evaluation that are relevant and useful to vocational education.
2.0 OBJECTIVE By the end of the unit, you should be able to: identify and briefly discuss some type and approaches to evaluation in vocational education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Types of Evaluation in Vocational Education As we have indicated earlier, there are different evaluation depending on the types, models and approaches.
Some of them are not quite applicable to vocational education.
It is necessary for us to briefly discuss a few of those that are applicable to vocational education.
They include the following: 1. those that seek to assess the extent of achievement of desired outcomes.
Such types or methods are generally handled under the “objective model”.
2. those that seek to establish the merit of an entity (i.e.
the worth of a programme at the beginning; as well as after it has been completed.
Evaluation using any of the first approach is referred to as “formative” that the evaluation is done at the beginning of a programmer.
The evaluation that is done after the completion of the programme is summative.
99  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 3.
Those which are decision-oriented, and are usually referred to as “decision-models”.
We will briefly discuss the above models plus a few others that are considered relevant and necessary.
1.
The Objective Model This appears to be the oldest and most popular approach.
It emphasizes the assessment of the extent to which desired learning outcomes have been achieved.
Here, a number of factors such as programme objectives, course content, students‟ performance, assessment procedure, etc, are evaluated in relation to intended outcomes.
This makes it possible to identify areas of success and problems; and at the same time, proffer solutions or remedies to them.
2.
Formative Evaluation This is used to assess students‟ performance or programme effectiveness at the beginning and during the various stages of developing it.
Frequent assessment conducted as the programme progresses serves the following purposes: to clarify instructional objectives/course content; to highlight areas of weakness, thereby creating room for improvement or change in instructional methods, materials, etc while the programme is still on; to highlight areas of strengths and success for consolidation; to play preventive, corrective and motivational role for students and teachers; to enhance the success of summative evaluation.
Formative evaluation philosophy is in line with the continuous periodic assessment of students which has recommended in the 6-3-3-4 system of education.
3.
Summative Evaluation This is conducted at the completion of a course or programme.
It aims at ascertaining the extent to which stated objectives have been achieved.
It also assesses the worth or over-all effectiveness of a programme after it‟s implementation and shows the quality of students‟ performance after they have completed the course/programme.
100  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION When properly organized and executed, formative and summative evaluation may be used to generate information and develop criteria upon which value judgments and decisions about the worth or success of a programme may be based.
4.
Ultimate Evaluation This is fairly new and takes place in order to authenticate or consolidate on formative and summative evaluation.
It occurs when the product (graduate/ex-student) of a particular programme is already working in an occupation for which he/she is trained.
Here, the employer of the ex- student is the evaluator and seeks to assess the extent to which the aims of the vocational education programme has be attained.
This can be done by assessing the work performance of the graduate on the job.
Results of such evaluation can lead to promotion, job retention or a sack, where the ex-student cannot defend his/her certificate.
5.
Decision-Making Approaches These are guided by the assumption that there are strategic stages of a programme at which decisions have to be made.
Such stages include: Planning stage Take-off stage Implementation stage; and Follow-up stage.
There are several modified versions of this approach.
They include: a. CIPP Model This was developed by Stake in 1967.
CIPP is an acronym for Context, Input, Process and Product.
(Product can also be called output).
i.
Context: This refers to the setting, environment, atmosphere, conditions, background, etc.
under which the educational programme operates.
ii.
Input: This refers to facilities, equipment, personnel, funds, materials, programme designs, objectives, assessment criteria, planned delivery strategies among others.
iii.
Process: This has to do with strategies, techniques, methods and procedures used for programme execution.
101  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION iv.
Product or output: This has to do with the performance of the graduates of a programme.
These may be ex-students or drop- outs from the programme.
These four criteria (CIPP) are assessed in order to make value judgments and informed decisions about the course/programme.
b. ATO Model ATO is an acronym for Antecedent, Transactions and Outcome.
It provides a very wide scope for evaluation of programmes.
i. Antecedent: This refers to the prevailing circumstances or conditions prior to the programme.
These include teaching/learning resources, teacher/student characteristics, and curriculum content.
before the course/programme.
ii.
Transaction: This has to do with the different kinds of interactions and activities that take place at the development and implementation stages of a course or programme.
iii.
Outcome: This refers to the results and consequences of transactions in various contexts or phases of the programme.
The evaluator can therefore assess learning outcomes, economic outcomes, job performance outcomes or even outcomes on the quality of life of the programme participants.
c. EIPO Model This was developed by Dave in 1980.
EIPO stands for Environment, Input, Process and Outcomes - immediate and long-range.
There are several other models suitable for evaluation in Vocational Education.
The evaluator may wish to choose from various techniques such as questionnaires, interviews, readability indices, or cost-effective analysis, in carrying out the evaluation exercise.
Whatever type or technique is chosen should be such that could generate information upon which value judgments or decision can be made concerning the vocational education programme being evaluated.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Show the different between formative and summative evaluation.
4.0CONCLUSION 102  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION There are several types of evaluation in education.
Generally some of these are particularly suitable for evaluating vocational education.
The choice of method lies with the evaluator, who is in a position to determine the most suitable type for the kind of evaluation exercise he/she is has in mind.
5.0SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed various types/approaches/models of evaluation that can be applied in Vocational Education – the objective method, formative, summative and ultimate methods as well as some decision- making approaches.
In the next unit (Unit 4), we shall be discussing Post-Evaluation Follow- up which will mark the end of our discussions in this course.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain what constitutes ultimate evaluation?
2(a).
What do you mean by ATO model of evaluation?
(b) Why is this model important in evaluating a vocational programme 3.
Why the decision model important in evaluating a vocational programme?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC press.
Iwuama B. C. (1991).
“Foundations of Guidance and Counselling”.
Benin City.
Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Miller J. V. and Vetter L. (1996).
“Vocational Guidance for Equal Access and Opportunity for Girls and Women in Technical and Vocational Education”.
Paris.
UNESCO.
Ogwo, B.
A and Oranu, R. N. (2006).
“Methodology in Formal and Non-Formal Technical/Vocational Education”.
Enugu: Ijejas Printers & Publishers Company.
103  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION UNIT 4 POST- EVALUATION FOLLOW-UP CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 104  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION 3.1 What is Post- Evaluation Follow-Up?
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this module, we have been discussing the concept of evaluation and its relevance to education generally and to vocational education specifically.
Generally, evaluation helps to establish and maintain high standards as well as quality in the educational system.
One important criterion for evaluation is communicability.
This implies that the results, outcomes, value judgments, decisions, suggestions and recommendations generated through the evaluation process should be effectively communicated to various stake-holders (those who need them) in order to get maximum benefits from the exercise.
This is done by way of feed-back without which the evaluation process is reduced to a mere “disturbance” and waste of time and resources.
Effective evaluation therefore must include an effective feed-back mechanism.
Such feed-back and implications must be monitored or followed-up even after the actual evaluation process to ensure implementation and or consolidation.
This is what post-evaluation follow-up is all about.
2.0 OBJECTIVE By the end of the unit, you should be able to: discuss the meaning, importance and relevance of Post-Evaluation Follow-Up to the evaluation process.
3.0MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Post-Evaluation Follow-Up?
This can be described as a systematic process of ensuring that evaluation outcomes, results, implications, decisions and recommendations are properly communicated to those who need them by way of feed back; as 105  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION well as monitoring, to ensure adequate implementation after the actual evaluation exercise.
Effective post-evaluation follow-up caps up the evaluation process and makes it more meaningful, useful and relevant to the educational system.
Post-evaluation feed-back and follow-up go hand in hand.
A good evaluation exercise therefore should generate what we can call the four (4) Rs: a.
Results: This refers to actual evaluation results, outcomes, decisions, problems, value judgments, etc.
b.
Reasons: This has to do with identified reasons for such results, problems, or outcomes.
c. Remedies/Recommendations: This implies solutions and suggestions for improvement or consolidation on the said results.
d. Reports: This refers to a compilation of the three Rs above and communication of same to those who need them.
Evaluation process Results Reasons Remedies/Recommendations Report (feed back) The figure above shows the relationship between the evaluation process and the 4Rs.
The report should be communicated by way of feed-back and followed-up/monitored (even after the exercise, by way of post- evaluation follow-up).
Features of a good feed-back report 106  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Essentially, a good feed-back report should possess the following features: It should be simple, unambiguous and easily understood by those who need it.
It should be based on stated objectives and objective evaluation.
It should be timely, confidential and directed to those who need them.
It should be practical i.e.
implementation of the recommendations should be feasible.
It should be economical.
Who Needs Post-Evaluation Reports (Feed-back)?
Post-evaluation reports/feed-back are needed by one or more stake- holders in vocational education for one purpose or the other.
Such stake- holders include: Students: Such reports enhance self-guidance, self-motivation, correction, healthy competition, consolidation of learning outcomes.
Parents: Such reports will help them advise, encourage, correct and motivate their children/wards.
It helps to justify expenses and to motivate them to give more support to their wards who need it.
Curriculum Planners/Administrators: Feed-back reports help in curriculum/administrative reviews, adjustments, improvements and consolidation.
Guidance Counsellor: Feed-back reports enhance the abilities of counselors to help their clients arrive at informed decisions/choices both academically and vocationally.
Teachers/Programme Executors: These people need such reports to help them assess their delivery/execution methods, materials, strategies as well as techniques and personnel with a view to changing or consolidating on them for better performances.
Prospective Employers: Feed-back reports/results enhance proper selection, classification, promotion, further training, etc.
Institutions’ Admissions Officers: Such reports enhance proper placement of students into appropriate grades, classes, courses or departments.
The Government/Society: Feed-back reports create awareness, appreciation of various programmes, justifies/expenditure as well as encourage more funding, changes, consolidation.
These benefits can only be achieved through consistent and effective Post-Evaluation Follow-up.
This involves monitoring to ensure that necessary changes/consolidations are made, recommendations are 107  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION implemented and the out-comes of the evaluation process are not swept under the carpet.
4.0CONCLUSION Post-evaluation follow-up is critical to the relevance, success and usefulness of any evaluation exercise.
This is because it gives value to the entire process by ensuring that issues raised are duly addressed by the affected parties in the interest of various stakeholders as well as the entire educational system.
Post-evaluation follow-up is particularly relevant to any evaluation exercise in vocational education because of the practical and capital- intensive nature of the programmes.
5.0SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the concept of post-evaluation follow-up – the meaning, relevance and implication to the evaluation process.
We also established that such follow-up must be preceded by and based on effective feed-back report mechanism.
This marks the end of our discussions in this course.
These discussions are not in any way exhaustive.
I encourage you to go through the entire material again to enhance your understanding of the various topics/units.
6.0TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List those sources that need evaluation in their programmes and explain why they need it?
2.
Why is post evaluation programme really necessary in TVE?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ekpenyong, L. E. (2005).
“Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education”: New Directions and Approaches.
Benin City: Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
“National Policy on Education” (4th Ed) Yaba.
NERDC press.
108  BED 115 FOUNDATIONS OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION Iwuama B. C. (1991).
“Foundations of Guidance and Counselling”.
Benin City.
Supreme Ideal Publishers Int.
Ltd. Miller J. V. and Vetter L. (1996).
“Vocational Guidance for Equal Access and Opportunity for Girls and Women in Technical and Vocational Education”.
Paris.
UNESCO.
Ogwo, B.
A and Oranu, R. N. (2006).
“Methodology in Formal and Non Formal Technical/Vocational Education”.
Enugu: Ijejas Printers & Publishers Company.
109
