 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: BED 413 COURSE TITLE: OFFICE ORGANISATION AND MANAGEM ENT i  Co urse Guide Course Code: BED 413 Course Title: OFFICE ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Course Developer: Inegbedion Juliet O. NOUN, Lagos Course Writer: Professor L. E. Ekpenyong Department of Vocational and Technical Education Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City Course Editor: Professor B.
A. Agbonifor Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences University of Benin Benin City Course Coordinator: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria ii  PAGES 1.
Introduction1 2.
What you will learn from this course 3.
Course Aims 4.
Course Objectives 5. working through the course 6.
Course Materials 7.
Study Units 8.
References 9.
Assignment file 10.
Presentation schedule 11.
Assessment 12.
Final Examination Grading 13.
Course Working Scheme 14.
How to get most from the course 15.
Tutor and Tutorials 16 Summary iii  BED 411: OFFICE ORGANI ZATION AND MANAGE MENT This course is designed to equip the business students with the knowledge and skills relating to efficient functioning of the modern business offices and related organizations.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN You will learn about the structure, functions and practices applicable to a modern business office.
COURSE AIMS This course aims at producing competent office managers, organizers and practitioners.
In order to enable you meet the above aims, the course has been designed in modules each of which has a number of units intended to facilitate your logical and easy assimilation of the contents of the course.
Again, each course unit consists of learning objectives to enable you assess how well you have achieved the set objectives.
COURSE OBJECTIVES The course objectives are meant to enable you achieve the following: 1.
Develop understanding of the structure and functions of a modern office; 2.
Acquire knowledge and skills for handling office documents, and routines; 3.
Understand and practise the procedures for handling and processing office data and transactions; 4.
Appreciate the importance of leadership, motivation, and human relations to worker satisfaction.
4  WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE GUIDE You are required to work through all the units thoroughly.
The course has six modules and 18 units in all.
COURSE MATERIALS The major components of materials and personnel for this course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
Text Books 4.
CDS 5.
Tutor 6.
Assignment file 7.
Presentation Schedule.
STUDY UNITS The breakdown of the six modules and 18 study units are as follows: MODULE I: THE SETTING OF OFFOCE ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT Unit I: The Office Today UNIT 2: Trends in Office Automation UNIT 3: The Workstation 5  UNIT 4: Types of Of fice Structure MODULE 2: OFFICE LAYOUT AND SPACE MANAGEMENT UNIT I: Principles of Office Layout UNIT 2: The working Environment MODULE 3: CONVENTIONAL AND ELECTRONIC MAIL SERVICES UNITI: Incoming Mail UNIT 2: Outgoing Mail UNIT 3: Types of Mail and Other Delivery Services UNIT 4: The Mail Room MODULE 4: COMMUNIC ATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT UNIT 1: communication in Office Transactions UNIT 2: Methods of Record Processing UNIT 3: Classification of Filing Systems UNIT 4: Systems of Filing and Indexing MODULE 5: FORMS DESIGN AND DATA ENTRY UNIT1: Forms and Forms Design UNIT 2: Principles of Form Design MODULE 6: LEADERSHIP AND MOTIVATION AT WORK 6  UNIT 1: Meaning, Theories and P rinciples of Leadership Unit 2: Interpersonal Relationships at the Place of Work REFERENCES AND OTHER RESOURCES Every unit contains a list of references and further reading.
Try as much as you can to get the listed books and further reading materials.
You are also expected to approach the internet for further related reading materials.
This is to widen as well as deepen the depth of understanding of this course.
ASSIGNMENT FILE You will find in this file all the details of the assignments you must attempt and submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you will obtain from these assignments will count towards your final course grade.
You will find further information on the assignments in the assignment file which you will find later in the section on assignment in this course Guide.
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation schedule which is included in your course materials gives you the important dates for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and for attendance of tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments on due dates.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
ASSESSMENT Your assessment will be based on tutor-marked assignments (TMAs) and a final examination which you will write at the end of the course.
TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENTS (TMA) Every unit contains at least one or two assignments.
You are advised to work through all the assignments and submit them for assessment.
Your tutor will assess the assignments and select four, which will be marked and the best three will be selected which will constitute 30% of your final grade.
The tutor-marked assignments may be presented to you in a separate file.
Just know that for every unit there are some tutor-marked assignments for you.
It is important you do them and submit for assessment.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING At the end of the course, you will write a final examination which will constitute 70% of your final grade.
In the examination which shall last for 7  two hours, you will b e requested to answer three questions out of at least five questions that may be given to you.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME This table shows how the actual course marking is broken down.
Assessment Marks Assignments Four assignments.
Best three marks of the four count as 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to the lecture.
In the same way a lecturer might give you some reading to do, the study units tell you when to read, and which are your text materials or set books.
You are provided exercises to do at appropriate points, just as a lecturer might give you in-class an exercise.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next to this is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
These learning objectives are meant to guide your study.
The moment a unit is finished, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If this is made a habit, then you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a Reading section.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor‘s job is to help you.
When you need assistance, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
IN ADDITION TO THE FOLLOWING: 1.
Read this course Guide thoroughly, it is your first assignment 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Design a ‘Course Overview’ to guide you through the Course.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important 8  information, e.g.
details of yo ur tutorials, and the date of the first day of the Semester is available from the study centre.
You need to gather all the information into one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates and schedule of work for each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stay faithful to it.
The major reason that students fails is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please, let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1, and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Work through the unit.
As you work through the unit, you will know what sources to consult for further information.
6.
Keep in touch with your study centre.
Up-to-date course information will be continuously available there.
7.
Assemble the materials.
You will need your set books and the unit you are studying at any point in time.
8.
Well before the relevant due dates (about 4 week before due dates); keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignment carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and,, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not late than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel that you are not sure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
11.
When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the Assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor—marked assignment form and also the written comments on the ordinary assignments.
12.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS The dates, time and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you, together with the name, telephone number and the address of your tutor.
Each assignment will be marked by your tutor.
Pay close attention to 9  the comments your tut or might make on your assignments as these will help in your progress.
Make sure that assignments reach your tutor on or before the due date.
Your tutorials are important, therefore, try not to skip any.
It is an opportunity to meet your tutor and your fellow students.
It is also an opportunity to get the help of your tutor and discuss any difficulties you might have encountered during the course of your reading.
10  Course Code: BED 413 Course Title: OFFICE ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT Course Developer: Inegbedion, Juliet O. NOUN, Lagos Course Writer: Professor L. E. Ekpenyong Department of Vocational and Technical Education Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City Course Editor: Professor B.
A. Agbonifor Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences University of Benin Benin City Course Coordinator: Inegbedion, Juliet O.
School of Education National Open University of Nigeria 11  MODULE 1: TH ME SETTING OFFICE ORGANIZATION AND ANAGEMENT INTRODUCTION This module is intended to introduce you, the student, to the nature of modern office organizations.
You will be expected to study the impact of information and communication technology, automation of the office, the design of workstations and the organizational structure of business enterprises, particularly the office aspect.
UNIT 1: THE OFFICE TODAY CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION Compared to the office of the 19th and mid 20th century, when shorthand, manual typewriters, writing with the quill feathers and bookkeeping were the dominant features of office functions, change in technology has progressively changed the phase of office functions.
Consequently, the office functions of today are being changed by new range of information and communication technology gadgets such as the computer, and the electronic mail systems.
The course you are about to study, office organization and management, is intended to introduce you to the modern trends and practices in modern day office organizations.
In doing so, we shall draw ideas from various aspects of business disciplines such as management, accounting, and information and communication technology to enhance your performance as office manager.
In this first unit of module I, you will be expected to be able to define an office and office management, know the different types of offices and their functions as well as the activities that are being carried out in the different office departments.
Your will be expected to recognize the key 12  organizational people whose roles impact on the running of the various sections of the organization.
2.0 OBJECTIVES As indicated in our introduction, at the end of this unit your will be expected to: i) Define an office, office management and organization ii) Recognize the different types of offices iii) Explain how offices function iv) Recognize the functions of various office departments v) Identify the key role players in large organizations 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 DEFINITION OF OFFICE, OFFICE MANAGEMENT AND ORGANISATION Offices are generally defined in terms of functions.
Thus we shall define an office simply as a particular room or building set aside within an organization for the purpose of performing various clerical transactions which may range from financial, personnel, legal, medical, record keeping, to information and data processing.
Office management: This is concerned with the rational use of organizational resources, human and material, for the purpose of achieving practical results.
Office organization, as a subset of office management is concerned with the conscious coordination of organizational units such as offices comprising two or more people that function on a relatively continuous basis to achieve the departmental or the overall organizational goals.
3.2 TYPES OF OFFICES The types of offices are determined by the type of business or services which they offer or render to their customers or clients.
Again some offices are large while some are small.
In production firms such as manufacturing, the office is meant to support the organization in its major task of production.
In business firms such as banking, insurance, and government establishments, the office provides supporting services.
13  While individual orga nizations may have certain peculiar procedures, the fact remains that man y office rules and procedures are common to most organizations.
For instance, you may wish to think of how life would look like in an organization where information processing, record keeping are not done.
Another point you should note is that the size of an office is determined by the type of function it performs.
KEY CONCEPT An office is a room or building in an organization which is set aside for performing specific organizational tasks which may range from accounting, personnel, legal, record keeping to information and data processing KEY CONCEPT Office management is concerned with the rational use of organizational resource (personnel and materials) for the purpose of achieving practical results.
Office organization: as a subset of office management is concerned with the conscious coordination of organizational units such as offices (comprising two or move members) that function on a relatively continuous basis to achieve the departmental or the overall goal of the organization.
3.3 FUNCTIONS OF AN OFFICE An office is created to support public sector organizations such as government establishments, and institutions such as schools and hospitals, and private sector organizations such as manufacturing, and service firms 14  by recording and providing informa tion.
Such information may be handled by an office in ways appropriate to t he objectives of the organizations.
Four major areas of office functions include the following: a) Providing information to other organizations.
This may be in the form of: i.
Price lists quotations replies to inquires financial or other types of information to other organizations and customers.
ii.
Receiving and processing information and data from other organizations and customers; iii.
Keeping record of transactions, e.g.
payments made and received, or wages paid to the employees, and soon.
3.4 DEPARTMENTS AND THEIR ACTIVITIES As an office manager, you need to know the various departments which office functions are performed, particularly in large organizations.
A brief description of the functions of the departments follows i) Sales Department: The work of sales department is very critical for those organizations whose survival depend on the volume of profit they get from their transactions.
The organization of sales department remains a major responsibility of the sales manager.
On the other hand sales departments are responsible for ensuring that stores departments pack and label goods ordered by customers.
Where the goods are not available, the production department is asked to make the goods.
When the goods are finally delivered to the customer, the sales department arranges for an invoice to be issued, and advises the finance (or accounts) department of the amount the customer would have to pay.
The role of clerical workers in the sales department includes sending out catalogues and price lists to customers and processing invoices.
The sales department also has the responsibility of dealing with customers’ complaints.
ii) Stores Department: This department is responsible for packaging and labelling the goods for the customers.
It arranges with the dispatch department for delivery of goods to the customers.
iii) Production Department: This department is responsible for the factory which goods are manufactured and sold by the firm.
A work manager is usually in direct control of the factory, while the factory office acts as a link between the factory and all other departments.
15  Where raw ma terials are required, these are ordered through the purchasing depar tment.
iv) Purchasing Department: This arranges for the supply of materials and services on request from other departments.
v) Accounts Department: The accounts department is headed by a chief accountant who has other accounts and clerical staff under him.
The department keeps the records of purchases and sales of other departments.
It pays suppliers and ensures that payments are received from the customers.
The department ensures that the accounts of the firm are audited at regular intervals, quarterly or yearly.
Other functions of the accounts department include payment of staff salaries and wages.
vi) The Personnel Department: the main duties that are performed by the personnel department cover the following areas: - Advertising and staff promotion; - Staff training and promotion; - Transfer of staff within and branches of the organization; - Keeping of staff records; - Handling of staff welfare; - Organizing negotiation with the unions; - Handling disciplinary matters which may include suspension and dismissals; - Handling social events and public relation matters for the organization.
vii) Transport Department: Most large organizations have transport departments.
In public organizations such as the civil service and academic institutions, the transport manager is responsible for the distribution of vehicles to key officers, and for various manufacturing and service delivery firms, it is the responsibility of transport managers to ensure that goods manufactured or ordered by the firm are delivered to their customers.
The transport department is equally responsible for the repairs, maintenance and maintaining inventory of the vehicles and plants of the organization.
16  Table M1.1: ORGANIZATIONAL CHART OF DEPARTMENTS OF A BUSINESS ORGANIZATION CHAIRMAN BOARD OF DIRECTORS MANAGING DIRECTOR PRODUCTION SALES ACCOUNTS PURCHASING PERSONNEL LEGAL DEPT.
DEPT.
DEPT.
DEPT.
DEPT.
DEPT.
PRODUCTION SALES CHIEF PURCHASING CHIEF COMPANY MANAGER MANAGER ACCOUNTANTS MANAGER PERSONNEL SECRETARY FACTORY SALES CASH PURCHASING RECRUITMENT LEGAL PRODUCTION PROMOTION FLOW MATTERS FACTORY MARKET WAGES AND STOCK WELFARE INSURANCE PRODUCTION RESEARCH SALARIES CONTROL TRAINING & OFFICE FACTORY ADVERSTISING PROMOTION SERVICES OFFICE 17  ST U DENT SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1a) Find out from two business organizations in your area, and list the number of departments that they have.
b) What clerical functions are performed in each of the departments?
STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1) Explain what determines the roles of offices in the organizations you have been to 2) What are peculiar about the activities of the following departments: sales department, stores department; and purchasing department?
3.5 KEY PEOPLE IN AN OFFICE In every business or other formal organizations, there are key officers or what we call top management whose roles affect the way the organization is run.
Thus where an employee is in accounting or personnel department, his/her performance can be affected one way or the other by the decisions of key people in the organization.
Indeed it is pertinent to mention the role of these key role players for the purpose of those in office management.
Let me briefly discuss the positions of these officers before concluding this unit.
These are Company Chairman, Board of Directors, Managing Director, and Company secretary.
18  The Company Chairman: The Chairman is the most senior and important member of the board of directors, in government parastatal, he along with other board members is appointed by the government.
In private organizations, he is elected by the board, some times owing to his commanding shares-as in commercial banks.
- The Chairman represents the firm (on behalf of the shareholders) outside the firm.
He chairs the meetings of the board of director; presents annual reports on the firm’s progress to the board of directors.
The chairman depends on his fellow directors for advice on the direction of the organization.
- Board of Directors: members of the board of an organization work hand in hand with the chairman to ensure smooth running of the organization.
In some organizations, the board assigns their members to oversee the functions of particular sections of the organization, for instance personnel, sales, and production departments.
The board members are also responsible to the board of directors and have to accept the board decision.
- Managing Director: One major responsibility of the managing director is to see that the board’s decisions are carried out.
To achieve this, he has to work closely with the chairman.
The managing director, therefore, has to work closely with the managers or executives of the various departments in order to keep abreast of how the organization is being run.
It is through the managing director that important matters are passed on to the board for discussion and decision.
4.0 CONCLUSION In reading through the main content of this unit, the conclusion to be drawn is that having set the stage of the course by defining the key concepts and providing the background upon which the course is based, the interest of the students will be aroused and retained throughout the course as a whole.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have defined three concepts, namely, office management and office organization as the bases for understanding what the course is about.
We did also differentiate between large and small organizations, but have indicated that in general, all offices tend to perform common functions such as filing and documentation of information.
19  The functions of var ious departments such as production, personnel, accounts, sales, stores, purchase and transportation have been duly discussed.
The roles of key offices and their holders, namely, board chairman, directors, company secretary and managing director have also been discussed; every student should ensure that the unit is read carefully for clear understanding.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is the relationship between office management and office organization?
2.
What clerical functions are done in?
a) Production department b) Personnel department c) Account 3) What is the role of the board of directors in a government parastatal?
4) What are the main functions of the managing director?
7.0 REFERENCE/BIBLIOGRAPHY Amadin, M.S.
(2004) Modern office practice-Benin City: In print services Ekpenyong, Office Management (2004).
(Unpub.
Monograph Series)Faculty of Education.
Univ.
of Benin Needham, David and Dransfield, Robert (1990) Business Studies.
McGraw-Hill Book.
London.
Taylor Alan and Davidson, Don (1980) The World of work.
Stockport.
Polytechnic Publishers 20  UNIT 2: TRENDS IN OFFICE AUTOMATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION What is referred to automation and in particular office automation can best be understood when we take into consideration what happens at every stage of technology or method of doing office work or business transactions.
For instance the evolution of invention of office machines from manual to electric typewriters, electric to electronic typewriters, and from the latter to the modern computers with word processors, have in no shall way changed the way office businesses are being conducted today.
On the other hand, the current stage of development of telecommunication technology from simple dialling telephone, to push-button type to the present mobile system indicates an evolutionary trend.
As business education students, it is important for you to note the trend in each area of office work, in or to appreciate the impact of automation in office functions.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit you should be able to: 1) describe the impact of office automation 2) Explain on-site electronic office 3) Explain remote (electronic) office 4) Organize the workstation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE IMPACT OF OFFICE AUTOMATION As indicated in the introduction to this unit, whenever there is a change in technology, the way office staff perform their work also changes.
21  Technology is used her e to refer to “Any skill or method of doing by which any physical equipment, or apparatus such as machine….or by which a systematic process…is used to modify, change, reproduce or create a new product or information, is technol ogy (Ekpenyong, 2008)”.
Office technology, therefore, involves the use of new inventions or devices in an office to transform, or change the process of office work.
It is this rapid change in the technology of office work through the use of machines to do the work that was previously done by hand that explains what we call office automation.
In other words, the use of machines such as computers, electronic mail system, among others, is called automation.
3.2 THE IMPACT OF OFFICE AUTOMATION The introduction of automation has impacted or influenced the way office functions are being performed today.
In offices where secretarial or office technology and management functions have become automated, the secretaries are now spending more office hours on managing the various technologies than being engaged in manual tasks.
You would observe that in highly automated offices, calls on virtually all matters are programmed to be answered by the telephone, thereby, allowing the secretary time to handle other challenging matters.
In the same vein, executives now do some of their key boarding and electronic filing.
Rather than leaving the task of transmitting their messages to their secretaries, Chief executives now do so by themselves.
On the other hand an executive can pick up his phone messages from a voice mail system.
You should note, and as will be explained later, the introduction of various electronic gadgets has completely changed the way secretaries and other office staff are functioning now when compared with the past.
3.3 THE ON-SITE OFFICE The advance in technology has given rise to a new type of office organization referred to as ‘on-site-office’.
This is because this type of electronic office is a computerized system by which information is set down in electronic bit instead of on paper.
Bit is a widely used abbreviation for a binary digit (e.g.
a, 0, or a or 1).
Coding schemes used in computer 22  systems employ particular sequen ce of bits to represent the decimal numbers (Martin, DeHayers, Hoffer and Perkins 1995).
The on-line office does not have bulky filling cabinets and restrictive walls.
Unlike, the conventional office, one can enter (access) the on-site office from any computer terminal that has a telephone line and a modern.
In fact the terminal can be in one’s home, a personal office or a hotel.
The important thing is for you to have your personal access number at a computer terminal and call up any information you may wish to work with.
In other words in this type of office you do not need an office boy or any other authorized person to come and open the office for you to enter.
If you want to access information on your electronic mail or ‘in basket’, you would only need to press a button or key and the computer screen would list its contents, e.g.
mail, telephone messages, reminders for meetings, to mention but a few.
You can also pass on the information which others in your organization need to work with to them, since every other worker in the organization has a workstation (desktop terminals).
In fact, in this type of office environment, a worker can call up electronic calendar to fix or confirm dates of meetings; arrange travel itineraries, or information on any matter important to him/her.
The on-site office for now remains the exclusive pressure of technologically advanced economies.
However, Nigerian multinational organizations such as the NNPC, Chevron and research institutes and university libraries have since gradually developed the capacity for on-site offices in order to improve their efficiency.
3.4 THE REMOTE OFFICE According to Houghton and Mifflin (1995), another development in office technology is what is called “The Remote Office”.
This type of office has come about owing to the fact that computers, copiers, fax machines and other office equipment have become cheaper, thereby enabling chief executives and other workers to afford sophisticated office gadgets including those on telecommunication in their homes.
With this option, chief executives are able to work from their homes or other locations.
Indications now are that secretaries, who work with the class of executives above, tend to assume more managerial responsibilities, including decision making on behalf of their chiefs.
23  Secretaries on their part can use their own computers and moderns to access the database in another location or city.
SELF ASSESSMENT TEST Describe a) what Bit is in your own word b) How may the term ‘technology’ be understood?
4.0 CONCLUSION The change in electronic technology has significantly affected the way and manner office work is being performed in modern offices, particularly in technologically advanced countries of the world.
The conclusion to be drawn here is that if the Nigerian students of office studies have to measure up to their counterparts in those countries, the quality and the equipment for their training must be upgraded and updated to meet the challenges that the innovations in the discipline impose.
5.0 SUMMARY; This unit has discussed the developments in the area of office technology in terms of office automation.
The unit has also discussed the features of on- site offices, particularly its emphasis on the use of computer terminals and moderns to access information from a main computer centre or office instead of using file cabinets and files to store information.
The remote office has come about because the executives now have in their homes similar office equipment such as fax machines, and relevant soft- wares which are available in their office.
These enable them stay in their offices or remote locations to perform some of the functions such as meetings which they could have normally performed in their offices.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Differentiate between office technology and office automation.
24  2.
What are the basic difference s between a conventional office and electronic office?
3.
Explain to your friend how an on-site office is different from remote office 4.
How would you convince your boss to invest in an on-site office rather than a conventional office?
7.0 REFERENCES Ekpenyong.
L E (2008).
Foundations of Technical & Vocational Education: Evolution and Practice.
Ekpenyong, L E (2004) Office Management.
(Unpub.
Monograph Series) Faculty of Education: Univ.
of Benin Houghton Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary Handbook.
Boston: Houghton and Mifflin Company.
Martin, E. Wainright, DeHayers, D.W., Hoffer, J.A., and Perkins, W.C. 1995).
Managing Information Technology.
New Jersey, Prentice Hall.
25  UNIT 3: THE WO RK STATION CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION One of the new concepts that have entered the electronic office vocabulary is “Workstation”.
Ordinary workstation means where people work.
However to clarify the meaning and application of the term with reference to contemporary office practice, this unit has become necessary.
We shall devote this unit to the purpose of trying to understand what constitutes workstation.
2.0 OBJECTIVE After studying this unit you should be to: 1.
Explain the concept of workstation 2.
Recognize the facilities that are needed for effective management of workstations 3.
Explain the type of organization needed to manage workstations in electronic office 4. state the advantages of workstation 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 CONCEPT OF THE WORKSTATION When you walk into an office you will observe that the secretaries and other office workers are seated and surrounded by a table on which there is a computer and accessories such as the mouse and keyboard.
You will also observe that some of the work desks have beside or near them printers, fax machines and scanners which are interconnected to the CPU, that is the 26  central processing unit of the co mputer.
This environment which the secretary or a computer personnel sit s to perform his work is referred to as “workstation” KEY CONCE PT WORKSTATION: This comprises the entire computer and other accessories which the secretary or office staff interfaces with and utilizes to facilitate the performance of his work without having to move from one section of the office or the other to have the work done.
3.2 MANAGING THE WORKSTATION Certain steps must be taken into consideration for your effective management of your workstation.
Apart from the telephone which should be connected to your computer system, you must ensure that all necessary office supplies are handy.
These include stapler, staple remover, paper- chips rubber bands, writing materials, erasers cello-tapes, note papers, markers, erasers, ink pads, date-stamps, diskettes calculators and roles of paper for printing calculator, etc.
Other accessories include and a good dictionary, for those who are secretaries, a good secretarial handbook should be worth keeping, just as telephone books should be kept handy.
Above all, ensure that the source of power supply is constant.
The essence of keeping these accessories is to enable you perform your work smoothly and without any hindrance.
Your system should be arranged in such a way that you can receive or access information or send it out without a moment’s delay.
A system which would not allow you to access internet information or use your fax machine instantly would be seen as having broken down.
3.3 STRUCTURING THE ELECTRONIC OFFICE To avoid a breakdown of the workstation or the system as a whole emphasis is being placed on decentralized rather than centralized electronic office.
27  A decentralized approa ch is recommended for offices where there are a few stand-alone work proce ssors/computers, and individuals have no difficulty in managing their workstations.
With reference to office automation, and word processing, a centralized approach involves the application of shared- logic (linked) workstation with several dump terminals which are linked to one central processing unit.
KEY POINTS Stand alone electronic office is one where a few computers are distributed throughout the organization KEY COCNE PT In a purely automated office and work processing, a centralized approach is used to allow and shared-logic set up with several dump terminals to be linked to one central processing unit Dump terminals are those computers which cannot be used until activated through the central processing unit of a related source.
3.4 ADVANTAGES OF WORKSTATION The organization of workstation is intended to provide the following advantages: i) To enables the user to sit on her work desk to execute all the office functions which include reception, processing, and transmitting of information ii) It allows for greater interface between the worker and machine and between the worker (user) and the work environment.
28  4.0 CONCLUSION The idea of workstation has come to emphasise the importance of a compact work environment meant to improve worker efficiency and productivity.
The conclusion to be drawn from the unit is that as organizations come to appreciate the impact of office automation, the idea and arrangement of workstations will become common place in most organizations.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has explained the concept of workstation as the assemblage of the computers and other related resources needed for the secretary or any other user to perform his/her information or data processing duties without having to leave his/her work environment.
Organization of workstations may be done centrally in case of organizations with a central CPU.
A decentralized approach is suitable for small offices where there are only stand-alone computers of which what people do in their workstations need not be necessarily coordinated.
The advantages of workstations have also been emphasized.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you understand by workstation?
2.
Differentiate between centralized and decentralized workstation 3.
What facilities do you classify as dump terminals?
4.
What advantages workstations have?
7.0 REFERENCES Bernstein, W; Powell, Loyd; McKusker, V. and Sherwood, Catherine (1993) Merriam-Webster Secretarial Handbook.
Merriam Webster, Incor.
Houghton Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary, Boston: Houghton and Mifflin Incor.
Ahukannnah, L, I; Akpomi, M, E; Ugoji, E, I; and Inyang, N. (2009).Applied Information Process.Owerri: Eastern Polytechnic publishers.
29  UNIT 4: TYPES O FFICE STRUCTURE CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION As a student of office organization and management, it is important that you have basic knowledge of organizations, their types of ownership and how they are structured.
This should enable you to see the relationship between how organization structure influences the structure of an office.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: i) Identify State and private organizational ownership ii) Differentiate between private companies and personal ownership iii) Identify three major traditional types of organization patterns iv) Describe modern departmental structures (methods of organizing work).
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TYPES OF ORGANIZATION OWNERSHIP As we indicated in unit I, office management is concerned with the rational use of men and materials to obtain practical results.
Formal organizations have been variously described and classified, namely as a broad type of collectivity, but the classification which has assumed particular importance and application in modern industrial societies is “bureaucracy” (Parson, 1981).
Bureaucracy is a type of organization structure which is based on hierarchical arrangement of positions, and which management is based on rules and regulations.
Familiar examples include government departments, business and industrial organization, academic and health institutions.
30  3.2 STATE OWNERSHIP In a capitalist economy such as Nigeria, business organizations fall under two levels of ownership - public or state and private ownership.
State Organizations: State organizations take the form of ministries and department, each headed by a Permanent Secretary.
Sometimes certain aspects of policy-making are delegated to boards and committees.
For instance, the administration of schools is handled by the State Education Board and Teachers Service Commissions which are agencies of the Ministries of Education.
Such boards are established by statute, as a rule.
Public Corporations in Nigeria are generally created by statute.
They produce goods and services such as electricity, water, transport services e.g.
Nigerian Airways and the Nigerian Railway Corporation.
The services produced by public corporations are sometimes highly subsidized by the government because they are usually not able to sustain themselves 3.2.1 PRIVATE OWNERSHIP Private ownership may be either corporate or personal.
This consists of public and private companies which are also known as Joint stock companies.
They may be incorporated in one of two ways, namely, by statute (law) or by registration.
Registered companies may be either public or private.
Public companies are different from public corporations.
Public companies are owned by shareholders, while public corporations are owned by Federal or State governments.
Before a company can be established, the Registrar of companies must be informed of the proposed name of the company and its business aims.
If approval is given, the company must the constituted under Articles of Association in accordance with the Companies Acts.
It has to have a Certificate of Incorporation, which bears the Seal of the company.
This gives the company an identity of its own.
The seal is used on all legal documents to which the company is a party.
Public companies require a Trading Certificate in addition to Certificate of Incorporation.
In Nigeria, the responsibility for company registration is vested on Corporate Affairs Commission.
Public companies, the shares of which are negotiable on the stock market are of two types, Group of Companies and Individual Companies.
A group of companies consists of a holding company owning a number of companies, which produce goods or provide services.
The holding 31  company may be pure ly financial, not itself producing anything, or it may be a parent company which produces goods and services and at the same time owns, either wholly or partly, subsidiary companies.
If its ownership is partial, the holding company owns the majority of the voting shares, the remainder being held either by other subsidiary companies, units trust, etc.
The other type of public company is the single company with no subsidiary.
Private Company: This is normally owned by a small number of shareholders-up to 50, and there must be at least two directors but not more than seven.
The shares are not available on the stock market.
Private companies may own subsidiaries.
Public companies are normally ‘limited’, private companies may be limited or unlimited, though unlimited companies are rather rare these days.
Personal Ownership: This may be a partnership or single.
A partnership may consist of not fewer than 2 and not normally more than 20 owners.
Such a partnership does not have limited liability.
In case of bankruptcy or failure, of the company, the partners will be called upon to settle debts from their own personal resources.
KEY CONCE PTS Public companies are different from public corporations.
Public companies are owned by shareholders, while public corporations are owned by the Federal or state government.
The types of organizational ownership are illustrated on table….. Table M I.
4: Types of Business Ownership 32  OWNERSHIP Public Private Corporate Personal Federal State Public Govt.
Dept.
Corporations Single Public Private Partnership 3.3 TRADITIONAL ORGANIZATION PATTERNS There are three types of traditional oorganizationa1 pattern.
These are: i) The Line Organization ii) The Line and Staff Organization iii) The Functional Organization These patterns are referred to as traditional because they are not seriously emphasized as they refer mainly to employees’ positions within the organization hierarchy.
i) The Line Organization The Line Organization is characterised by direct lines of authority, with no staff, advisory, or ancillary officers.
This type of organizational structure is hardly used except in very small organizations.
The table below shows a simple line organization chart.
It shows the authority of the chief executive over three co-equal officers.
There are no staff positions.
33  FIG.
MI.
4.2: LI NE ORGANIZATION CHIEF EXECUTIVE ii) The Line and Staff Organization: The Line and Staff Organization pattern is more common.
The main difference between it and the Line Organization pattern is that it has both advisory and staff positions that ‘are not’ links in the chain of command.
Fig.MI.4.4 depicts a typical line and staff organization structure.
The squares show the chain of command while the circled sections show the staff relationships.
This structure of organization has a number of advantages, namely.
1) Clear-cut division of authority and responsibility; 2) Great stability 3) Basis for maintaining discipline.
4) It is based on planned specialization, particularly in large organisations; 5) It makes for orderly administration, communication and control.
34  Fig.MI.4.
2 Line and Staff Organization CHIEF EXECUTIVE Staff Assistant LEGAL ENGINEERING PERSONNEL TRAFFIC PLANT B PLANT A PLANT C iii.
Functional Organisation Pattern The ‘Functional’ organization pattern is the line and staff type with a difference.
The main difference between this and the former is that functional specialists (or line officers, i.e., supervisors) at the lower levels report to staff specialists at the higher levels, rather than reporting to the next line officers.
KEY CONCE PT The main difference between functional and line and staff organization is that in the former, functional specialists or supervisor at the lower levels report primarily or partly to staff specialists at the higher level, rather than reporting to the next line officer 35  Most large educational institutions adopt the functional organisation patterns.
The defect in the functional organisational pattern is that there is a tendency to de-emphasize line positions and problems sometimes occur because of the complexity of the interaction variables as well as frequent role ambiguity or overlap.
A formal organisation that has many hierarchical levels is commonly referred to as a ‘tall’ organisation’ the one with few vertical levels, but with wider span of control is called a ‘flat’ organisation.
Fig.
MI.4.3: A functional organization pattern is shown in CHIEF EXECUTIVE (1) 2 (3) 1.
Line 2.
Staff 3.
Functional Staff Advantages of functional organization pattern 1.
In this type of organizational pattern, the general planning and functions of the organization are handled by specialists 2.
The overall efficiency of the organization is emphasized 3.
Employees have opportunity to improve their talents, even as there are opportunities for them to be trained for particular aspects of work.
36  4.
There is room for employees to work under specialists and to receive expert supervision and advice.
Defects: This method of work organisation has declined due to the fact that organisations can now employ more skilled persons to perform specified functions of which expertise and no more number is the determining factor.
On the other hand, people are becoming more specialized in their different aspects of jobs than before.
Another reason or defect of this approach to enterprise organization is that it can only be effectively used at the lower level of work- where unskilled labour is necessary.
3.4 TYPES OF MODERN DEPARTMENTAL STRUCTURE The question that should readily come to your mind as a modern office manager when considering the size of the organization and the people in it is: How would the members of the organization be managed without departmentalization?
Some organizations have many large populations of workers with varying functions, while some others also have small populations with varied functions.
It is through the process of departmentalization that it has been possible to expand organizations to fairly reasonable proportions.
The nature of business enterprise would normally determine the pattern of its departmental structure.
Some organizations are very large and have varying functions, while some others are rather small and in consequences have limited functions.
Through the process of departmentalization, an organization can expand its labour force to any level it wishes to, without any serious problem.
Although there are various methods of arranging work, we are just going to treat these four owing to their importance to office management.
a) Departmentalization by Enterprise functions b) Departmentalization by Territory c) Departmentalization by Product line d) Matrix Organization 3.4.1 Departmentalization by Enterprise Functions A very common method of grouping activities in an enterprise is by its functions, that is what the enterprise mainly does, namely, production which involves the creation of utility; goods or services selling: such as 37  finding customers, pa tients, clients, students or communicants who are likely to accept the goo ds or services at a given price; financing; including raising and collecting, safeguarding and expanding of funds of the enterprise.
Even though these terms are often used in enterprises, there is no generally acceptable terminology.
The overriding factor is that the use of each of these terms may be determined by the importance that an organization would attach to a particular function.
The fad that an organization such as a hospital, church, or a legal chamber does not have a finance or specific section of its activities under say, finance or sales, does not mean that they do not carry out these activities, to a certain extent.
Why Prominence is given to the Three Departments The reason why thee three departments, production, sales and finance are often mentioned is that they are so obviously recognized and thoroughly understood.
These three departments often form the basic primary organizational patterns and the life-wire of the entire organizational enterprise.
The primary level of an organization forms the first level of an organisation below the chief executive.
In grouping organisational functions, therefore, these three functions always take primary positions while other (minor) functions would be found anywhere below the organisational structure.
Major and Derivative Functional Departments The term ‘major department’ denotes a department with large budget, large work force.
Large budgets are employees are, however, independent of the types of departmentalization.
The major functional departments dare those which perform their characteristic activities, namely production selling and finance.
Since every organisation is involved in creating utility in goods or services, exchanging this wealth at a price for purchasing power, and managing the cash flow which results from these activities every organization, therefore, persons production, sales financing functions.
Though not every organisation would use these terms, a school system is engaged in the production of educational services, attracts students, and finances its operations.
A medical practitioner offers service to his patients at a fee, lawyers, accountants offer their services at a price.
The fact that these services are not classified under the three well-known departmental 38  functions, does not mean they are strictly different from those of large business organizations.
Sometimes the heads of major functional departments find that their span of management is too broad.
If a production department which has been controlled by one manager has increased responsibility as a result of expansion, an aspect of its functions such as purchase may be exercised and handed over to a purchasing agent.
This new unit would be carrying out the duties of a ‘derivative functional department’.
The following chart suggests an example of grouping of functional activities into derivative departments.
39  Fig.
MI.4.4 A TYPICA L FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATON GROUPING Chairman Assistant of Personnel Chairman Engineering Marketing Production Finance Engineering Market Production Finance Administration Research Planning Preliminary Market Industrial Budget Design Planning Electrical Advertising & Production General Engineering Promotion Engineering Accounting Mechanical Sales Purchasing Cost Engineering Administration Accounting Hydraulic Sale Tooling Statistics & Engineering Data Processing Packaging Quality Control 40  Advantages of Functional Department 1) Logical reflection of functions 2) Follows principle of occupational specialization 3) Maintains power and prestige of major functions 4) Simplifies training 5) Means of tight control at the top.
Disadvantages 1) Responsibility for profits at the top only 2) Over specialization and narrowing of viewpoints of key personnel.
3) Limits development of general managers 4) Reduces co-ordination between functions 5) Makes economic growth of company as a system difficult.
3.4.2 Departmentalization by Territory: In some large enterprises, departmentalisation by territory appears the best and most logical approach to organizing.
In Nigerian a number of enterprises such as NEPA, NIPOST, NTA, and some Commercial Banks such as Union and First Banks respond to departmentalisation by territory.
The operating principle behind this method of organizing is that all activities in a given area or territory should be grouped and assigned to a manager or territorial controller.
Large departmental stores may also use territorial departmentalisation in its operation.
For instance, one security guard may be stationed at the west and another one at the eastern end of the store.
Floorwalkers may also be assigned on this basis.
Government ministries and schools management boards also adopt this method of departmentalization-as in when schools in different parts of a state, e.g.
Cross River and Akwa Ibom, are placed under zonal supervisors who are to control the staff and take decisions on issues affecting the general school administration in the zone.
Reasons for Departmentalization by Territory 41  Some reasons are usually advanced for adopting this model of departmentalization, b ut it must be borne in mind that it is not all these reasons such as poor or slow communication is good enough in view of the current advances in ICT.
The need for prompt action also calls for territorial departmentalization; in other words local officers will be prompt in taking decisions on matters that affect a local branch.
However, it is not unusual for action or decision to be delayed at the central office.
Where an enterprise is grouped on area basis, and the different areas or different organization methods differ from those at the head office this difference in approach can create management problem for the organisation as a whole.
Positive Reasons: 1) Territorial departmentalisation becomes appropriate if the intention is to encourage local participation in decision making and to take advantage of localised operation.
2) Territorial departmentalisation would be advisable where a company derives some of their essential product lines or makes large profit from a particular locality e.g.
in the banking and transport business.
3) Area grouping may be embarked upon where a company wants to employ the local work force for its business, for, example, in sales business; managers would prefer local employees who know the locality where their operations are being carried out than outsiders.
4) Areas grouping enable local employees to direct their complaints to their local managers rather than to the remote head office managers who may not readily understand the peculiar problems of the employees.
5) Area grouping may be adopted for economic reasons.
For example, in the petroleum industry all the plants are usually located where the raw material is found rather than in, say Lagos.
This is meant to reduce operational or transport cost.
6) Area grouping is important since it is considered to provide a good training ground for managers.
An example of territorial departmentalization is shown on table MI.4.3 42  Table MI.4.5: Territorial Departmentalization Chief Executive Marketing Personnel Purchasing Finance Northern Abuja Western Eastern States State States Advantages: The following advantages are claimed for territorial grouping of enterprises: 1) It enables responsibility to be placed at lower level of the enterprise.
2) It enables emphasis to be placed on local markets and problems.
3) It allows an enterprise to take advantage of the economies of local operations.
4) It makes for effective coordination in a state or region.
5) It allows for quick, better, and direct contact with the local interests 6) It acts as the best starting or training ground for your managers and employees.
Disadvantages: The disadvantages may be listed as follows: 43  1) This method of enterprise organization requires more persons with general manager ial abilities.
2) It tends to make maintenance of economical central services difficult.
3) It also creates problem of top management control.
3.4.3 DEPARTMENTALIZATION BY PRODUCT LINE The grouping of enterprise activities by product lines is characteristic of large production companies.
This method of organization is said to be evolutionary because, initially the enterprise was organised on functional basis, but with the growth of the firm, production managers, sales and services managers as well as engineering executives encountered problem of size.
The managerial responsibility becomes too complex and the span of control became too broad, thus giving rise to the creation of immediate subordinated-manager positions.
It was at this point that organisation on a product line emerged.
Organisation on product lines enables top management to delegate a divisional executives extensive authority over the manufacturing, sales, services and engineering functions that relate to a given product or product line and to assign a certain degree of profit responsibility to each of such managers.
Employment in Functional Areas: Using product line or major product in grouping activities can be successful in all functional areas except industrial relations and finance, since these areas require company-wide agreement.
The centralization of authority over finance enables top managers to economize in the use of very scarce resources and by this means, hold the enterprises together.
In industrial relations, the organization must deal with a single national union and especially with its national officers.
It is important the organization be centralized.
This allows for the employment of skilled personnel or managers to negotiate with and to make authoritative interpretations of the issues or agreement reached.
Apart from the above mentioned functions, all other functions can be successfully organized on a product basis.
Some motor manufacturing companies have their enterprises organized along product lines.
For 44  instance, the General Motors, and other USA enterprises are organized along product basis.
These grou pings include Buick, Cadillac and Chevrolet.
Customers report to merchandize managers on the basis of what they produce.
Organisations that produce, hospital equipment may be known or described along such products e.g.
Surgery and radiography departments.
Advantages: The following advantages are claimed for this method of organisation.
1) Attention and effort are placed on product line 2) Responsibility for profit is placed at the divisional level.
3) It is easy to improve the coordination of different functions of the units within the enterprise.
4) It provides a convenient training ground for managers.
5) It allows for growth and diversity of products and services.
Disadvantages: 1) This approach requires more persons with general managerial abilities.
2) It tends to make maintenance of economical central services difficult.
3) It presents increased problem of top management control 45  Table MI.4.6 D epartmentalization by Product Lines Managing Director Marketing Personnel Purchasing Finance Instrument Indicator Industrial Electronic Division Light Div.
Tools Div.
Meter Div.
ENGINEERING Accounting Engineering Accounting 3.4.4 MATRIX ORGANIZATION Meaning and Origin Matrix Organisation is one interesting form of organisation, which is being increasingly used in a number of complex organisations.
It is sometimes referred to as “Grid” organization”, ‘project’ or ‘product’ management.
However, it should be emphasized that a pure or traditional product management need not be seen as a matrix organisation.
This type of organizational design is used to establish a flexible and adaptable system of resources and procedures to achieve a series of project objectives in record time.
Matrix organisation evolved from the development of aerospace technology.
Characteristics: 1) Matrix organization system may also be regarded as a co-ordinated system of relationships.
For instance, it illustrates the co-ordinated 46  system of relationships amon g the functions essential to highly specialized goods or services.
For more details see BED 306 by Ekpenyong/NOUN.
See also the Fig.
2) In a traditional divisional type of organization, the flow of work progresses among individual or autonomous functional units of a specific division.
A divisional manager is responsible for the total programme of work involving the products of his division.
The divisional manager, however, has similar responsibility in terms of authority and accountability for the result of his division, but differences do occur in the division of work performed and in the allocation of authority or responsibility for the completion of work.
3) When work, which is performed by an operating division, is of a routine nature or is a standardized product or service(s) with high volume, it would not be necessary to adopt a matrix organization design.
Since the process is more or less routinized, the total work can flow through the division with each functional unit or group adding its value and enhancing the smooth completion of the work process.
However, when the work performed is for specific project contract a matrix organization can be applied effectively.
In real terms, emphasis is placed on the completion of specific projects namely, road construction project.
New projects may be added as a result of new contracts won by say the Marketing Group.
As projects are completed, they are deleted from the organization, which is why matrix organization is regarded as fluid.
So, from the above statement, it is easy to see that a matrix type of organization is built around specific projects.
A manager is given authority, responsibility and accountability for the completion of the project in accordance with the time, cost, quality and quantity as specified in the project contract.
The line organization under this concept operates solely in a ‘support relationship’ to the project organization (see fig.
in BED 306).
The project manager is assigned the number of personnel with essential qualifications from the functional departments for the duration of the project.
The project organization is thus served by the manager and functional personnel groups.
Since he has the authority and responsibility for the successful execution of the contract or project assigned to him, he also has authority to reward personnel by way of promotions, salary increases and other incentives.
He can equally discipline or relieve personnel from the functional group assignment.
The functional group personnel normally return to their functional departments for re-assignment or transfer to other divisions.
47  There are many variati ons of the project or product management in: 1) In some cases, the project or product manager has no authority to tell any functional department to do anything.
They may only be acting as information gatherers on how their project or product is proceeding, and reporting to a top executive when there are any significant variations in the work plan.
The problem about this method is that in case of any problem, it is this man with no authority that is held responsible.
2) In some other cases, a grid or matrix may be drawn showing managers who are in charge of functional departments and those in charge of projects or products.
This approach is intended to convey a pure case of dual command.
But from observation, what has been happening is that if anything goes wrong with a project or product it becomes difficult for superior officers at the top to identify the source of it and who to apportion blame.
Others types of Departmentalization structures or ways of organizing work include the following: 1) Process or Equipment Department 2) Service Department 3) Customer Departmentalization 4) Marketing-Oriented Departmentalization.
You may wish to refer to relevance sources as indicated in the bibliography.
STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1.
List the four common types of formal departmental structure.
2.
What do you understand by matrix organization 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit was intended to teach you various types of office structure.
To do so public and private enterprises and their types of ownership were identified.
From this knowledge and the knowledge of different 48  organizational patterns, it may b e concluded that you have acquired requisite knowledge and skills that w ill enable you to identify the dynamics of the organizations which you may work.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit the main types of organizational ownership were treated.
These included public and private ownership under public ownership.
Federal and state government ministries and public corporations fall under public ownership.
Corporate, that is public-owned companies.
E.g.
commercial banks and small and individual businesses fall under private ownership.
Three traditional organizational patterns, namely, line, line and staff, and functional organization patterns have been identified and discussed.
Four modern types of departmentalization or methods of arranging work include departmentalization by enterprise functions, departmentalization by territory, departmentalization by product lines, and matrix organization.
The features, strengths and weaknesses of this organizational type have been identified.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT: 1.
What is the difference between private companies and personal ownership?
2.
List three types of traditional organization patterns and describe the second of them briefly.
3.
Differentiate between state and private organizational ownership.
4.
What are the main features of departmentalization by enterprise functions?
7.0 REFERENCES Ekpenyong, L.E (2004) Office management (unpub.
Monograph services).
Faculty of Education.
Univ.
Of Benin.
Ekpenyong/National Open University (2009).
Organization of Technical and Vocational Education.
Lagos: NOUN Littlefield, C.L., Rachel, F.M., and Caruth, D.L.
(1979) office and Administrative Management.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
49  Certo, Samuel, C. (1 980).
Principles of Modern Management.
Chicago: William Brown Pub.
Parsons, Talcott (1981).
‘Social Systems’ in Grusky, O, and Miller, George, A.
(ed.).
The Sociology of Organizations.
New York: The Free Press.
50  MODULE 2: OFFICE LAYOUT A ND SPACE MANAGEMENT INTRODUCTION This module is intended to introduce you to the principles of office layout and space management.
It discusses the environment of work in terms of location of office organization as well as the human comfort and prestige within the system.
UNIT 1: PRINCIPLES OF OFFICE LAYOUT AND SPACEMANAGEMENT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As a very important aspect of office management, office layout has to do with the arrangement of equipment within available floor space.
On the other hand, office space management involves the provision of space which will allow for maximum productivity at a minimum cost.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: 1) State the objectives of office layout 2) State the general principles of office layout 3) State when to effect office layout 4) State space requirement for office layout 5) Explain when private offices for staff may be considered 6) Describe the criteria for maximum office utilization 7) Assess effective work flow 51  3.0 MAIN CONTE NT OFFICE LAYOUT AND SPACE MANAGEMENT Office layout may be thought of as the arrangement of equipment within available floor space; and office space management as the provision of space which will yield maximum productivity and effectiveness at a minimum cost.
3.1 OBJECTIVES OF OFFICE LAYOUT The objectives of office layout include the following: 1) Effective work flow 2) Space that is ample and well utilized 3) Employee comfort and satisfaction 4) Ease of supervision 5) Favourable impression on customers and visitors 6) Ample flexibility for vary needs; 7) Balanced capacity of equipment and personnel at each stage of the work.
It is the responsibility of those in authority in an organization to see which of these objectives would be most effective for their type of operation.
Equipment should be arranged to follow a straight line in such a way that it allows minimum delay in work flow.
3.2 PRINCIPLES OF OFFICE LAYOUT 1) Work should flow continuously forward, as nearly as possible in a straight line.
2) Departments and divisions which have similar and related functions should be placed near each other, to reduce travel time.
3) Central service groups, such as stenographic pools, file rooms and data processing units should be conveniently located near the department and the employees who use them 4) Furniture and equipment should be arranged in straight line symmetry, with angular placement of desks and chairs reserved for supervisory personnel.
5) Space allowance should be adequate for work needs and employees’ comfort.
6) Furniture and equipment of uniform size make for greater flexibility and more uniform appearance.
52  7) Isles should be wide enough so that persons walking will not brush against the desk and employee s. Clear access to exit and fire escape should be provided.
8) Employees ordinarily should face in the same direction, with supervisors placed to the rear of work groups.
9) Desks should be arranged so that no employee is compelled to face an objectionable light.
10) Units which utilize noisy equipment such as data processing machines may need to be partitioned off to avoid disrupting other units.
11) Employees whose work requires close concentration may justify partial or full-length partitions.
12) Units which have much contact with the public should be so located in a way that they can be easily accessible to the public without disturbing other departments.
13) Keep from public view departments in which work is unnecessarily untidy.
14) Provide suitable light and air-conditioning for all employees.
15) Locate necessary private offices where they interfere least.
16) Consider personnel and equipment needs both for the present and future.
3.3 WHEN TO EFFECT OFFICE LAYOUT Office layout may be contemplated under the following conditions.
1) When changes in procedure occur 2) When there are increases or decreases in personnel 3) When there is space inadequacy.
Reviews may be done at two or three years’ interval.
3.3.1 Laying out the office: Office layout may be done by planning, or methods department, but where there is none of these, the administrative manager will have to co-ordinate layout plans for his organization, in which case some staff specialists may be called upon to undertake the actual design and execution of the layout.
It would equally be beneficial to discuss the matter with other relevant heads of departments and employees who may have some useful suggestions to offer.
In essence office layout should be contemplated when there are changes in the number of personnel required or when there are inadequacies in current space.
53  3.3.2 Procedure 1) Draw a rough sketch showing shape and size of floor space available 2) Prepare a blue-print of the available area.
3) Draw to scale the floor space.
4) Make templates or models of physical items to be used in the space.
5) Make a process chart and flow diagram.
3.4 SPACE REQUIREMENT FOR OFFICE LAVOUT The following list suggests space allowances which have been found to helpful in most situations.
75 – 80 square feet for a clerical worker 75 square feet for a chief clerk 100 square feet for a supervisor 130 square feet for a junior executive 200 square feet for a first level executive 310 square feet for a Department head 400 square feet for a top executive 5 foot-width for main aisles 4 foot-width for secondary aisles.
3.5 PRIVATE OFFICE The extent to which private offices are provided to employees will depend on the wishes and judgement of management.
Each case may have to be dealt with separately.
Among the questions which may be asked in deciding whether or not to give an employee a private office are whether the officer: 1) has a position of sufficient prestige to justify his/her, having a private office?
2) his/her work requires a level of concentration which can best be provided by a private office?
3) his/her work interferes with the work of others?
3.5.1 Disadvantages of Private Office 1) Supervisors do not have the close contact which is possible in an open office 54  2) Smooth and uninterrupted wo rk flow is harder to achieve.
3) More floor space is consumed .
4) Problem of air-conditioning and lighting is complicated.
5) Private offices are more expensive.
3.6 CRITERIA FOR MAXIMUM SPACE UTILIZATION There is no hard and fast rule about space utilization, but office planning experts have indicated that a good office plan should: 1) Provide adequate lighting.
2) Provide acoustic sound proofing 3) Provide adequate ventilation 4) Make minimum use of permanent and semi-permanent partitions.
5) Maximize the use of available units of furniture.
6) Utilize space near the elevators and entrance for reception and display.
7) Utilize upper space above file cabinets for storage shelves.
8) Eliminate private rooms for officers who may not need them 9) Send dead or inactive files to the store or archive 10) Emphasize flexibility.
STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1.
When would you think of office layout in your small business 2. Who should initiate responsibility for office layout?
3.7 TEST FOR WORK FLOW Research findings have indicated the following rules should be maintained for effective organization of workflow: 1) Check backtracking and crisis-crossing by charting layout tracing work flow.
2) Make process charts of dominant procedures involved in the floor area under study, checking particularly the distance travelled and 55  time of delay b etween operations.
An alternative approach may be timing productio n steps in the procedures, and finding the difference.
3) Check bottlenecks by measuring total productive capacity of workers and equipment assigned to each operation in a procedure, then compare.
A simple ‘neck-chart, such as that presented in Fig.M2.1 can show out-of-balance conditions and demonstrate that overall speed is limited by the bottlenecks.
Fig.
M2.1: Chart showing uneven space arrangement 80 40 60 25 4) Observe whether some workers are constantly pressed while others frequently run out of office.
5) Observe whether a very large percentage of workers are constantly on their feet.
An average of 10% is considered suitable maximum for efficiency in many offices.
The implication, therefore, is that space should be well spared and suited to job and employee needs.
Cost and work flow consideration implies that available spaces should be well utilized.
Employee comfort and satisfaction may be strongly influenced by layout.
Ease of supervision may be affected by the placement of the employees, by accessibility to related departments and other layout factors.
A favourable impression on customers and visitors is of extreme importance where outsiders see part or all of the office areas.
Flexibility should be sufficient to permit ready altering of the layout when justified by work needs or fluctuation in the volume of work.
4.0 CONCLUSION The focus of this unit has been to discuss the objectives and principles of office layout and management.
We also discussed the space requirement for 56  office layout.
All other principles and factors influencing office layout, space utilization, and effective work flow as have been discussed.
The conclusion from this unit is that office layout and space management play a vital role in office maintenance and business success, of which the students should pay particular attention.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed nine major subsections which touch on clarification of objectives of office layout, principles of office layout and space management, space requirement for the layout of an office, and when it may be necessary to provide a private office for staff.
The unit also discussed and explained to you how best the usefulness of a given office space could be maximized, how to test for effective work flow, as well as the factors that are necessary to make a conducive working environment.
Finally the factors likely to affect the design of office environment were listed and explained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a) State at list five objectives of office layout and space management b) State ten principles of office layout 2a) When would you as a personnel manager consider a private office for your personal secretary?
b) What do you see as defective about private office?
3) How would you test for work flow in the central working area of a bank or a post office?
4.
How may we ensure maximum space utilisation in a firm?
57  7.0 REFERENCES Ekpenyong, L.E (2004) Office Management (unpub.
Monograph services).
Faculty of Education.
Univ.
Of Benin.
Houghton Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary Handbook.
Boston: Houghton and Mifflin Company.
Foster, Thelma (1990) Office skills Stanley Thornes.
Littlefield, C.L., Rachel, F.M., and Caruth, D.L.
(1979) office and Administrative Management.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Taylor, Alan and Davidson, Don (1980) The World of work.
Stockport.
Polytechnic Publishers Ltd. 58  UNIT 2: THE WORKING EN VIRONMENT CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In good organizational and management practice, the physical environment where people work has continued to receive serious attention.
The sight of a well lighted and furnished office with superb colour conditioning is certainly bound to leave a permanent impression on the visitor and a sense of prestige on the part of the worker.
It is on the basis of this that the issue of the physical environment should be seen as an important factor in the employee prestige and psychological well-being.
2.0 OBJECTIVES Based on the introduction above at the end of this chapter you should be able to: 1) Explain why the work environment should be designed to facilitate the employees comfort and prestige 2) Discuss the physical factors that determine human comfort and convenience in the work environment 3) List and discuss the principles which determine the location of a form 4) State objectives of office building space.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PRELIMINARY PRACTICE First, before I present the main content of the topic to you, take your mind back to a banking counter that you went recently to conduct your financial transaction.
59  Second, recall a local government office that went to visit your friend Now compare the phys ical environments of the two.
What is your conclusion?
3.2 WHY THE WORKING ENVIRONMENT SHOULD BE DESIGNED WITH THE EMPLOYEES’ COMFORT IN VIEW As we said in our introduction, modern management thinking agrees that a modern working environment should be designed in such a manner that it does not only facilitate performance but also the employee’s comfort and prestige.
Thus in various types of office buildings, effort should be made to design the office interior in as attractive and dedicated a manner as possible.
However, it has to be borne in mind that the design of office building is largely dependent on the type of work carried in it, and by a consideration of the people who are to work there and the customers who are to do business therein.
3.3 FACTORS WHICH DETERMINE HUMANCOMFORT The following have been listed as the physical factors which determine human comfort and convenience particularly in a working environment 1) Lighting 2) Colour conditioning 3) Air-conditioning 4) Sound conditioning 5) Music conditioning 6) Furnishing 3.3.1 Lighting When it is realized that every office work involves seeing activity, the importance of good lighting becomes readily apparent.
The role of an office include information gathering, arranging, storing and supplying information.
These functions, as we all know require the use of the eyes in working with the hands.
Hence to facilitate these rather demanding tasks, there have to be the right type of lighting, and the lighting has to be of the right intensity.
The following have been found to be the specific benefits of good lighting in an office: 1) Increased productivity (difficult to measure exactly how much) 60  2) Better work quality 3) Better employee morale.
4) Reduction in eyestrain and mental fatigue 5) Higher prestige for the firm.
Conventionally, lighting is measured in toot candles.
One candle indicates the amount of direct light which is supposed to be present in one foot of a standard candle.
3.3.2 Improved Quality of Work Work quality and neatness can be improved through the provision of acceptable standard of lighting.
Where visual needs are not met errors are more frequently committed, probably due in part to inability of the worker to see with sufficient exactness in inferior light and in part by eyestrain and fatigue.
Reduction in Eyestrain and Mental Fatigue Working at office tasks for a prolonged period under poor light causes eyestrain and may also cause eyesight defects to develop or to worsen.
More energy must have also to be expended, which could result in increased fatigue.
Better Employee Morale: Improved morale is most likely to result when employees feel that management is interested in their well being and when the working atmosphere is pleasant.
Good lighting and good use of colour, which must accompany good lighting, will go a long way to creating such an atmosphere.
Good morale, we should remember, has a number of advantages some of which include higher productivity, reduced turnover, and lower absenteeism.
Higher grades of workers are also likely to be attracted to such an establishment.
3.3.3 Higher Company Prestige An attractive and efficient lighting installation makes a favourable impression on visitors of all types who call at the firm.
Good lighting also 61  adds to the general rep utation of the firm for progressiveness and efficiency of operation.
3.3.4 Factors to Be Controlled In the Supply of Lighting The two aspects to be controlled in the process of lighting include the quantity and quality.
Quantity: Although ordinarily, clerical or office workers are not expected to possess the technical know-how required of illumination engineers, they should however be aware of the principal problems surrounding lighting and need to seek help for that purpose.
The quantity or intensity of light is easily its most familiar characteristic.
It is important to have sufficient intensify of light in all seeing tasks, this implies that different tasks have varying light requirements.
3.3.5 Quality of Light Much of the problem or complaint emanating from light users in Nigeria is not only limited to the quantity but also to the quality of supplies.
Good- quality light is that which is relatively free from glare and that it is diffused evenly about the seeing area.
Brightness should be relatively uniform rather than varying in different portions of the area.
Shadows should be minimized although it is impossible to eliminate them entirely.
Glare is of two types - direct and reflected.
Direct glare is that which is produced by a sharply contrasting light source, either natural (sun light) or artificial within the field of vision.
Reflected glare occurs when light strikes bright or polished surfaces such as wall, desk tops, machines or other equipment.
Lighting may be direct or semi-direct, with all or most of the light coming directly from the light source to objects in the lighted area.
It may on the other hand be indirect or semi-direct with all or most of the light reflected from the ceiling and diffused evenly about the room.
Sources may be incandescent or fluorescent.
A large number of offices use the fluorescent, though the advantage of it is not clear.
Lighting should be regularly maintained and deteriorating bulb replaced lamps usually lose 10-25% of their efficiency before they go out.
62  3.4 COLOUR CONDITIONING Colour presents a rather fascinating spectacle to mankind.
The effect of colour on human emotion has been found to be very positive as it activates and stimulate it.
A good colour presents pleasing and attractive effect of the office to the eye.
What is, however, not certain is how much of production gains can be specifically attributable to the use of colour in an office.
However, evidence points to the fact that effective use of colour can enhance to work environment and have at least an indirect effect on employees' productivity.
The following colour shades are to convey certain effects and feelings.
These are; 1) Red - Heat - action, excitement 2) Orange - Warmth 3) Yellow - Warmth 4) Brown - Warmth 5) Blue - Coolness 6) Purple - Dignity.
It is suggested by experts that offices, which receive predominantly northern light, which has a bluish tinge, utilize a blend of warm colours.
Offices which receive in the main, southern light which has a yellowish tinge, should utilize a blend of cooler colours.
Different colour combinations schemes and variety may be used to break the monotony of bare walls in the office.
Neutral colours too are frequently used in modern offices and the possibility of monotony is offset by ingenious use of colour - often in modern paintings or in carpeting or draperies.
Soft, postal colours, which have a feminine quality and bold, bright colours which have a masculine flavour may be used in lounge areas exclusively by women or men.
The use of light and colour appears the noblest means of creating positive working conditions.
By using touches of stimulating colours the eyes can be refreshed or stimulated according to the colour used and the effect desired.
While strong colours may best be reserved for accessories such as draperies, chair coverings and wall decorations, colour and lighting can be used to provide some degree of individuality, and each section of the department being given its own colour scheme or varying intensities of lighting.
Essentially, the best type of colour and light is one which achieves the purpose without calling undue attention to it.
63  3.5 AIR CONDITIO NING Air conditioning provides another avenue by which working condition can be improved.
Air condition is believed to account for high productivity, better quality of work, improved employee comfort and health, higher morale and a more comfortable impression on visitors.
An additional benefit with systems which filter the air is the resulting decrease in deeming and decorating costs.
Available evidence shows that at the Interterm Securities Company Kansa City Missouri, U.S.A employee efficiency was found to be up by 20% after air conditioning was installed.
Other reports of from 10-50% increase of performance went to the doubtless beneficial effect of air-conditioning on productivity.
As with other elements, the specific amount of improvement that can be attributable to air-conditioning is, however, difficult to determine with exactness since other elements also come into play in the circumstance.
3.5.1 Outstanding Functions of Air-condition It can be used to control one or more of the following factors of air as indicated below: 1) Circulation - movement and changing of air for freshness; 2) Purity - filtering out objectionable particles such as dust, smoke and fumes; 3) Humidity - maintaining proper relationship between moisture content of the air and the temperature.
4) Temperature - maintaining comfortable heat level.
Complete air conditioning will control all the four factors.
Whether all the four elements of air-conditioning can be provided, will usually depend upon the system considered most feasible.
This is in view of atmospheric conditions in the geographic location involved, the characteristics of the building and the sections of the space to be air-conditioned, and the costs of alternative systems.
3.5.2 Types of Air-conditioning System These fall into two main categories: 1) Central system which are to serve the whole buildings: 64  2) Packaged units meant for in dividual or single offices and contain both refrigeration and condit ioning equipment.
The smaller ones have certain advantages, which include ease of movement, and independent temperature and humidity control units.
3.5.3 Sound Conditioning Noise has been one of the major problems affecting effectiveness in an office.
Excessive noise, apart from being injurious to health, has been known to affect productivity.
A number of approaches have been adopted to control noise or keep it at a tolerable level.
These include: Checking Noise at Source This involves the use of quieter machines, noiseless equipment, cushions, and keeping of the machines in good working order.
Sound Proofing the Room Sound conditioning materials can be used to insulate walls with sound absorbent rugs, carpets as well as drapes.
3.5.4 Isolation of Noisy Equipment: Noisy equipment such as accounting, duplicating and other noisy devices can be separated from the general working area through partitioning.
However, a light soothing sentimental music, reduced to a very low tune has a positive effect on job performance.
But harsh and loud or rowdy type of music can only be interpreted as noise to the ears and a set-back to work performance and concentration.
Thus the staff assigned to the function of the ‘DJ’ must bear in mind the type and volume of music or records that would be helpful for effective work-flow and workers and customers’ comfort.
SELF ASSESSMENT TEST Why should a classroom be?
a) Air – conditioned?
b) Sound conditioned?
c) Colour conditioned?
65  3.6 THE DESIGN O F OFFICE ENVIRONMENT The design of work environment actually begins with the location of the site for the firm.
As a non-expert, you may not be called upon to take part in the location and building of the school or firm in which you work.
But it is essential you have a good idea of the office problems which could arise in connection with the location and building of the firm.
3.7 LOCATION OF A FIRM Where an office should be located is influenced by a number of factors which will be discussed later.
Essentially, however, the office function is exercised in every department and in every unit of a firm.
Therefore, office activities need to be provided where it can best serve the objectives of the organization as a whole and the requirements of sales, production, and other primary departments, since such services account for its existence.
From all indications, office location is directly dependent upon the broader problem of location of the firm generally.
3.8 CHOICE OF LOCATION OF FIRM The decision to locate a firm in a particular area is dependent on a number of factors: some of the common ones are accessibility to markets, raw material, transportation, labour supply, power, state and local government laws trends in regional and local government development, living conditions and commuting problems for employees and, so on.
These and related issues have to be looked into very carefully so as not to create un-expected problems that may suggest the premature abandonment of the location.
3.8.1 Cost Analysis: A most appropriate approach to determining the suitability or otherwise of a firm’s location is to conduct cost-analysis for each of the alternative locations.
Other ways of assessing the suitability of the firm may be to consider the volume of traffic within the area, particularly in the area of distributive trade.
As part of the consideration package, it would be worthwhile to obtain information about the attitude of people within the area as well as the general security therein.
An objective consideration of 66  all these variables should be a reaso nable guide to a sound decision on the choice of business location.
3.9 TRENDS IN THE CHOICE OF BUSINESS LOCATION IN NIGERIA Within the past few decades, there has been a gradual stepping up of various business activities in Nigeria.
Amidst these activities, could be observed certain trends in the location of business in the context of three forms of business buildings can be identified.
a) Distributive services; b) Manufacturing business and c) Government business 3.9.1 Distributive Service Type of Business Included in this class of business are departmental stores and supermarkets, legal, medical service ‘establishments, banks and other related business.
These forms of business are located mostly in busy commercial centres in big towns and city centres which operate as the hub of business activities.
The operators who are not located at strategic locations, namely where there are heavy traffic and business activities often try to move from such places to more favourable locations.
3.9.2 Manufacturing Firms Manufacturing firms, particularly those that produce heavy equipment are often located in suburban areas or at locations reserved for such purpose, and usually referred to as industrial estates.
3.9.3 Government Businesses By government businesses is meant federal, state and local government ministries.
These establishments are usually located in especially ear- marked locations, and the tendency is to site these establishments at a common location that would allow easy communication between the various ministries.
They house the various government ministries referred to secretariats.
The demand for office space tends to stimulate the erection of business houses in big cities.
These new business houses are often built with modern 67  office needs in mind.
These include the need for space that would allow different forms of layou t, accessibility, easy and effective communication.
3.10 OBJECTIVES OF OFFICE BUILDING SPACE Office space is often chosen to meet some important objectives: they include: 1) Facilitation of Work Process In modern management context, the building in which office equipment is housed, is as important as the equipment itself, hence the trend is to erect buildings which are functional or tailored to the type and philosophy of the venture.
The modern office building is designed to facilitate work flow hence in planning the office building the architect has to be thoroughly informed about the volume of work and its procedures, the organisational units, and need for future expansion and growth.
2) Favourable Impression An impressive office building undoubtedly commands a high opinion rating on the part of customers, visitors and the public as a whole.
Its prestige on the community and suppliers representative also counts.
3) Flexibility Needed For Growth for Varying Needs A building meant for long-term use should be built with future need in mind.
That is to say, a business building should be built in such a way that would allow for modification in office-planning and layout where this need should arise.
Future needs in terms of space should be anticipated; changes in lighting, air-conditioning, noise control requirements and other similar building services constitute issues to be considered.
Where a building has spaces which have no immediate use to the business, it should be leased out to tenants on the short-term.
4) Cost-benefit Effect For a building to serve the purpose of meeting the objectives which have been listed and discussed earlier, it must do so economically.
The amount due to depreciation, maintenance costs, insurance and taxes, in whichever 68  form it is paid, must be weighed ag ainst the values received, and on what competitors are willing to pay for the facilities.
By implication, therefore, maximum use has to be made of every usable square foot space, while alternative uses should be for dead spaces.
STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT 1.
Why would it be necessary to build a business office with the future on mind?
2.
What is important about the location of banks in your area?
4.0 CONCLUSION The physical environment in which people work has in recent years attracted the attention of those in management and office studies.
The conclusion from this unit is that a good physical working environment can impact positively on individual’s personality psychological wellbeing.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has made you to learn a number of facts about the importance of a good physical environment.
Specifically you have been made to understand the physical factors that determine human comfort in the work environment, the principles which determine the location of a firm.
The objectives of office building space were explained to you.
These include facilitation of the work process, creation of favourable impression, and flexibility in determining deferring growth needs.
Finally the issue of cost- benefit effect of the project has to be analysed.
6.0 TUTOR-MADE ASSIGNMENT 1a) List five physical factors which you think generally determine human comfort and convenience in a business office b) Discuss briefly one of the factors you have listed.
2.
Discuss the trend in the location of business offices in Nigeria.
3a.
List four objectives of office building space.
69  b.
Discuss two of them briefly.
4 a.
Briefly described the types of air conditioning.
b.
State briefly how you would control the sound that comes from office musical and other equipment.
7.0 REFERENCES/BIBLIOGRAPHY Ekpenyong, L.E (2004) Office management (unpub.
Monograph services).
Faculty of Education.
Univ.
Of Benin.
Littlefield, C.L., Rachel, F.M., and Caruth, D.L.
(1979) office and Administrative Management.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Houghton Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary’s Handbook.
Houghton & Mifflin Taylor, Allan and Davidson, Don (1980).
The World of Work.
Stockport: Polytechnic Publishers 70  MODULE 3: CONVENTION AL AND ELECTRONIC MAIL SERVICES INTRODUCTION The central focus of this module is to assess the changes that have taken place in the area of office mail services.
We shall examine the extent of mail services in terms of methods of mail handling in conventional and electronic offices today.
UNIT 1: INCOMING MAIL CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You need to understand from the start that one of the major functions of a formal organization, be it a government establishment, a corporate or small business enterprise, involves the handling of incoming and out-going mail: an important clerical and secretarial role in a conventional mail room letters and other forms of correspondence will be received and sent out.
In an electronic office, apart from the traditional methods of receiving, correspondence, such correspondence will be received through fax, e-mail, recorded telephone messages, etc.
whatever means documents are received in an office their proper handling and speedy have to be given, in the order of their importance.
71  2.0 OBJECTIVE In line with the above introduction, it is expected that after studying this unit, you should be able to do the following: 1.
Be conversant with the initial mail sorting and opening procedure 2.
Adopt appropriate procedure for sorting mail into their respective categories 3.
Adopt effective procedure to open the mail 4.
Be conversant with the final steps for sorting the mail 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 SORTING AND OPENING PROCEDURE As you saw in our introduction, postal mail may arrive the office at given dually intervals but private courier services may bring in mail any moment during office hours.
Other forms of mil may come through fax, e-mail or telex at any time of day or night.
As a secretary or office in charge of mail, you should check your computer mail box, fax machine or other facilities by which mail could be received in your establishment.
As an initial sorting effort the enveloped should be annotated to remand you where they belong.
3.2 SORTING MAIL INTO CATEGORIES Although different establishments use different procedures in attending to their mail, it is however important that mail that come in through electronic means should be printed out and the hard copy presented along with other paper mail to the schedule office.
As your next step, sort the mail into their respective categories or departments to which they are addressed to, e.g.
i) Letters of inquiry ii) Applications for appointment iii) Purchase orders iv) Bank statements, etc.
The categorization should include printed or hard copies of electronic documents.
All documents marked “confidential”, secret, or ‘personal’ should also be separated from the others.
3.3 OPENING THE MAIL 72  A suitable instrument such as sharp pen-knife should be used in opening the mail where automatic opening device is available it should be used, though on such a machine would be justified where an organization receives a large volume of mail day.
Note the following: i) When opening a mail ensure that no part of the content is left inside ii) All attachments and enclosure should be attached at the back the document iii) In cases where enclosures which are said to be in the documents are not found, the sender should be duly informed.
iv) Where the address of the sender of a letter is incomplete or distorted, attach the envelop at the back of the letter for easy correspondence v) All confidential letters should not be opened but sent to the appropriate schedule officers after the details of their receipt has been recorded in the incoming mail register.
Letters which are accompanied with remittances should be properly recorded in the remittance register.
vi) All personal letters should be sent to their owner enclosed.
vii) Where a letter meant for other establishments are sent to you, but you know where it should be redirected, write on the envelope “Try” followed by that address and re-send the letter.
Where the addressee’s address is unknown, it should be so indicated and returned to the post office.
viii) Stamp and date all the correspondence with the official “received” stamp.
Some offices use what is called the “Inward correspondence Register” in recording the incoming correspondence.
This is shown below Fig…………… Inward correspondence (or mail Register) Name Subject Reference Attention Date Date Received and number of written recorded by Address ix) Where a letter requires the attention of more than one officer, it should be photo-copied and distributed accordingly.
On the other hand, circulation slip or a special stamp may be used to indicate the list of officers to when the information should be directed.
73  Below is a sample of a remittance slip CIRCULATION SLIP TO: INITIAL DATE DIRECTOR – ADMIN DEPUTY DIRECTOR – ADMIN PRINCIPAL ADMIN OFFICER SENIOR ADMIN OFFICER Fig… Circulation slip KEY CONCE PT ANNOTATION: Addition of notes Explanation or comments to a book, a text or document, example, as during sorting of correspondence or mail 3.4 FINAL SORTING The opening of the mail often goes with final sorting, which is the final stage meant to ensure that the opened letters or other documents are sorted and finally dispatched to respective schedule officers in appropriate files.
One important aspect of mail sorting is to put them in the order of priority of treatment.
In the civil service three levels of attention are often followed: 74  1) Letters which need to be give n first priority of treatment are marked IMMEDIATE or with three x: ; XXX 2) The letters which need the next priority of action are marked “URGENT or with “XX” 3) Those marked ‘X’ or no indication falls within the last or normal level of attention.
One establishment such as business organizations also have specific symbols by which in-coming correspondence are treated.
Those employed as office systems managers should acquaint themselves with priority symbols that are applicable to mail treatment in such establishment.
STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT TEST If you received ten letters which comprise the following content: Letters of enquiry Letters with remittances Letters without sender’s Correct address Note: That the initial sorting involves the general placing of envelopes containing documents into board categories.
The second sorting stage involves classifying mail into their specific categories, e.g.
enquiry, or application letters.
The final sorting is done when the envelopes have been opened.
4.0 CONCLUSION Incoming mail come in both conventional and electronic channels sorting and opening of correspondence follow a number of informed steps and procedures.
The conclusion to be drawn from this unit is that since the adoption procedure is criteria to effective more handling, you read, understand and 75  practice answering t he tests that are set to facilitate your learning competence.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been made to understand the different sources that mail is received in an organization.
Some mails are received through the conventional means namely the post office.
Others come through special courier services.
The correspondences that come through electronic means include the computer fax and telex machines.
Sorting of mail are in two categories, namely sorting of envelopes, and sorting of opened letters into their respective subject matters, and departments to which they are to be forwarded.
Confidential documents are not opened at the open registry but are sent to sections responsible for such documents.
On the other hand we also saw that information about remittances must be properly recorded.
Inward correspondence register is used to enter essential information such as name and address of the sender, subject matter, etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a) what does it mean to annotate a document?
b.
What actions are involved before the mail or letters are opened/ 2) Discuss at least five points that are to be observed when opening the mail 3) Explain how you would handle the following: a) Confidential letters b) Letters with remittances c) Letters meant for the attention of four officers 4a) What steps would you take to ensure that the mail that come by electronic means is not delayed in the machine b) How would you ensure that officers have copies of electronic mail?
5) How would you identify letters which are meant for certain types of action by the schedule officers?
7.0 REFERENCES Amadin, M.S.
(2004) Modern office practice-Benin City: In print services.
Bernstein, W; Powell, Loyd; McKusker, V. and Sherwood, Catherine (1993) Merriam-Webster Secretarial Handbook.
Merriam Webster, Incor.
76  Foster, Thelma (1990) Office skills.
Stanley Thornes.
Houghton Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary, Boston: Houghton and Mifflin.
UNIT 2: OUTGOING MAIL Content 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION Sometimes customers and clients complain that the letters of enquires they made to some instructions or companies have not been replied to.
On the other hand one may wonder how organizations are able to cope with responding or replying to volumes of business letters or inquires that are sent to them.
One way of appreciating the efforts of organizations in the area of mail management is understand how mail are sent out of organizations.
2.0 OBJECTIVE Following the introduction above at the end of studying this unit, you should be able to: 1. state the procedures for sending out mail 2.
Proof -read out going mail 3.
List the procedure for presenting mail for signature 4.
State the procedure for conforming e-mail copies 5.
Describe the procedure for handling the following enclosures, file copies and follow-up records 6.
Explain the procedure for performing preparing envelopes and inserting materials 77  7.
Adopt appropria te procedures for stamping the mail 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PREPARING MAIL FOR POSTING After preparing documents such as reply to letters enquires and other similar documents, you have to adopt appropriate procedure mailing them.
There are no standard procedures for preparing mail for postage.
This is why different organizations tend to adopt different methods in preparing and sending out their mail.
For instance, small offices which have little volume of mail and do not have sophisticated equip usually make do with manual stamping of their documents for posting.
Some officers have sophisticated electronic mailing equipment for stamping their envelopers.
E.g.
franking machine, postage meters, etc.
the more their mail mainly by e-mail and fax.
Mail for posting are generally collected during working hours with the early afternoon being the pick period.
Some establishments keep "outgoing mail" tray where the messenger mail have to lift if from the mail room.
Some departments prefer to prepare and submit their letters in sealed envelopes before taking to the mail room.
3.2 PROOF-READING OUTGOING MAIL The mail that goes out of an organization is regarded as an 'ambassador' of an organization.
No businessman or client wants to deal with an organization that is not careful about the communication that it sends out.
This is why all letters or other documents must be carefully checked for correctness of spelling, grammatical structure, layout or format by the secretary or any scheduled officer before it is allowed to be marked out.
It is normal to use a spell-checker for identifying errors in a text, but sometimes where there are omissions of words; the spell-checker would not be able to identify it.
This is why it is necessary for the secretary to carefully read any document that is type written or handwritten, before it is put on the mail.
3.3 SIGNING THE MAIL 78  Any official letter that leaves an org anization without being duly signed by the executive or designated officer would be regarded as unauthentic, and so not acceptable for business transaction.
Consequently all letters for signature should be collected and put in the 'signature file' for the executive’s endorsement.
Where the executive is to sign must be clearly indicated by the secretary.
It is important to ensure that adequate letters are collected before presenting for signature.
However, where a letter, contract or similar document needs immediate or urgent dispatch but the executive is not immediately available, arrangement should be in place for a relevant senior officer to sign on behalf of the executive.
Before folding and inserting letter in their envelopes.
It is necessary to recheck them one by one to ensure that no letter has been left unsigned.
3.4 E-MAIL CONFIRMATION COPIES Usually it cannot be easily confirmed that the memos or other documents that are mailed to a client or clients by e-mail or other electronic transmission it was intended to receive.
Some organizations, therefore decide to send hard copy printouts of the electronically transmitted message by regular post.
E-mail messages are usually typed in memo format which does not allow for signature, however, it may be necessary to sign the confirmation copy.
3.5 HANDLING ENCLOSURES In many business organizations letters and other documents are sent to the meal room together with correctly typed envelopes.
The mail clerk is expected to fold and insert the letter in the envelope.
However during the typing process an enclosure notation should be typed at the bottom of the letter.
It is helpful to ensure that what is enclosed or the number of enclosures is indicated.
To ensure that letters with enclosures are not omitted, take the following steps: i.
Check the letter to see whether there should be an enclosure, should the enclosure not be enclosed, the letter should be kept aside and returned to the sender later.
ii.
Where there is enclosure attach it the later with a stapler or on the alternative, use paper chip; pins should not be used to avoid injury on the 79  person opening the e nvelope.
Attach small enclosures at the front of a letter, and the bigger on es at the back.
What is enclosed in a letter should be determined by the size of envelope.
3.5.1 Handing file copies: File copies should be taken for reference purpose.
In the case of electronic filing, the document should be saved under appropriate file name; electronic mail should be copied and field under appropriate subject heading.
3.5.2 Follow-up Record: Some offices try to keep track of outgoing mail by keeping follow-up records for them.
A follow-up record may take the following format.
Fig………………… OUTGOING MAIL FOLLOW-UP RECORD Date Sent Name and address of recipient Description of material sent Method of mail or transmission follow up date….
Follow-up files are more commonly used than follow-up record.
The use of follow-up record seems to be a matter of choice only.
3.6 PREPARING ENVELOPES In preparing an envelope some basic facts are necessary.
For a start the size of the envelope chosen should be such that would take in the letter without bursting the content.
Knowing the sizes of envelopes therefore becomes important.
There are three styles envelopes, the first too are referred to as Banker style envelopes.
The smaller of the two measures 3½ x 6m, has opening on the longer side.
The second range of Banker style window envelopes measures 4 x 9m each and have window panels through which the address an the letter can be read.
The third type is the referred to as pocket envelope (measures 4 x 9m as the former one) and has opening on the longer side.
There are also three main sizes of envelop.
These are the post office preferred (POP).
Envelopes on this category range from 3½ x 4m to 4.9m in size.
80  Traditional envelopes: These are in different sizes.
The international envelope sizes range from size B3 -C7C8, that is from the largest to the smallest sizes, (324 x 458m; 250-353m; through to 81 x 114m).
3.7 ADDRESS IN ENVELOPES This requires accuracy, clarity and good display.
The NIPOST has standard producers for addressing envelopes.
For instance it is expected that: - Name and address must be typed or written at the lower part of the envelope with one clear space or double line spacing between lines using indented or blocked style.
- The full name and address on the front surface of the addresses must be typed, or written while that of the sender should be typed or written at the back of the envelope.
- The word 'Personal', 'confidential' or "for the attention" should be typed two spaces above the address.
- The name of the post town or city must be typed in blocked capitals while that of the country should be typed with initial capital and in full.
- The post code of the country must be typed or written in Block capitals.
Student Self Assessment Exercise 1a.
Go to two business establishment you know and find out when mail are usually collected for posting.
1b.
Is there any difference in the time of mail collection and postage of mail in those establishment.
2.
What is the importance of file copies of out-going mail?
4.0 CONCLUSION From the study of this unit, it can be seen that preparing official mail for posting usually follows a number of steps, including providing file records as evidence of postage, in case the addressee complains that the mail did not get to him/her.
81  The conclusion to be drawn from this unit is that mail preparation and sending out is a serious aspect of office duty that has to be taken seriously by the scheduled staff.
5.0 SUMMARY As indicated at the beginning of this unit, the unit is intended to teach you the processes involved in sending out mail.
Hence the unit dealt on what steps to be taken before sending out mail.
The unit dwelled on the purpose and of importance of proof reading the mail before presenting it for signature.
Even though the e-mail can be sent to a form or customer, a printed copy with the signature of the superior officer from the form of posting has to be sent out as conformation.
File copies are also kept of such documents.
It was emphasized that all official documents leaving the organization should be duly signed for the purpose of authentication.
Envelopes must be chosen in consideration of the size and type of document to be posted.
All the necessary steps needed to address an envelope have to be duly observed in betters which are "confidential" or "attention" of some person, the envelopes should be typed or written with these words two spaces above the rest of the addressee's address.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why do different organizations have to adopt different methods for stamping their mail for postage?
2a) Why is it necessary to proof-read letters meant for posting?
2b) What electronic method is used to check spelling and other errors in a document for posting, what is the defects on spell checkers?
3.
Discuss the rules governing the handling of enclosures 4a) What is the importance of creating a follow-up record?
b) Is there any advantage of a follow-up record over a follow-up file?
5) What facts would you consider when addressing envelopes?
7.0 REFERENCES Amadin, M.S.
(2004) Modern office practice-Benin City: In print services 82  Bernstein, W; Powell, Loyd; Mc Kusker, V. and Sherwood, Catherine (1993) Merriam-Webster Se cretarial Handbook.
Merriam Webster, Incor.
Foster, Thelma (1990) Office skills.
Stanley Thornes.
Houghton Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary, Boston: Houghton and Mifflin.
UNIT 3: TYPES OF MAIL AND OTHER DELIVERY SERVICES CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In units one and two we treated incoming and outgoing mail.
In the case of incoming mail we showed you what has to be done when mail is received in the mail room and the steps to be taken to distribute same to the relevant schedule officers for action.
We also explained the processes involved in the handling of outgoing mail.
However, we did not get into discussion of the types of mail which include domestic and international types.
This division will be explained in this unit.
83  2.0 OBJECTIVE Introduction following the above after studying this unit should be able to: 1) Describe the type of mail that are classified as local or domestic mail 2) Describe the type of mail that are classified under international mail 3) Describe the role of private delivery services 4) State the importance of post code 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TYPES OF DOMESTIC POSTAL MAIL Domestic, local inland mail services offered by post offices in most countries fall under four categories: These include: - Expedited mail services (EMS or speed post) - First class mail - Second class mail - Third class mail - Fourth class mail - Business reply mail 3.1.1 Expedited mail service This is one fast service which offered by post offices world-wide.
In Nigeria, the NIPOST also offers this service to it costumes.
It is a poster service which is considered to be the fastest in mail delivering.
It is on this account that most business organizations often use this service when they have important documents to be delivered within a day or two to the addressee.
Individuals who need to meet deadline in their transactions also use this service.
A major advantage of this service is safe delivery of mail to their addressees’ destinations, be at the office or home.
3.1.2 First Class Mail 84  First class mail is one that is given p riority delivery.
In the USA, or the UK, first class mail usually takes betw een twelve and twenty hours to be delivered to the addressees-depending on their location in the country.
Usually first class mail is carried by air sorting and delivery of such mail usually restricted to airport towns and cities.
First class and express mail services usually attract higher postal tariff than the other mail services.
3.1.3 Second Class Mail This type of mail service is mainly restricted to newspapers and magazines, non-profit classroom equipment such as science equipment the operatives of this type of business enjoy some discounts from the post office.
3.1.4 Third Class Mail Generally mail that is not required to be mould first class or second class, normally go third class.
In the Nigerian postal system where the categorization of mail for postage is not clearly spelt out indications are that apart from those mail that are mailed through speed post or Express post, energy other mail service is given third-class postage.
3.1.5 Fourth Class Mail All printed materials and merchandise that are not sent by first, second and third class mail are classified as fourth class mail.
Fourth class mail tends to enjoy lower postal charge than those discussed above.
In Nigeria printed materials post cards or Christmas cards are not differentiated from ordinary mail in terms of charge.
In fact printed materials and ordinary mail e.g.
letters do not seem to enjoy any differential rates.
3.1.6 Other postal services Post offices generally offer a variety of services.
The three common ones include the following: a) Certificate of mail: This certificate only shows evidence of mailing b) Certified of Mailing: In this service, proof of delivery, with record of delivery is kept at the recipient’s post office 85  c) Collect o n delivery (C.O.D): in this service the postal service collects the price and the cost of an article from the recipient at the time of delivery.
Registered letters and expedited mail provide have recorded delivery service.
In the case of special post the sender receives receipt or note of delivery after the package has been delivered to the recipient who has to sign the note before the post office returns to the sender.
STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT 1.
Take a trip to the post office nearest to you and find out how many types of postal service are offered by NIPOST.
2.
From the information you have collected write a one-page essay on the types of mail services that are available or are offered by NIPOST 3.2 INTERNATIONAL MAIL International mail fall into three classes, by implication each category must meet the specific requirements of the Universal Postal Union.
This has postal conditions which member countries have to meet generally although there is room for modifications to meet the requirements of individual member countries.
You are advised to approach NIPOST for further details on this.
The three classifications are as follows: - Postal union mail: Mail in this category is governed by the convention of the Universal postal union.
There are three categories of mail here, namely, letters and cards; such as aerogramme, and other articles; printed matters, books and sheet music, periodicals and materials for the blind, and small packers, priority airmail is also available for back mailers of items under this category.
- Parcel Post: Sometimes referred to as CP mail (colis postaux, referring to postal parcels), this category of mail includes only the category that is equivalent to domestic fourth-class zone- rated parcel post.
86  - Express mail i nternational service: This is a service that is exchanged with ot her countries under agreement and memoranda of understanding with the postal administration of those countries.
Two services are normally provided.
These are custom- designed service and on-demand service.
A various types of services are similar to the national or domestic ones are also available to international mailer.
Such services include certificate of mailing insured mail, international postal money orders, international reply coupons, registered mail and restricted delivery, among others.
PRIVATE MAIL SERVICES Private courier companies offer most of the services that are offered by NIPOST.
In Nigeria today many companies and individuals tend to patronize private courier companies.
This is because these companies tend to offer more efficient and speedy delivery services than the NIPOST, even the former charge more than the latter.
Some of the services offered by private courier companies cut across national and international boundaries.
These include letters parcels and other mail services except those prohibited by law.
STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1) Go to any post office nearest to you and find out the international postal services that are available in Nigeria 2) Make a list of such services 3.3 POST CODE Before ending this unit it is important to mention what is referred to as Post Code.
Every major town or city in Nigeria has a post code.
This consists of the addressee’s name, followed by street name of the city and the post code.
87  For instance if you wa nt to write to a person in Benin City, the post code is 30001.
The address would be as follows: Rose Ogbomo 5 Ikelebe Street Benin City 30001 Edo State Post codes are used by the Post Office to speed up the sorting of mail in the sorting office.
It is therefore important that the correct post code be typed or written on the envelope to avoid missort of mail.
Post code may also be used to identify buildings.
This can be seen on most buildings in Abuja.
The essence is to identify buildings easily by mail deliverers and visitors.
4.0 CONCLUSION The knowledge of the national and international mail services is very important.
Being aware of the postal services that are available enables one to known the service could be used in a postal transaction.
The conclusion that may be drawn from this unit is that adequate selection of the account for effective use of appropriate mail service by the students.
5.0 SUMMARY We started this unit by describing the type of mail that is classified as domestic.
These include first class, second class, third class and fourth class mail.
Other mail service such as certificate of mailing, collect on delivery, and registered mail among others.
International mail falls within three categories namely.
Postal Union Mail Parcel Post and International Express Mail Service.
Various types of other international postal services have been discussed.
88  The role of private mail delivery companies was also discussed.
It is expected that you will ensure that y ou will study the unit closely and try to answer the questions that are meant to facilitate your understanding.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a) List the four common types of domestic mail b) Describe the nature and advantage of expedited local mail service as well as its advantage over other types of domestic mail.
2) Differentiate between first class and second class mail service.
3) Describe two other mail services that the NIPOST offers.
4) Attempt a classification of the international mail services available to most countries.
7.0 REFERENCES Amadin, M.S.
(2004) Modern office practice-Benin City: In print services Berstein, W, Powell, Loyd; Mckuster, V. and Sherwood, Catherine (1993).
Merriam – Webster Secretaries Handbook.
Merriam Webster Incor.
Foster, Thelma (1990) Office skills.
Leckhampton.
Stanley Thornes Pub.
Houghton Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary.
Boston: Houghton and Mifflin.
89  UNIT 4: THE MAIL ROOM CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the three preceding units, out objectives centred on incoming, outgoing and types of inland and international mail services.
However the mail room and the equipment that are needed to facilitate the tasks of the mail clerks were not discussed.
Unit will focus on the mail room, mail room documents and equipment.
90  2.0 OBJECTIVE: After studying this unit, you should be able to: i) Describe the mail room ii) Describe mail room documents iii) Describe mail room equipment 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DEFINITION OF MAIL ROOM Large organizations such as government establishments and corporate organizations have offices set aside for receiving incoming mail, and forwarding outgoing mail.
KEY CONCE PT A mail room is part of organization where letters and parcels are delivered by the postman, and where all outgoing mails stamped before being taken to the post office or postbox for collection.
Usually in government ministries a number of personnel work in the mail room.
These include the supervisor, receiving clerk, index clerk, tracing clerk, enclosure clerk as well as the training clerk.
The nomenclatures of mail room personnel seen to vary from organization or organization.
For effective performance and work flow, the mail room must be properly arranged.
3.4 MAIL ROOM DOCUMENTS 91  A number of docum ents are kept in the mail room for the purpose of maintaining accurat e entry and movement of incoming and outgoing mail.
The common mail room documents include dispatch book, outward correspondence register (which we described in unit 3), postage book and remittance book.
- Dispatch book: This is used to record details of letters sent out of the organization.
It ensures that letters leaving the mail room are received by the right persons.
Below is a sample of a dispatch book.
Fig ……….DISPATCH BOOK Date Destination Method of Receiving address dispatch - Postage Book: Postage book is used for recording posted letters, the amount spent on the postage, and the value of the stamp used.
Example of postage book is shown below.
Fig …………POSTAGE BOOK Amount of Details Amount of Remark stamps stamp Used Bought N K N K - Remittance Book: We have discussed the use of remittance book in the preceding unit.
All we can remind ourselves is that remittance book is used to record letters which money is enclosed either in cash or cheque.
The cashier is the regret personnel to sign the remittance book as evidence that those items involving payments have been accepted.
3.5 MAIL ROOM EQUIPMENT Mail room equipment includes those labour saving devices which are meant to facilitate the task of mail clerks.
As we indicated in the previous units, large organizations usually use automatics equipment for mail handling while the smaller ones usually use manual or hand operated machines.
Now note a few examples of such machines and their uses: 92  - Envelope sealing machines: Th ey are used to seal envelopes that are ready for dispatch.
Envelope sealing machines moisten the gums on the flaps of envelopes folds, compresses and deliver them into a tray which stacks than for stamping or franking.
- Envelope opening machine: This machine is of two types manual and automatic.
The manual type is usually used by small organizations owing to the small size of their mail.
Large organizations often use automatic electrically operated machines.
The machine picks envelopes from a stack, passes them through cutters which slit, the upper edge of the envelopes, and finally drops them in a receiving tray.
This prevents damage to the contents of the envelopes.
- Folding machine: Folding machines are used fold papers, letters, statements, pricelists, invoices and pamphlets, and other documents with the required sizes to fit the size of the envelopes.
The machine is capable of folding papers at a fast rate, and accurately.
- Inserting machine: This machine is used to select a large number of different postal materials and inserting them together in an envelope for dispatch, after they have been folded.
Other machines: other mail room machines include the following: i) Stamp fixing machine: Roles stamps are placed inside the machine when the machine is depressed, each stamp is moistened and affixed on the envelope ii) Collating machine: Used to sort papers into different sets and staples them iii) Envelope addressing machine: This is used for printing names and addresses on envelopes or other mailable documents such as card and statements before they are dispatched.
iv) Franking machine: This prints the amount of stamps on the denomination of postage required on the envelope for postage.
v) Guillotine: This machine is used for cutting and trimming papers.
It may also be used for opening letters.
Some other machines that may be found in a mail room include: a) Automatic time and date stamping machine b) Jogger-used to vibrate papers into alignment before binding or stapling them c) Stapling machine d) Rolling and wrapping machine used for rolling and wrapping news letters, magazines and journals e) Shredding machine: used for destroying confidential or other documents that are no longer useful.
f) Perforators: Used in making holes into paper or file jackets.
g) Rubber stamps 93  h) Laminating ma chine: This machine is used for sealing papers or cards in a transp arent film.
4.0 CONCLUSION We have described mail room, its documents and equipment as well as their uses.
The conclusion to be drawn from this unit is that no effective mail handling can be performed without a well equipped mail room.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have defined the mail room as part of organization where letters and parcels are delivered, processed and taken to the post office for posting.
Some of the main mail room documents include incoming mail register, dispatch book, postage book and remittance book.
A variety of mail room equipment which we have discussed includes stamp fixing machine, envelope addressing machine, folding machine, among others.
You should go through the unit again in order to answer the questions that follow.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
With appropriate diagrams, name and mention the functions of three mail room documents 2.
What is the following equipment used for in a mail room: stamp fixing machine, collating machine, franking machine, shredding machine, and jogger.
3.
Explain why some organizations prefer to make do with hand operating machines while others go for sophisticated ones in their mail rooms.
4.
Give 3 reasons why documents and equipment are necessary in a mail room.
7.0 REFERENCES Amadin, M.S.
(2004) Modern office practice-Benin City: In print services Bernstein, W; Powell, Loyd; McKusker, V. and Sherwood, Catherine (1993) Merriam-Webster Secretarial Handbook.
Springfield.
Massachusetts.
Foster, Thelma (1990) Office skills Stanley Thornes.
94  Houghton Mifflin Company (1995) .
The Professional Secretary, Boston: Houghton and Mifflin.
.
MODULE 4: COMMUNICATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT INTRODUCTION This module is meant to introduce you to the role of communication and office records in business transactions.
You will be made to understand the role of communication, the communication process, methods of handling files and documents in office organizations.
UNIT 1: COMMUNICATION IN OFFICE TRANSACTIONS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 95  1.0 INTRODUCTION Business organizations, like any other social system is comprised of individuals who have to interact with one another.
Language is one medium by which interaction may be carried out in an office or organizations generally oral and written language stand out as two major media of human interaction.
Interaction involves communication.
This is why communication has remained central in business transactions.
This explains why effort will be made on this unit to examine the impact of communication in the place of work.
2.0 OBJECTIVE Following our introduction, the objective of this unit is for you to do the follow after studying its contents: 1.
Define the concept of communication in offices organization 2.
State the purpose of communication in an organization 3.
Describe the communication process 4.
List the classification of communication 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 CONCEPT OF COMMUNICATION Generally, communication may be seen as the process by which a though is transferred from one person to another.
Communication connotes the exchange of information and transmission of meaning (Katz and Khan, 1988), Koontz and O’donnel consider that communication is the transfer of information from the sender to the receiver.
Thus communication can only be said to be received when it is understood by the receiver.
This explains why communication is central to formal organizations such as an academic institution or a firm.
It is difficult to provide an entirely acceptable definition of communication.
However in simple terms, communication implies the transfer of a message which is transmitted and acted upon.
This definition will be explained fully in a later section.
The general conception of communication with reference to organizations may be summarized as follows: - The lifeblood of an organization 96  - The glue that binds the organiz ation - The oil that smoothens the org anizations life - The thread that ties the system - The force that propels the organization In real terms, no organization can function effectively without a dynamic communication system.
3.2 PURPOSE OF COMMUNICATION - Communication is intended to provide the basis by which enterprise managers can get things done through the organization members.
- Communication seeks to provide the means by which organizational goals, objectives, procedures, rules, and executive decisions are made available numbers.
- Communication is intended to foster effective interdependence between organization units and their members.
- It seeks to foster effective interpersonal relationship within organizations.
3.3 THE COMMUNICATION PROCESS The effectiveness of an organization, largely depends on how well communication is handed.
In the process of attempting to meet organizational goals, solve problems and take decisions, communication necessarily comes into play.
The effectiveness of communication itself depends on whether the message which is sent by a source across to the receiver has been correctly decoded (understood by the latter).
It is on this account that Katz and Khan define communication as the exchange of information and transmission of meaning.
The process of communication may be summarized as listed below.
1) Stimulus: The thing that triggers off the communication exchange, otherwise referred to as the ideation stage.
2) Source: Referred to as the encoder, initiator etc who functions to formulate “meaning” into the “message” He initiates the communication exchange.
3) Message: The core of all forms of communication.
It refers to the thoughts, ideas, attitudes, intentions, etc which the encoder transmits to the receiver.
4) Medium: The form in which the sender wishes to put the message e.g.
oral (speech) written (on paper), drawing etc.
97  5) Channel: The c onduit pipe through which the medium chosen is passed to the r eceiver e.g.
in oral communication, such medium as Radio, TV.
Etc could be used.
6) Receiver: The decoder, i.e.
the destination of the message or the intended audience.
7) Feedback: The essential component that typifies communication as a process which makes it possible for, both source and receiver to swap roles and act as Transreceiver; and 8) Noise: Any disturbances, distraction etc in the communication process that could disrupt the flow e.g.
physical, psychological, linguistic etc.
In fact all the theories and models of communication derive from the above eight aspects of communication process.
Classification of communication process: Communication may be put into four main classes, namely, unilateral, directional transactional and interpersonal.
98  3.3.1 Unilateral Communication In unilateral or downward communication, the speaker initiates a message which terminates with the listener.
In educational systems, this comes in the form of address to students and staff, writing of memorandum, circulars or bulletins and verbal messages.
Available evidence points to three psychological processes that occur in the course of two, three and four step communication.
In the first process-levelling, the receiver tends to reduce constraints between parts of a message by omitting qualifying phrases.
In the second process, the receiver sharpens certain parts of the information or message so that only a few high points are remembered, while most of the others are forgotten.
In the third process, the receiver assimilates much of the message within his cognitive structure, colouring memories and interpretations of the message by his or her own thoughts and feelings.
Given these defects, unilateral communication can be said to be less than an efficient way of transmitting information.
3.3.2 Directive Communication This occurs when individuals interact face-to-face.
The exchange is complete when the receiver indicates to the sender that he has received and understood the message; as when a teacher gives an assignment to the students and asks if they have understood it.
The problem with this form of communication is that the sender influences while the receiver complies with the message.
3.3.3 Transactional Communication: Transactional communication is a reciprocal process in which each participant initiates messages and attempts to understand the other.
Information travels in both rather than one direction and each message has some impact on the next message, and the roles of source and receiver shift rapidly back and forth, as communication takes place.
It is generally observed that while many misunderstandings can be resolved through transactional communication, carrying out effective transaction takes a high degree of communication skill.
Participants must be in a position to state their thoughts and feelings clearly, ask each other for specific information, 99  read relevance of gest ure, and make sure that the message was decoded correctly.
This mutual feedback and spirit of helpfulness between participants is usually lacking in most communication situations.
FIG.
M4.1: TRANSACTIONAL COMMUNICATION ENCODED TRANSMITTE RECEIVED DECODED D IDEA CHANNEL IDEA DECODED RECEIVED TRANSMITTE ENCODED D Sneaker-Listener Listener - Sneaker Although managers and the workers can communicate information among themselves in writing, they often do so through face-to-face conversation.
This face-to-face encounter or interaction qualifies as interpersonal communication.
The context of interpersonal communication may be taken as belonging to another aspect of problem statement in terms of when they talk about how things are- situated (S), how things ought to be — (T) and how to move from the situation (S), to the target — proposals (P).
This mode of conceptualizing communication is what is referred to in problem solving literature as S.T.P.
model of problem or communication analysis.
3.3.5 Characteristics of Interpersonal Communication: Four features cut across the three levels of interpersonal skills (STP) with reference to subsystem effectiveness and organizational adaptability.
These include openness, communication during emotion, eliciting personal 100  resources and trust.
These elem ents are very important in Starting Organizational Development (OD) intervention.
It is upon these that the context for interpersonal communication is set and the process of improving interpersonal skills and other subsystem processes in organizational improvement and adaptability are based.
KEY POINT One point that you may wish to note is that every department or office in organization is constituted of people.
For the tasks of these people to be accomplished, without hitch, communication-effective communication becomes the driving force of personal, group, and entire organizational success.
STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1a) Why is directive communication important in a group b) Does it have any defect?
If you have a group assignment, but one member decides to work alone, what effect will this have on the final product of the group?
4.0 CONCLUSION Communication remains central to the success of any group or organizational transaction or business.
The conclusion to be drawn from this unit is that where the purpose, and process of communication is not 101  clearly defined and cl osely followed, corporate success of any office and organizational as a who le can hardly be attained.
5.0 SUMMARY We defined communication largely as a process of human interaction which may be oral or written.
The unit tried to explain to you the concept or ideas which constitute communication, and put forward a number of statements which seek to explain the concept of communication.
The purpose of communication is explained in terms of the goals it seeks to accomplish in an organization.
In discussing the communication process, we observed that it involves all the steps that need to be taken to make communication effective.
In this unit, communication is classified into four main groups: unilateral, directional, and transactional an interpersonal.
In unilateral or downward communication, the speaker initiates a message which terminates with the listener.
Directive communication occurs on the form of face-to-face situation where the sender gives a message to the receiver, and this is taken as being understood by the receiver.
Transactional communication is a two-way interaction where the participants try to understand themselves, as the message flows in both rather than one direction.
Interpersonal communication is usually effected through a face-to-face process.
The characteristics of interpersonal communication include openness communication during emotion, eliciting personal resources and trust.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a) Attempt a definition of communication b) Outline five attributes of communication in an organization 2a) Briefly explain the purpose of communication in a business office.
b) What do you think would happen to human organizations if communication is not effective?
102  3.
Compare and contrast unilateral communication and directive communication.
4.
With a suitable diagram, demonstrate why transactional communication is the preferred type of communication in an organization.
7.0 REFERENCES Aggarawal, Rohini (2002) Business Communication and Organization and Management.
New Delhi Taxman Allied Services Luthans, Fred (1985) organizational behaviour.
McGraw-Hill International.
Dubrin, J. Andrew (1990) Effective Business Psychology.
Englewood Cliff: Prentice.
Hall.
Katz, Daniel, and Khan, Robert (1988) working Smart”.
Personal Report for the Executive.
Coontz and O’donnel (1995) Management.
McGraw-Hill.
103  UNIT 2: METHOD S OF RECORDS PROCESSING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Records management is part of information management because it involves the systematic analysis and control of all forms of records which include paper records, microfilm, and optical media.
Thee forms of records management involves the use of improved electronic technology to store information other than conventional files.
However, the management of paper records which are written communication remains the major focus of many conventional and moderate or average electronic office.
Records management is one function which is common to offices in small or large organizations.
The size of an organization generally determines the type of record management that may be operated there.
In this unit you will be made to understand some basic methods of records storage.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: 1) Define the concept of filing 2) State the purpose of good filing system 3) Show evidence of efficient filing system 4) Demonstrate how filing is organized 5) Determine the constituents of good filing system 6) Identify steps in filing 7) Identify the range of office files 8) Categorize files in terms priority of treatment 9) Describe the steps of file movement 10) Explain the process of cross-referencing 104  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE CONCEPT OF FILING You may recall that when you first enrolled in your programme of this university, you were given documents which you were required to file, that are place in your file jacket.
You should at this point note that filing simply means placing the right papers or documents in the right file.
A more technical definition of filing is that it is the process of collecting, classifying and arranging documents for the purpose of keeping and ensuring that they can quickly be retrieved whenever required.
This is the most important part of the filing process, because a file which is placed in the wrong file could be difficult to find when the document is required.
KEY CONCE PT Filing is done in order to find documents with ease- whenever they are required Much of filing work that takes place in an office include letters, forms inquires, circulars and other documents that have been received by the organization.
When these documents have been filed they now become office records.
3.2 PURPOSE OF FILING Filing documents is meant to achieve three main purposes: 1) Protecting the document from wear and tear that may arise out of frequent use or poor handling, dirt, dust or unforeseen circumstance, such as fire or flood water.
2) Retrieving the document without delay.
3) Providing the source of evidence in case of litigation or similar situation 105  3.2.1 Evidence of effic ient filing An efficient filing system should exhibit the following features: - The filing system should be simple and quick to understand and operate.
- The filing cabinets should be conveniently located while the files within the cabinets should be easy to find.
Authorized staff should be able to have easy access to the files - The filing system should be suitable to the type of business undertaken by the organization - The system of filing should be easily adaptable to the change or modification in the business trend.
- The filing system should be easily adaptable to personnel or equipment changes within the office - The filing system should not be too expensive to put in place - The system should ensure the safety of the documents and the equipment used in storing them.
3.3 ORGANIZATION OF FILING Official files may be organized at the central level or at the departmental level.
Filing which is managed centrally is referred to as “Centralized filing”.
The one which is organized department by department is referred to as “Decentralized filing”.
3.3.1 Centralized Filing In centralized filing system, the files and the filing facilities are located and maintained in a specialize department from which the various divisions of the organization are served.
Essentially all the organizations or firms' documents are filed in one single section of those organizations.
Messengers from these other sections come from time to time to collect or return their files.
3.3.2 Advantages and disadvantages - There is more effective supervision and control of the records - It provides opportunity for more specialized staff to be used for the filing functions - Duplication of documents and equipment is controlled - A standardized and uniform filing system can easily be established for the organization.
106  - It allows effective and efficient follow-up system and absent- file system to be put in place.
3.3.3 Disadvantages The disadvantages of centralized filing include the following: - Possible delays in the retrieval of documents or files because of distance and the long bureaucratic process that might be involved - The centralized filing system adopted by the firm may not be suitable to some departments.
- The confidentiality or safety of classified (e.g.
secret) documents may not be guaranteed.
- The centralized filing system may create room for the dumping of outdated or unwanted documents from other departments.
3.4 DECENTRALIZED FILING Decentralized or departmental filing system is one in which each section or department keeps and maintains its own files and filing facilities.
The function of filing may be assigned to a few officers who may also have some other schedules.
3.4.1 Advantages The following advantages are claimed for decentralized filing: - It is convenient as it enables personnel in each section to have easy access to files and documents - Each department may use the filing method if deems more suitable to its line of business - It is time saving as documents can easily be retrieved.
- It is much easier to preserve the confidentiality of documents - Departmental filing provides a good training ground for the staff.
3.4.2 Disadvantages The disadvantages of decentralized filing system are as follows: - It is expensive to operate - It involves duplication of documents and equipment - Incompetent officers may mishandle and there by cause the loss of files 107  - Supervision and control is less effective in decentralized filing 3.5 DETERMINING EFFECTIVE FILING SYSTEM An effective filing system may be determined by the ease with which documents could be retrieved.
To ensure this, an efficient filing process must be established.
Let me briefly discuss these processes.
i. Inspecting correspondence: Each incoming correspondence must be examined to ensure that it has been released for filing.
Release marks or symbols are special marks that are made on the file to show that it has been dealt with.
Release mark may be just a signature, a live across the paper, a large ‘F’ to indicate the document has been filed.
It could be an instruction stamped on the paper to file it.
ii.
Reading and indexing: You should each letter thoroughly to determine how it should be indexed and filed.
This means determining the name, subject or other heading or caption by the way the correspondence will be requested.
iii.
Coding: Coding here means marking the indexing caption of papers to be filed.
One way of coding so is to underline the indexing caption which could be name, subject or place.
Coding saves time when papers are filed for the first time and when they are filed after use.
iv.
Cross-referencing: A letter may be called for under more than one name, subject or place and across-referenced under other names or subheads.
v. Filing: Carve it and proper filing of a document should be made.
You should ensure that the right file jacket or folder has been selected, and that the letters are correctly placed with the aid of a string with metal looks at both ends.
Iron file tags which are normally placed at the centre of the file jacket may also be used.
Irrespective of their paper sizes all correspondence should be filed with heading to the left, so that they can be read at the same time like a book.
Number every filed document with red ink or biro for the purpose of referencing, and to avoid removal without notice.
3.6 STEPS IN FILING After going through the file under, and seeing that there are letters or documents that have not been filed proceed to file as follows: 108  i.
Assign a name to each file, using either blocked capitals or inject black typed capitals and pr ovide dividing guide cards for every twenty to thirty folders ii.
Sort and group correspondence in suitable filing order iii.
File systematically and neatly, in the order in which the documents come each day and place each one squarely them squarely in their respective files.
iv.
Ensure that each correspondence is placed correctly on the right folder by checking file index properly, and where a document is to be placed in more than on file use clear cross-reference.
v. Remove all paper clips, and in their place, use staple for papers that need to be kept together, to avoid single papers being trapped and being file wrongly.
Note that filing is done in date order and placing latest paper on tap or in front and number it.
Where the firm uses the book number, put the latest paper at the back and number it.
vi.
Removing individual papers in a file should be avoided to avoid misplacing them.
Prepare markers for all absent files or you should place ‘out card’ where files are removed.
vii.
Where there is insufficient correspondence from a source to warrant opening an individual fill, such correspondence should be placed in the miscellaneous file and ensure transfer from the miscellaneous file to individual folder as soon as there is enough correspondence for it.
viii.
Remove “dead” materials to transfer file (dead file) to avoid the file becoming too bulky.
Alternatively a new file should be opened under a new volume.
ix.
Keep your card index ready for quick cross-referencing x.
To update your filing system, you have to file daily, as this would enhance efficiency and easy retrieval of files.
3.7 RANGE OF OFFICE FILES Files are often described in line with the level of their use in an organization.
The levels which files are used are based on how active they are often in demand.
Six levels of file activeness are identified as follows: 1) Active file: Files in this category are always in demand for action by schedule officers.
Examples include personnel files, wages and salaries files, work in progress or contract files in this category are kept in place where they can be easily reached.
2) Semi-Active file: Files in this category are relatively action in other words the frequency with which reference is made to them is not as 109  high as those in the first category.
In this class are files on disciplinary and promotion matters.
3) Inactive files: As the name implies files in this category are dormant, as it contains obsolete papers and documents which the organization is required by law to preserve for a stipulated number of years before they may be destroyed.
4) Pending files: Pending files are those that are kept in abeyance, since action may not be taken on them until occasion demands it.
5) Temporary files: This file contains correspondence that require urgent action, but which cannot be treated in their original file, owing to the engagement of the file at the particular time.
Such correspondences are returned to their original files as soon action has been completed on them.
6) Miscellaneous files: Correspondence which does not have specific files of their own is treated on the miscellaneous files.
When the correspondences have eventually been transferred to their main file, the miscellaneous file is destroyed.
3.8 CATEGORIZATION OF FILES IN TERMS OF PRIORITY OF TREATMENT It is not every file that comes into an office that is given equal treatments.
As a rule, files are treated in relation to the priority of their treatment.
This retried to indicate briefly in a previous unit.
It is on this account that files have been classified under four levels in the order of their importance or importance of their contents.
They are as follows: 1) Top secret files: This type of file is handled with the highest degree of confidentiality.
Information on such a file is restricted to top management staff because of its very secretive and sensitive nature.
2) Secret file: Files in this category with high sense of confidentiality.
Matters in this file are usually restricted to some categories of senior staff.
3) Confidential file: Matters on this type of file are private and personal in nature and usually relate to employees of the organization, and to enquire that are personal on nature.
4) Open file: This file contains matters which any office staff of the organization may have access to.
Nothing in it is confidential or restricted.
All files of confidential or secret nature are usually treated in the secret registry.
The envelopes and the content of such letters are often marked top secret, secret or confidential.
The mail clerk must always take such correspondence to the secret registry unopened.
110  3.9 FILE MOVEMENT One evidence of a good filing system is best demonstrated by the extent to which the movement of files is maintained.
One document which is needed to maintain efficient file movement is called the file movement book or file movement register.
A file movement register is a booklet which is use to keep the movement of files which leave one department or section of the organization.
A typical example of the file movement register is shown in fig… below.
Fig M4.
2: FILE MOVEMENT REGISTER File Date Colle Date De Returned Date Nam/ Borro cted Collect pt By Returned No.
wed By ed As indicated above, the register records the file number, date borrowed, department which borrowed it, the officer who collected the file and date of collection.
When the file is returned the identification of the staff who returned the file and date returned must be indicated.
By this process, when the file is missing, it is possible to trace it to the last office or department which signed for and collected the file.
3.10 CROSS-REFERENCING Cross-referencing means providing data or information that would enable one to get information or correspondence in respect of a person or firm, in an alternative file.
Generally people, particularly women change their names when they are married.
Firms may also change their names as a result of merger.
Filing clerks, therefore, have the responsibility of organizing the system in his/her file so that anyone who is looking for an out of date name would be directed to the new or more current name.
This is what is involved on cross-referencing.
Usually a sheet is made out as shown below and placed in files under the old name: 111  FIG.
M4.
3 CROSS REFER ENCE SHEET FOR CORRESPONDENCE: Maria Ekpenyong SEE Mrs Maria Okafor Cross-referencing can also be used for goods and suppliers, for example: For suppliers of computers, look under: Electronic equipment, cross- referencing may also be used for a variety of items such as a letter dealing with two topics; e.g.
(see example) FIG.M4.4 CROSS REFERENCE SHEET FOR CORRESPONDENCE FOR: Complaints SEE Payments and Complaints STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1) Draw a cross-reference sheets and enter the following: a) The firm of Udo-Udo Enterprises is now known as: Udo-Udo & Co; b) Miss Hauwa Ibrahim is now known as: Mrs. Hauwa Ibrahim-Kolo 112  4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has dealt with the processes and steps that are essential to the setting up and maintaining an efficient filing system.
The point which the student should take as the conclusion of this unit is that without the mastery of the essential steps to setup a viable office records could be difficult.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has explained the concept of filing as storing information a retrievable form.
The purpose of filing is that it acts as a means of preserving, and retrieving documents.
Evidence of a good filing system is such as having a number of attributes such as convenient location of files within file cabinets, easy and adaptable filing system.
Two forms of organizing files include centralized and decentralized methods.
Their strengths and weaknesses have been noted.
How to determine the effectiveness of a failing systems include the ease with which documents could be retrieved among others.
The major steps include inspecting correspondence, reading and indexing, coding, cross- referencing, and correctness of filing.
Steps in filing involves assigning name to each file sorting, filing systematically, ensuring that every correspondence is placed in the right file, and so on.
Office files may be put under six types of files: active file, semi-active file, inactive file, temporary files and miscellaneous file.
Files may also be identified in terms of their priority of treatment: namely, top secret, secret, confidential, and open file.
To ensure efficient movement and file retrieval, a file movement book or register has to be main formed.
Finally, the concept of cross-referencing and the procedure for effecting cross-referencing has been clearly demonstrated.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) What does filing entails?
2a) List the ten characteristics of efficient filing b) Describe five of them in detail 113  3) Show the ad vantages and disadvantages of centralized and departmental fili ng 4) Describe the 5 steps you would take to determine an effective filing system.
5) If you observe that some letters have not been filed, explain the steps you would take to file them 6) How would you classify files in the order of information which they contain?
7) Why is it necessary to have a file movement register?
8) With appropriate cross-reference sheet treat the following for effective cross-referencing: a) Correspondence from Mr Okonkwo of Edo Broadcasting Network is to be filed in future under silver bird television b) Miss.
Jane Amah is now married.
Her married name is Soludo, and her correspondence will be filed under Mrs. Jane Chima Soludo.
7.0 Reference Amadin, M.S.
(2004) Modern office practice-Lagos: In print services Foster, Thelma J.
(1990) Office skills.
Stanley Thornes Pub.
Houghton and Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary's Handbook.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Parson, C.J.
(1988) Communication for Business Students.
London: Edward Arnold.
114  UNIT 3: CLASSIFICATION OF FILING SYSTEMS CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION There are a variety of filing systems.
This is why different offices use different methods to classify their files.
Essentially the success or failure of any filing system is largely determined by the choice which an organization makes.
Again, the nature of business undertaken by a firm can also influence the type of filing system to be used.
In this unit you well be taught the different methods of classifying files, with the intention that you will be properly guided in your choice of file classification system, particularly with reference to the level of efficiency of the system.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of studying this unit, you should be able to accomplish the following: 1) State the importance of designing appropriate system of file classification 2) Explain the principles of alphabetical classification 3) State the principles of subject classification 4) Describe the principles of geographic classification 5) State the numerical classification 6) Explain the principle of alpha-numeric filing 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 DESIGNING THE APPROPRIATE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM The first consideration in file classification of filing is irrespective of where the file cabinets are kept and whether paper files, magnetic or microfilms, a 115  manageable system mu st be developed not only for the current records but with an eye on future ex pansion.
For the purpose of consistency, where one type of file includes the same material in paper and electronic, you should use the same naming system, e.g.
alphabetical or numerical, for both.
On the alternative you may wish to develop a cross-reference index for them.
If you happen to file documents on disk, or other media, follow the file naming instruction of word processing or other programme that they use.
3.2 CLASSIFICATION OF FILING SYSTEM 3.2.1 Alphabetical classification Alphabetical classification can generally be applied to names, places and other subjects.
The same words used in alphabetical and computer filing, but it is likely that such words may be abbreviated in the case of a disk file.
A-Z rules: generally, the A-Z rule apply in alphabetical filing, however, special rules may applied in certain cases.
The general rules for alphabetical classification of under alphabetical filing are as follows: i) FOR PEOPLE: USE SURNAME AS FILING POINT: AKPAN MICHAEL EWERE YUSUF MARTINA OLAITAN OLIVER TIMI Where there are people with the same surname, file the second name or initial, if full second name or initial, if full second name is not known: ODOGWU CAROLE F ODUGWU CAROLE EJIRO ODUGWU CAROLE W ODUGWU CAROLE YEMISI ODUGWU CAROLE Z Where there are identical first names and surnames, file in the alphabetical order of the towns which the people live: 116  EDEM UDO ABEOK ULA EDEM UDO CALAB AR EDEM UDO ENUGU EDEM UDO ORON ii) NAC NAMES For those working in companies where there are foreigners with Mc, Mac or M, file the names as if they were all Mac: McBeth, Simpson McBride Elizabeth McHenry Dan Mackenzie Harry iii) SAINT NAMES File all ‘saint’ surnames with ST as of this were spelt saint: ST Gabriel ST Genesis ST John ST Lawrence ST Martin’s finance Co. Ltd iv) TITLES Ignore titles altogether from the point of view of filing: NWOSU Lady Jane NWOSU Margaret NWOSU Mrs Tina Igbinedion Mrs Ijeoma Igbinedion Sir Gabriel Ndinechi Prof. Gabriel Monday Lady Okuosa Odumegwu Nazi Eke v) SHORTER NAMES: Fill shorter names before longer ones: UDO AKPAN UDOETTE AKPAN UDOETTEYEN AKPAN 117  vi) HYPHENATED NAMES: Fills with hyphenated names are filed by the first part of the name, in other words, ignore the hyphen and treat whole name as one word: EKE-NSEFIK EDET OBONG-ETE EKPENYONG SAM-UBA IMO vii) FIRMS: Some registered names of firms include first name.
Where this is the case, file under the surnames.
FOR OBI, G, Nwankwo & Co. Ltd., file as Nwakwo Obi G & Co. Ltd. Where the registered name of a firm includes two surnames, file under the first surname; e.g.
file Lawrence and Imo PLC File as Lawrence and Imo PLC Where a firms name which includes a number, file as if the number where spelt in full: FOR: THE 469 CLUB, file as sixty-Nine Club (The) Ignore the words; ‘The’ and ‘A’ on names of firms.
For the following: The Mercy Honey processing Ltd A modern Honey Business File as: Modern Honey Business (A) Mercy Honey processing Ltd (The) viii) Firms whose names consist of initials, should be filed before firms whose names are written in full: e.g.
NDF Production Co PLC Marvel Furniture Co. PLC However if you known what the initials stand for, file normally: PHCN is the filed as Power Holding Company of Nigeria 3.2.2 Subject Classification Subject filing is a useful method for classifying paper under different topics.
Each topic or subject is usually filed in alphabetical order of the main subject in question.
This method is particularly useful in classifying names.
The following categories of subject may be classified or filed under subject method; e.g.
118  Wages Vacation Receipts Promotions Rates Bank Salaries Shares Topics which are related to each of these titles are filed under each of them.
On the other hand, subject filing may be done hierarchically, that is in the order of importance.
In other words, where there are groups of items or various subjects where to put some of them.
How to organize them so that items of one class is not put in anther one, becomes a major filing issue.
For instance we may have the following series of subjects: General processing unit Impact peripherals Output peripherals Ancillary storage devices System soft way According to Houghton Mufflin (1995) each of these series might be subdivided into two or more primary categories.
E.g.
Output peripherals Paper printers Display terminals A primary category e.g.
output peripheral, may be further sub-divided into secondary categories as follows: Pot matrix printers Typewriter-Quality printers Line-Printers Display terminals CRT Display Flat panel display The secondary category may further be divided as required.
119  The advantages of hier archical filing: One of the advantages of this system of subject filing is very systematic as it reflects the structure of the activity through which the documents themselves were created.
The system is useful for browsing since all related documents are grouped together in the file.
Documents could also be retrieved at varying levels.
The major disadvantages of hierarchical filing are as follows: - The consuming to construct - Requires a thorough understanding of the activities by which files are created - It provides only one place to file a given document 3.3 Geographic classification of files Geographic arrangement of files can be said to be a variant of alphabetical filing.
Geographic filing is more commonly used in architectural offices, building or construction offices, where large plans have to be filed in the order of say, cities towns, country, states, or local government, areas or territories.
The geographic filing is advantageous useful for grouping correspondence by territory; for distributive organization’s and export departments of large companies with a wide range of customers scattered across many countries.
It is useful when the need arises when there is need to review a firm's activities.
In terms of disadvantages it requires: i.
An index for easy reference ii.
It requires, employment of a knowledgeable clerk in order to avoid mistakes 3.4 NUMERICAL CLASSIFICATION This method uses numbers rather than letters to divide the filing pockets of a filing cabinet.
This method is easy to use because each new file receives the next number and added to the end of the existing files.
In numerical filing files are separated with guide-cards which may be numbered in multiples of ten.
For example: 1-10, 101, 110……… The number which is allocated to each file automatically becomes the files name and indexed 120  separately alphabetically.
This expla ins why numerical filing is the reverse alphabetical filing since it from alph abetical index that a files number can be known.
The strength of numeric filing has on the fact that it requires fewer rules, but you must ensure that the name (alphabetical, and number index rule has to be maintained).
Again, the following advantages may be claimed for numeric filing: 1.
It maintains about the greatest accuracy in filing 2.
Additional folders may be added without having to rearrange the existing folders 3.
It makes provision for expansion in the case of individual folder 4.
Chances of misfiling are slim.
On the negative side, the following defects may be identified: 1.
The system requires a separate index, and this could be costly 2.
A lot of time is lost in an attempt to open new file 3.
It takes a fairly long time to refer for the under card whenever papers are needed to be retrieved.
3.5 ALPHA-NUMERIC FILING This combines alphabetical and numerical filing system.
This is alphabetical filing which is divided numerically.
The procedure is to involve preparation of alphabetical guide-guides, while the folders are numbered in sequence behind the guide-card A.
For instance, a folder for Abia line appears behind the guide card A. thus if it is the first folder, under this alphabet, it is numbered A1.
The next name which appears next becomes A2 and so on.
SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1) List five factors that you would consider when classifying files 2a) Why is numerical filing so called?
What do you consider to be the advantage of alphabetical classification of files over numerical classification?
3) Pay a visit to a business and a government office and try to find out how they classify their documents 121  4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of classification of the filing system is can be seen on the ability of a firm to organize and manage its records effectively and efficiently.
The conclusion from the study of this unit is that an organization is as effective and efficient to the extent to which it can classify its records system.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit started by emphasizing the fact that whatever system of file classification is adopted, it must meet not only the immediate but also the future needs of the organization.
It has been shown that alphabetical classification can be applied to names, places and other subjects.
It has also been emphasized that the A – Z rules apply to alphabetical filing in terms of using surnames as the filing potato for people, titles, hyphenated names, and so on.
Subject classification is useful for classifying papers.
Each topic or subject is often filed in alphabetical order.
Hierarchical filing is observed to be very systematic as it reflect the structure of the activity through when the document themselves were created.
As variant of alphabetical filing, geographical filing is often used in architectural offices, where plans are to be filed under country, state or territorial locations.
Numerical classification of files uses numbers rather than letters to divide the filing pockets of a filing cabinet.
Alpha-numeric classification of files combines both the numeric and alphabetical filing system.
Alphabetical filing is divided numerically.
The advantages and the disadvantages of the various filing classification systems have also been discussed.
Go back to the main text and try to master what you have been taught.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 122  1.
Differentiate alphabetical and subject filing 2a) Explain what method is hierarchical filing b) What are its strengths and weaknesses?
3) Explain the principle behind alpha-numeric filing REFERENCE Amadin, M.S.
(2004) Modern office practice-Lagos: In print services Foster, Thelma J.
(1990) Office skills.
Stanley Thornes Pub.
Houghton and Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary's Handbook.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Parson, C.J.
(1988) Communication for Business Students.
London: Edward Arnold.
123  UNIT 4: SYSTEM S OF FILING AND INDEXING CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION As we indicated in Unit 3 classification of files by which alphabetic, numbers, subject titles, location geographical, time sequence, or electronic processes are used to arrange papers.
On the other hand, systems of filing involve the methods of placing files in the file cabinets or containers.
In this unit the various methods of doing so will be explained.
2.0 OBJECTIVE After reading this unit, you should be able to: 1) Adopt the different systems of filing in an office 2) State the principles involves in microfilm filing 3) Apply the principles paper filing to electronic filing 4) Apply appropriate the principles for indexing documents 5) Describe the different types of indexes 6) Describe the relevance of follow-up systems in filing of documents 7) Describe the basic equipment that may be available for filing and preserving documents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 TYPES OF FILING SYSTEMS As indicated in our introduction, filing systems have to do with the methods of placing files in the file cabinets or containers.
The next point you have to note is that files may be placed in the file cabinet ho containers.
The next point you have to note is that files may be placed in the file cabinet 124  horizontally, vertically or laterally (as in the case of books) some of the methods by which files may be pl aced in the file cabinets are discussed below.
3.1.1 Horizontal filling Horizontal filing otherwise called flat filling remains one of the oldest methods of filing.
The system is used in modern times to keep drawings, charts, plans, photographs and tracing papers which are stored in flat positions in cabinets which are filled with shallow drawers.
Few organizations which still maintain this type of filing system include those of engineering and architecture.
This system is only effective where the volume of correspondence is small, and where there is need to keep a particular set of papers together.
As indicated above, it is only required when the volume of correspondence is small.
Its usefulness in modern business organizations appears to be waning.
3.1.2 Vertical Filing: Sometimes referred to as drawer filing owing to the fact it owes its origin to the use of rawer filing cabinets.
Vertical filing is a highly adaptable system since it can be used in variety of classifications to suit the requirements of different organizations.
Some file may use as many as six drawers.
Documents are filed vertically in the drawers.
What is needed to operate vertical filing system includes strong or hard folders and guide cards which may be tabbed in alphabetical order.
The following are the advantages of vertical filing system: i.
Papers and folders cannot easily be displaced ii.
Folders need not be removed when inserting or removing papers from the file iii.
Documents can easily be protected from fire.
However the following are the disadvantages of vertical system of filling: i) It is only accessible to only one person at a time ii) It is expensive to operate iii) It tends to take additional space when the drawer is open 125  3.1.3 Lateral Filing: Lateral filing is synonymous with book filing because files are placed on the shelves like books are the files are demarked by vertical dividers at intervals.
Interconnected concertina pockets hung on the rails are filled laterally in cupboards or shelves.
One advantage of the lateral filing occupies less floor space, cheaper to operate than vertical filing.
Files are easy to remove and replaced.
On the contrary, files may be easily exposed to dirt and dust.
Reading of file titles may be difficult because of the way files are placed on each other.
3.1.4 Suspension Filling: In suspension filing, files are suspended vertically from metal frames which are fitted inside the drawers.
The pockets are provided with flat tops which house the printed or typed titled strips.
To prevent miss-filing several colours of the strips are used.
The pockets are arranged in the form of concertina in order to prevent the loss of documents which may become loose.
Note that a folder is provided for each suspended pocket and labelled to correspond with the title strip; papers are filed in the inner folder and placed inside the suspended pocket.
The pockets can accommodate several folders.
The advantages of suspension filing may be listed as follows: 1.
Coloured metal chip-on signals are used as reminders or to indicate important facts to staff.
2.
It is easy to add new files without difficulty 3.
It allows for conspicuous, display of names or numbers of files 4.
It is easy to find inside folders and to replace same where necessary 5.
All titles become visible as the drawer is opened.
On the negative side of this filing system, is that a long time and a serious care is required to label folders to correspond with the title strips, poor arrangement of tabs may result in poor visibility of files.
3.2 MICROFILM FILLING Microfilm filing involves the process of retaining documents for which permanent record is required to be kept.
The process involves taking 126  photographs documents and reducin g their sizes in order to reduce the large amount of information into a small ro le of films or separate frames of films.
Documents are usually microfilmed in order to: - Protect the content from fire - Preserve vital or confidential records - Safeguard customers cheques by banks - Keep the records of books and other information in the libraries - Keep records of plans drawings, sketches or maps in a drawing office - To keep records of case history of patients in the hospitals - Keep the record of history at the police stations.
Two types of equipment are required for making microfilm records: 1) Camera for filing the data 2) Scanner machine for projecting the filmed documents on to the screen for immediate or subsequent reading Microfilming provides an economic method of filing and preserving records on a relatively permanent basis.
However, microfilming equipment is expensive, and may be difficult to retrieve one’s records for one’s use.
3.3 ELECTRONIC FILING With computer-assisted document, filing and indexing and index data may be stored and processed electronically, however the documents themselves still remain in paper of microform.
In appropriate filing systems, some or whole documents may be stored in machine-readable, computer-processed form on magnetic disks or other media.
[You need to note that there are two forms of computer storage: These are on-line-storage and off-line storage.
On-line storage: The following procedure may be adopted in developing on-line storage - Create a document: Enter file name or other indexing term - Instead of printing out a copy or microfilming the document, retain it on a disk for retrieval later.
This technique is said to be particularly effective when using multi- terminal installations where documents can be accessed even from remote workstations.
The advantage of storing documents in computer system saves space than would be the case in paper filing system.
127  The disadvanta ge of computer filing is that data stored on computer- processed magne tic media are not stable and must be recopied from time to time to prevent deterioration or loss.
Off-line storage: The storage space provided by most word processing processors is too limited to accommodate extensive records and large database.
So as available disks become full, older records have to be transferred somewhere also for off-line storage such as magnetic tape or microfilm.
CD-ROM and other recording media may be used to provide additional storage space, in which case the potential of electronic filing systems can be ascertained as more documents can be allowed to remain on-line for a considerable period of time.
3.4 INDEXING By indexing is meant the process of selecting the main title or name under which a document is to be filed.
The term may also be used for to describe the device for finding the position of records in a filing system very quickly and easily.
One important point you must note is that the speed and case with which you may retrieve records from a filing system will be determined by the efficiency with which you have used or adopted to select parts of the names of tiles to be filed or have been filed.
For effective indexing, observe the following rules: 3.4.1 Individual Names: use surname prefix as part of indexing unit.
Usually, the surname, e.g.
in Eke Michael John, since Eke is the surname, it becomes the first or main indexing point:- EKE, Michael John In the case a name such as Babagana J. it is indexed as: BABAGANA J.
In the case of Names such as Mc Mac, De, La, e.g.
La Macquist the name is indexed as are surname: LAMACQUIST, Romano 128  3.4.2 Hyphenated names: Treat hyphenated names, as are name and index as a unit.
For example, Grace Ojomo-Paul becomes: Ojomo-Paul Grace.
3.4.3 Titles and Degrees: Titles are not considered for the purpose of indexing.
For instance, Sir John Odey, becomes, Odey, Sir John; Dr. Peter James becomes James, Dr. Peter.
3.4.4 Articles: Definite article 'THE' should be put at the end when indexing: e.g.
the peoples Club of Nigeria, becomes: Peoples Club of Nigeria, THE.
Where the article comes in the middle of the name, place it on parenthesis rather than removing it.
3.4.5 Abbreviations: As in the case of filing, this is indexed as if they were spelt in full e.g.
Ltd. Inc. Co., Bros. are treated as separate indexing units.
3.4.6 Numbers: Treat these as words e.g.
2009.
3.4.7 Geographical Names: E.g.
Akwa Ibom state, Abia state, are treated as one indexing unit for indexing purpose.
3.4.8 Names and Numbers: Names consisting of initials and numbers are placed at the reigning of appropriate letter group A1 steel Company; ADC Transport Ltd and AGR Agric.
Co. 3.4.9 Close look at the methods applied in alphabetical filming shows a close relation with indexing: In other words the techniques used in filing alphabetically could easily be applied to indexing documents of different titles.
3.5 TYPES OF INDEXES 129  There are a number of indexes that are used in record keeping.
These include Card Index, strip index visible card index, Rotary card index, page index, vowel index and punched card index.
Let us not briefly describe how each of these indexes work.
3.5.1 Card Index: This is a device which is used to keep records, particularly in numerical filing system, since it is not always easy to go directly to the file with a reference card index.
This card index which is alphabetical order is used to look for the number which is allocated to the file.
Card index may also be used to as a guide card to help filing officers in locating files particularly in the cause of alpha-numerical filing.
Absent file card is normally inserted to indicate that a file has been removed.
A guide card looks something like this BE – BL – BP – BP BA – BK BO BD 3.5.2 Strip Index: This is a device, whereby strips of paper are specially designed in special shapes and handwritten or typed to provide the required information on a particular file.
The strips are usually available in different colours, and inserted in vertical metal sheets which form part of a visual card index.
Strip index would be useful where the information to be typed can be done on one line only.
3.5.3 Visual Card Index: This card is called visual card index because the names of persons or organizations are inserted for reference purpose.
The cards are so fixed so that the information on them is easily visible.
Visible card index is especially useful in ledger records.
Personnel records, sales and stock records.
These devises are arranged in a special in such that they overlap each other.
130  3.5.4 Vowel Index: This device is used to split-up a group of names into vowel columns such as A, E, D, P, S, Y, All the names under each of these vowels are filed under each other in alphabetical order.
3.5.5 Wheel or Rotary Card Index: This is an alternative to actual card index.
Cards are stored on wheel which can be rotated to locate a particular file easily and quickly too.
The advantage of this system is that it enables records to be found more quickly than other forms of index.
3.5.6 Punch Card Index: This system is developed for the purpose of selecting and sorting and records of which original information is recorded in cards which have holes punched along two or four edges.
The key point to note here is that the recorded information is usually printed on the card itself quite adjacent to the punched holes.
The information which is to be shown on card is notched in the edges by hand or key operated punch.
Punched card index system may be used in personnel records offices, or market research.
One advantage of this system is that any card containing required information can easily be selected from a large group of similar cards.
3.6 FOLLOW-UP SYSTEMS In good offices it would be necessary to find out if the replies to correspondence have been received where no reply is received; it may necessary to follow-up by sending a reminder either by letter or phone call.
On the other hand, whenever a file or document in a file has been removed, there has to be a system of reminder which will speed up the retrieval of such documents, to avoid their being misplaced or forgotten.
A number of methods are available, which an office may use.
Let us briefly explain a few of them.
131  1.
Desk Diary: En ter the details of file you wish to consult on a desk diary.
This diary is checked daily.
Any file to be consulted must be taken out for action.
2.
Tickler file or follow-up: This consists of a filing cabinet drawer, and is divided by guide cards for each of the twelve months of the year.
Behind the current month is a file is placed for each day of the month.
At the beginning of each day, a card on the file concerned has to be placed in respect of respective date.
At the day, the cards concerned are removed, while files concerned are then removed from their cabinets.
3.
Extra copy: One simple approach to reminder system is to make an extra copy of the relevant subject matter, and to place same in a special folder under appropriate action date.
Other methods of follow-up or reminder which you may use include absent file card, visible loose leaf or sheet and the file movement register, which we explained their uses earlier.
3.7 FILLING EQUIPMENT Before bringing this unit to an end, you should be reminded that there are series of equipment for storing office documents.
We shall list and briefly discuss a few key ones.
i) Metal File cabinet: The most common equipment for storing paper files is the standard metal office file cabinet.
This usually has two drawers.
Other types of file containers within this category include even-shelf units, potable files, rotary files, tray files, and notarized files.
Sometimes miscellaneous cartons may be used for storing both standard and paper documents of various sizes.
ii) Supplies: Some containers for paper storage have labels which contain large letters meant to identify the contents.
File folders, guides, and tabs also contain labels with printed or typed words, letters, numbers, or other designations to identify the associated materials standard labels folders, guides, cross reference sheets and out cards could be obtained from most stationery shops in Nigeria.
iii) Special file cabinets: A good number of special file storage equipment may be purchased from the dealers of such products.
Some of these file storage equipment include: Fire proof safe and strong room 132  i.
Pipe hole filing cabinets: T his is a large shelf which is partitioned into different smaller apartments.
The equipment is used for holding rolled-up documents either vertically or horizontally.
ii.
Plans file cabinet: Built specially for strong plans iii Arch-level file: This equipment is a loss-lead made of hard cardboard binders.
Iv Box file: Box file is suitable for t small offices since the volume of their file holding is low.
v. Bull Dog Clips: This equipment is often used for storing temporary files.
vi.
File Tray: This is often found on the tables of key officers for placing temporary files pending action by the schedule officer.
vii.
Transfer storage file (Box): This is used to keep documents usually dead or unused file for eventual transfer to the archives.
viii.
Pigeonhole File cabinet: This is a large shelf which is partitioned into smaller compartments.
This equipment is usually used for holding rolled-up document either in vertical or horizontal position.
STUDENT SELF ASSESSMENT 1) Go into these offices and seek to fund out what type of filing system they use among the following: vertical filing, horizontal filing, microfilming, computer-assisted filing 2) Check also the type of under system they use among the following: card index, strip index, visual card Molex wheel or rotary index 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you were exposed to different systems of filing and indexing.
The conclusion to drawn from this unit is that effective and efficient management of office records does not only depend on the ability to classify files, but also on the effectiveness and efficiency of the filing and indexing systems.
133  5.0 SUMMARY We did explain that filing systems have to do with the method of placing files in the file cabinets.
You learned that documents could be filed, horizontally, vertically, laterally or suspended in the folder in the file cabinet vertically.
We also learned that microfilming involves a process of using camera which can reduce the size of a document of several pages to only a very small size in order to reduce the amount of information that could have been put in a file or files.
Electronic filing is the filing which the computer is used to assist in the filing and indexing process electronically.
The computer may store information on-line or off-line.
Indexing was defined as a process of selecting the main file or names under which a document is to be filed.
It also stands for the process of finding the positions of records in a filing system.
The principles of indexing individual names, hyphenated names and others have been demonstrated.
The unit has also explained the use of different types of indexes such as card index, strip index, wheel or rotary index, and punch-card index.
The importance of follow-up system on the tracing and identification of whereabouts of files has been explained.
Records such as the tickler card, des diary, among other have been shown to be useful in tracing file movement.
Finally a number of equipment for storing records has been described.
Some these include pigeonhole file cabinet, Bulldog clips and plans files cabinet.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 2.
Describe the process of suspension filing, indicating its strengths and weaknesses 2a) Define indexing, and explain its importance b) List and describe three types of index and their relevance in a filing system 3) What are follow-up systems and explain the uses of three of them 134  4) List and explain three types of filing equipment 7.0 REFERENCE Amadin, M. S. (2004).
Modern office practice.
Lagos.
Imprint Services.
Foster, Thelma J.
(1990).
Office Skills.
Stanley Thornes Pub.
Houghton and Mifflin Company (1995).
The Professional Secretary’s Handbook.
Boston.
Houghton Mifflin.
Bergstein, Warren N., Perell Loyd, M; McGrusker, Valerie; Sherwood (1993).
Springfield Mass: (Merriam Webster Incor.
135  MODULE 5: F ORM DESIGNS AND DATA ENTRY UNIT 1: FORMS AND FORM DESIGN CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We have come to give on a world where forms and entry of data in the forms have become a normal routine in any form of daily business or transactions.
From the day we were born to our last day on earth we have to full forms or somebody else has to full a form for us.
From the kindergarten, primary, secondary to tertiary level of education, you were faced with the task of your personal data or other relevant information which your educational institution required.
Ordinarily why you have to fill those forms would not ready clear to you.
This unit seeks to enlighten you on the essence of forms in various transactions.
2.0 OBJECTIVE Having been introduced to this unit, it is expected that after studying its contents, you should be able to: 1.
Describe the nature of forms, of forms in official transactions 2.
Identify the different types of forms.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 THE NATURE OF FORMS Let us start this unit with the following questions: 136  i.
Did you fill any forms when y ou were admitted into this university ii.
Why were you required to fill the forms?
iii.
What specific information did you find in the forms?
The answer to the first question is very obvious because from the time you contemplated seeking admission to the National Open University there were series of forms which you had to fill to secure the admission.
Two after you received the admission letter, you still had to complete acceptance and all other forms which were intended to authenticate or regularize your admission as a bona fide student of the university.
The third question is intended to find out from you the type of information that was put in the forms.
3.1.1 From all indications, the required information on the forms would have include your bio-data, that is your name, age where you come from, your sponsors, schools attended, examination passed and guides, etc.
If you went to a bank to withdraw some money, you would have to complete a cheque (or from – if it is savings account) and stating your name, date, and the amount of money you require.
3.1.2 In the case of an academic institution, the form you fill out enables the institution to keep the record of your entry ands studentship in the institution.
It also enables the institution to monitor your progress from level to level, particularly in the areas of academic performance, see obligation and discipline.
3.1.2 In the case of banks, apart from the forms you complete at the point of applying to become an account holder, the cheque you draw each occasion enables the bank to keep an accurate record of transactions with you.
FORM DEFINED A from may be said to be a piece of paper, bearing fixed data and providing spaces for variable data 137  From the definition in the box, a form contains information that is known in advanced (fixed data) and the one which the customer or client is expected to supply (variable data) (see fig below) From: Tel.
No: FOR………………..... Company Name: Date…………………..
Address: Time………………….. …………………………… TAKEN BY: MESSAGE:…………………………………………………… … …………………………………………………………………… …………………………………………………………………… …………………………………………………………………… SIGNATURE………………………… You need to be reminded that whether you are looking at an application form, an invoice, purchase order or insurance policy form, you will observe that the two major characteristics of a form are shown in them.
These are fixed data and variable data, the latter of which you have to supply the answers such as agreement/affirmation and personal signature.
138  3.2 PURPOSE AND USE OF FOR MS The purposes which forms serve or are meant to serve include the following: i) To make clear the type of information that are to be collected and communicated ii) To provide a specific space or location for each item of information, in order to facilitate data entry, processing and reference.
iii) To eliminate the need recopy, standard or repetitive information iv) They facilitate the use of multiple copies, with the end that work procedure is speeded up.
v) Forms identify records and facilitate filing and future reference.
From the above statement of form purpose, we can say that they function under two capacities: a) As instructions to individual school student in case of educational institutions and individual employees and managers in the case of employment organizations b) Forms may be used to set out criteria for appraising individuals, e.g.
those seeking employment, employees being assessed for their performance, promotion and other competitive positions outside employment.
c) If well managed, forms can provide a more economic way of gathering information or data d) It has been strongly argued in personnel management circles that forms have the potential of making positive contribution to the success of organizations.
This may be realized through well designed forms.
On a final note, you may wish to note that owing to importance attached to forms in the communication and data management process may large organizations employ form management consultants whose role is to enhance the design quality and control of forms within the organizations.
3.3 TYPES OF FORMS As you may know, forms are designed for different purposes.
Some are meant to provide short, simple information; some for lengthy and detailed information.
By implication therefore their lengths and sizes have to differ in facts ad details required from the client, customer or applicant.
139  Some of the common types of forms are called cut-out forms because they are of single sheet in this category are receipts for purchase, sales or rent transactions.
Within the cut –out category also are continuous forms, card record forms, tag forms, stock forms and forms for book sales, machine accounting form and cheque forms, and several others that you may wish to identify.
Multiple copy forms: these types of form need to be mentioned because they have potential for saving time.
Among this category of forms are handwritten books in which file copies can be retained, regular form, which may be handwritten, but in perforated sets with a carbon retained in the machine, fanfold continuous forms that are perforated in accordion-like fold (folded in the forms of the fold found accordion).
There are the non- marginally punched forms which are used on machines equipped with forms feeding devices.
Because these sorts of forms are made of devices that insure accurate alignment from part to part, and set to set, they are now used in electronic type writer, billing machines, addressing machines, teleprinters, tabulators and high speed printers of output from computers.
One important development in form design is the use of magnetic ink character recognition (NICR).
This process is chiefly used by banks for printing data in magnetic in certain reserved spaces at the bottom of cheques.
As you receive your cheque booklet look down the bottom of each cheque booklet for such information-which are usually in digital codes.
Different important organizations now use the NICR codes to protect their forms.
SELF ASSESSMENT TEST A private Business promotion Agency has asked you to send an application form which will be used to determine the best designed form.
Attempt a design of such a form.
Some of the major headings you will be expected to include in the form are: Name and address of candidate Position applied for, Previous position Schools attended and academic qualifications with dates, Hobbies, Referees, etc 140  4.0 CONCLUSION An attempt to understand the nature of forms, its purpose and functions, it can be concluded that since forms tend to plant important role not only in the effective administration of educational institutions, but in various areas of personal and work life, its essence should not be down-played.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit started by illustrating the relevance of forms in our social life.
We illustrated later by indicating the relevance of form competition on admission situation, in business transactions.
The purpose of form has been illustrated in the areas of collecting accurate data and information, eliminating need for recopying, particularly when it has to do with multiple forms.
Different types of forms have been identified and described.
With particular reference to MICR, a number of organizations, apart from banks, now use it in their form design to ensure the security of such forms.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why is filling of forms important for student who seek admission into tertiary institutions 2.
State the basic purpose of forms in a business organization 3.
Differentiate between single forms and multiple forms.
4.
State an important development for design 7.0 REFERENCE Lyons, T.P.
(1988).
The Personnel Functions in a changing Environment.
London: Pitman Publishing.
Littlefield, C.L., Rachel, F.M., Rachel, and Caruth, D.L.
(1990).
Office and Administrative Management.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Needham, David and Dransfield, Robert (1990) Business Studies London.
McGraw-Hill Book.
Company.
Torrington, D. and Hall, Laura (1990) Personnel Management: A New Approach London: Prentice-Hall.
141  UNIT 2: PRINCI PLES OF FORM DESIGN CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit one of this module, you were introduced the nature, purpose and the main types of forms namely, single sheet forms and multiple pages forms.
In this unit you will be introduced to the principles of form design in the expectation you will become experienced in the various techniques of form design.
2.0 OBJECTIVE Following what you have so far learned about the nature and purpose of forms, it is expected that at the end of this unit you should be able to: 1.
State the basic principles of form design 2. develop checklists of the basic principles of form design 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 PRINCIPLES OF FORM DESIGN In designing a form, there are four basic principles which you have to bear in mind.
These are that the form should be: 1.
Easy to write 2.
Easy to read 3.
Easy to understand and 4.
Easily pleasing in appearance 142  These principles which we shall call the ‘Four Es’ in form design, is strictly followed should enable you to des ign forms of any type and content satisfactorily.
3.2 DEVELOPING BASIC PRINCIPLES AND APPROACHES TO FORM DESIGN You have usually seen various types of forms such as staff appraisal forms.
However, have you ever stopped to ask the principles that guide the design of such a form?
What are to do now is to provide checklists of the principles and approaches which you or anyone else could adopt in for design.
In spite of the fact that form design is usually the work of experts, understanding and application of these principles can enhance your ability in form design.
The following principles of form design have been identified through research; and are listed here for your guidance you may wish to refer to them as checklists.
i.
Give the form a name that will sufficiently describe its functions, for example: Application form, Appraisal form, Enrolment from and Job Analysis form, among others.
ii.
Provide identification number for the form e.g., Form M, FORM A1, FORM IT.
iii.
To add effect to the form, use a box design and print the captions in small but distinct type at the upper left corners of sections.
This is to provide space for entries and keep the captions visible to the operator, when entering other variable data.
iv.
You have to arrange items so that what is written can proceed from left to right and from top to bottom; and as far as possible arrange according to use, based on items that are used often and those that are used minimally.
v. All related information should be grouped together, e.g.
names, date of birth and address.
vi.
Ensure that the sequence of items agree with the sequence of the same item for example, under schools attended, list the sequence as follows: Primary school Secondary College of education University 143  vii.
L ayout the form, possibly with equal left and right margins to allo w for punching or other relevant remarks.
viii.
Use boxes when it is possible to simplify the entry of data and to render the whole form readable, see fig on personal particulars.
ix.
Allow sufficient space for entering data, vertically and horizontally.
For forms to be filled on the typewriter or computer, leave three line spaces between items.
In other words, the spacing should be determined by the type or amount of information to be entered under one item.
x.
For those still using manual or electric typewriters, or computer, ensure that appropriate tap stops are set top/down, or left/right.
xi.
To design forms which are to contain mailing address in a window envelope, use the fold marks on the envelope for guidance.
xii.
Place filing reference, e.g.
key officer, name, file number and page reference to ensure that punching and filing will not be tampered with.
xiii.
Remember to place simple instructions directly above the section of the form which they apply e.g.
the section that seeks information on the candidates employment history should be preceded by the instruction under: Employment History: 1) ………………………………………………… ….
2) ………………………………………………… ….
3) ………………………………………………… ….
xiv.
Where appropriate, use relevant colours to highlight some key sections or information in the form.
xv.
Use various type forces or fonts to underscore (highlighting key) and colour shades to highlight certain areas or to guide competition of the form.
xvi.
Produce your form with type forces and colour shades that would make the filled in data less dominant or difficult differentiate from the printed items on the form.
xvii.
Provide for possible omission of data from one or more internal parts of a multiple part form so that such errors or omissions can be easily removed by means of what is called ‘print blackout’ or perforation so that undesired information may be turned off.
144  xviii.
When you need to file in standardized equipment, use standard form sizes, in order t o avoid waste of stationery.
It is important to remember that forms and have been severalty can be designed for on-line completion.
The rules applicable to manual design need also be observed when dealing with on-line form design.
Two examples of forms are presented under for your guidance.
PERSONAL PARTICULARS Surname Block Capitals)…………………………………………… ... Christian Names……………………………………………………… .
Address……………………………………………………… ………… Telephone Number (if any)…………………………………………… .
Date of Birth…………………………………………………………… Nationality…………………………………………………… ……….. Height………………………………………………………… ……….
Weigh………………………………………………………… ……….
Colour of hair………………………………………………………… .
Colour of eyes………………………………………………………… .
Size of shoes………………………………………………………… .. Do you wear glasses?
Hearing good or poor?............................................................................
Have you had any serious illnesses?
If you have, name them……………………………………………… ... Can you swim?....................................................................................................
............................ 145  Do you like playing games?..............
.................................................... What are your hobbies?
……………………………………………………………… ………… QUESTIONNAIRE Christian names: Surname (Block Capitals)…………………………………………… .. Address……………………………………………………… ………..
Date of Birth:………………………………………………………… ............. ............................
Nationality: Religion ……………………………………………………………… .. Name of School……………………………………………………… ...
Address of School: Are your parents both alive?..................................................................
How many brothers have you?...............................................................
Are they younger or older?
Have you any relatives who live abroad?
If so, where?.........................................................................................
When are you leaving school?.............................................................
What kind of work would you like to do when you leave school……... ……………………………………………………………… ………….
……………………………………………………………… ………….
146  SELF ASSESSMENT TEST If you were to design an invitation that requires you to allow a tear-off section for reply by mails what size of paper would you use for the purpose and why?
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit emphasizes the principles to be born in mind when designing forms.
The conclusion to be drawn from studying these principles is the students will be able to design forms effectively and efficiently.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught the student the four basic principles to be borne in mind when designing forms.
The unit also provides a checklist of eighteen principles of form design, some of which are giving name that would effectively describe the type of form to be designed, provision of identification number to a particular type or set of forms and use of special boxes to add effect to the form.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a) What do you understand by ‘Four’ principles of form design?
b) Why are they important?
2a) Why is the printing of captions necessary in the design of some forms?
b) What is the rule governing placement of related information?
3a) Show how the sequence of items may agree with items under a given heading b) How may entry of data be simplified?
4a) How may effective completion of forms be done?
b) What is the importance of providing for omission of data?
147  7.0 REFERENCES Lyons, T.P.
(1988).
The Personnel Functions in a changing Environment.
London: Pitman Publishing.
Littlefield, C.L., Rachel, F.M., Rachel, and Caruth, D.L.
(1990).
Office and Administrative Management.
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Needham, David and Dransfield, Robert (1990) Business Studies London.
McGraw-Hill Book.
Company.
Torrington, D. and Hall, Laura (1990) Personnel Management: A New Approach London: Prentice-Hall.
148  MODULE 6: LEADERSHIP AN D MOTIVATION AT WORK INTRODUCTION This module, an elaboration of Unit 3, Module 3 of BED 306 (Organization and Administration of Vocational and Technical Education) is intended to relate leadership behaviour to worker motivation and interpersonal relationships at work.
The module is therefore, consists of the following 2 units; Unit 1: Meaning Theories and Principles of Leadership Unit 2: Interpersonal Relationships at the Place of Work UNIT 1: MEANING THEORIES AND PRINCIPLES OF LEADERSHIP CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 INTRODUCTION What constitutes or makes a person to be seen or called a leader, and the various ways of trying to understand what leadership is all about has resulted to a variety of theories of leadership.
Again how people approach their leadership responsibilities may depend on the style of leadership which they adopt.
In this unit you will be taught the basic principles and styles of leadership as they lead to managerial performance and worker motivation within the organization.
2.0 OBJECTIVES 149  From the above intr oduction, you should after studying this unit be able to: 1) Define and explain the concept of leadership 2) List and explain the different theories of leadership 3) Discuss the different approaches to leadership styles.
4) Explain the principles for motivating the work force through effective leadership.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 MEANING OF LEADERSHIP Leadership is generally seen as the ability to influence a group of people in order to achieve a set goal As we shall see later leadership involves a process by which a person influences others to accomplish an objective and direct organization in a way that makes it more cohesive and coherent.
A leader carries out the leading process through the application of certain attributes which generally include beliefs, values, ethical character, relevant knowledge and skills.
Holding the position of a head teacher, office manager, supervisor or manager, only gives one authority to accomplish certain tasks or meet certain objectives.
However, leadership is different from mere authority over peoples conduct or behaviour at work, for instance.
A leader makes the followers to want to achieve high goals without application of coercive authority or power.
Leadership therefore, implies the ability to influence a group of people towards the achievement of set goals.
In other words, when a person becomes a manager by virtue of his rank within the organization, the influence of his office or position alone can hardly make him a leader except he can combine in addition, certain relevant personal attributes such as trust and self confidence, and professional knowledge or skills.
150  KE Y CONCE PTS CONCE PTUALIZING LEADERSHIP: i) TO LEAD: To Show The Way ii) LEADER: An individual, who occupies a position in a group, influences others in accordance with the role expectation of the position and coordinates and directs the group in maintaining itself and achieving its goals.
Raven iii) Leadership: Ability to influence a group toward the development of a goal iv) A process of influence between a leader and his followers to attain group, organizational, or social goals Aggarawal, R 3.1.1 Further perspectives of leadership Leadership has, apart from being seen as ability to do something to achieve a goal, can also be conceived as a process, as we said earlier.
According to Ekpenyong (2009), leadership is: A process by which one person influences or directs other people to accomplish set objectives.
It also involves the process of directing, an organization in a way that will make it more cohesive and coherent in its activities.
151  Aggarawal (2004) e mphasizes three constituents of leadership as a process, namely, inter personal nature, influence and goal.
3.1.2 Interpersonal process: Interpersonal relationship between the leader and his followers emphasizes the interpersonal nature of leadership.
Leadership emerges when there is a willing acceptance of the leader’s directives by his subordinates.
So the use of positional and/or personal power to induce acceptance from the subordinates cannot fall within the content of leadership.
3.1.3 Influence: This implies the power to affect or to induce compliant or supportive behaviour from the subordinates, without the necessity to resort to his positional authority and/or personal power.
3.1.4 Goal: This is the end which a person set seeks to attain as a leader.
3.1.5 Leadership: can be understood as a property (Aggarawal 2004).
We can describe leadership as a set of key characteristics that are attributable to certain individuals who have ability to influence others.
Within this category are experts in certain fields, informational and communication authorities.
SELF ASSESSMENT TEST In your own words try to explain the terms: leadership, influence: leadership, influence; and positional authority 3.2 LEADERSHIP THEORIES There are a number of leadership theories such as trait behavioural and great man’s theories, we did treat the relevant as pacts of these theories much fully in BED 306, we shall only discuss than there in brief.
152  3.2.1 Trait Theories The assumption behind trait the ories is that the great leaders and managers we have had over the years were able to lead because they possessed certain personality attributes which other less successful leaders and not have.
In view of this view early researchers spend several years trying to identify such personality attributes.
The names of personalities such as G Mahatma Ghandi, Kwame Nkrumah, Adolf Hitler and Martin Luther King Jr, were freely mentioned as representing great leaders with key leadership traits.
Given the belief at the time, early behavioural science researchers spent several years trying to discover prerequisite traits of leadership most of which were inconclusive.
According to research review out of about so leadership traits that were isolated, only fine of them were common to four or more of the investigations (Robbins, 1989).
However, the following fine traits, namely, intelligence, dominance, self-confidence, high-energy and task-relevant knowledge have been found to show consistent correlation with leadership.
3.2.2 Behavioural Theories The trait factors on leadership could not explain how leaders behave in challenging situations or major conflicts such as riot by staff, among others.
This led researchers to try to fund out how people in management positions tend to behave as leaders for example as democratic or autocratic leaders.
The basic assumption behind behavioural theory is that if we knew the specific behaviour that identified leaders, then it would be possible to teach leadership; that is by designing programmes that could be listed to teach people effective leadership behaviours, (which means styles of leadership) (see BED 306 for details of studies based on behavioural theories.
For example the University of Ohio which we mentioned in BED 306, study focused on consideration style, and initiating structure style.
University of Michigan study centred on Job-centred leadership behaviour, and on employee-centred leadership behaviour pattern.
Other studies included Blake and mouton’s managerial Grid which identified five continua of leadership types.
3.2.3 The Great man’s Theory: This theory was based on the traditional belief that leaders were born and not made.
The believers or advocates of this theory do not believe that ordinary persons can be 153  trained to become leaders.
However, under the present state of knowledge this theory tends to have greatly lost its momentum.
3.3 APPROACHES TO LEADERSHIP STYLES As indicated by Bubrin (1990) another way of understanding leaders is to draw some stereotypes of their behaviour.
It is these stereotypes or common characteristics of their leadership behaviour that is called leadership style.
KEY CONCE PT Leadership style refers to a leader’s characteristic way of directing people in most situations -Dubrin, A.J.
In this section we shall briefly discuss three of the more common, but important leadership styles types.
These are Autocratic, participative and situational leadership styles.
You will not as we go on that within each of these three major categories, are some subsets of leadership styles.
3.3.1 Autocratic Leadership An autocratic leader, sometimes called boss-centred, self-centred leader, is a leader who seeks to retain most of the authority that is granted to the group.
This type of leader makes all the decision and expects the subordinates to follow rules without questions.
Every decision, approval of subordinates’ requests, for instance, stops at his table.
3.3.2 Crisis Managers: It is common knowledge that some autocratic leaders are good at using their authoritarian characteristics in turning things around in times of crisis.
That is, why they are called “Crises Managers”.
154  KE Y CONCE PT A crisis manager is one who specializes in turning fueling organizations around, or rescuing them from crisis In this country, we have witnessed situations where retired autocratic managers are recalled to go and salvage some ailing organizations.
Power Holding Company of Nigeria and NNPC are some of the big companies that have received such interventions in the past.
3.3.3 Participative style Participative leadership style characterizes a leader who shakes decision-making authority with his subordinates.
A participative leader tends to have strong interest in the people he leads.
He is a good motivator of his workers as he allows them the opportunity to participate in the organization’s decision making process.
From research analyses three sub-sets of participative leaders can be identified.
These are: i) Consultative leader: He often seeks the opinions of his workers or work group before making a decision.
However he is not obliged to accept the views or advise of the group.
ii) Consensual leader: This leader believes in consensual leadership, hence he would encourage group discussion on a given subject.
He then makes decision based on the consensus by the group members.
This type leadership style is encouraged at all levels of management, that is, from the lower to the higher level of management.
iii) Democratic leader: A democratic leader is one who confers final authority to the group.
In this situation the leader obtains the views of members, usually through voting before he can take a final decision- which incidentally is expected to reflect the position or thinking of the majority.
iv) Free-Rein leadership: This leadership style is sometimes called subordinate centred style, because the leader turns virtually all his 155  authority as a leader to the group or subordinates.
Some authorities refer to this style of leadership as laissez-faire.
This type of leader is more or less care free because after issuing general guide lines or expected goals to be achieved, the implementation is left in the hands of the subordinates.
He is more of a public-relations man of the organization as he receives visitors, and speaks glowingly about the organization-which may be decaying under his laissez-faire leadership.
Subordinates who expect effective direction and guidance from their leaders are not often comfortable with leaders in this category.
3.3.4 The situational leadership This model of leadership is based on the work of Hersey and Blanchard (1996).
This model explains how leadership style may be matched with the readiness or organization number to act.
Three basic concepts need to be remembered if you want to study situational leadership, namely; - Task behaviour: This explains the extent to which the leader spells out the duties and responsibilities of an individual member of the work group.
- Relationship behaviour: This is the extent to which a member of a group has the ability and willingness to accomplish a given task or assignment.
Ability depicts the knowledge and experience and skill with which a member of a group brings to a particular task or an assignment.
Willingness; on the other hand, shows the extent to which an individual or group has confidence, commitment and motivation to accomplish a given task.
As explained in the model developed by Hersey and Blanchard (see Hersey and Blanchard, 1996: 253-262), Readiness levels represent different combinations of ability, willingness, and confidence.
To explain the whole concept of situational leadership simply, we can say that as the followers readiness increases, a leader should rely more on relationship behaviour and less on task behaviour: if he must achieve optimal success.
156  3.4 PRINCIPLES OF MOTIVA TING THE LEADER There are a variety of principles which a leader must use to motivate his/her workers or group under his leadership.
We shall now briefly discuss some of these tested principles as set down below.
A good leader must: i) Be technically proficient: This calls for a leader’s sound knowledge of his job, and to be reasonably familiar with his employees’ tasks.
ii) He must seek responsibility as well as take responsibility for his actions.
iii) While trying to uplift the organization to greater height, he should be ready to accept responsibility for the mistakes that may be made by those he delegates authority to.
iv) He should be able to make sound and timely decisions v) He should set good examples for his subordinates team or group members vi) He should try to care for his staff and be ready to look after their welfare, and be ready to empathize with them, particularly when they have problems, official or personal.
vii) He should keep his workers as group well informed about work related and other general or social issues.
viii) He should ensure that the workers understand their tasks, and be free to ask questions, where they do not understand given instructions.
ix) He should ensure that regular training and development of his staff are undertaken as a matter of policy.
x) Finally, he should strive to entrench team-spirit, within the work groups, and within the organization as a whole.
SELF ASSESSMENT TEST From what you have learnt in this unit, write a memo to members of your clients and explain to them the principles you will adopt to them effectively if you are appointed the president of the club.
157  4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has exposed you to the concepts, theories, and styles of leadership.
The conclusion to be drawn from the implications of this unit is that ability to adopt and apply the principles of effective leadership, can go a long way to making good leaders of the students whenever they are faced with the challenge of leading other people.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have presented sheds of definitions of leadership, one of which is that leadership implies ability to influence others towards goal achievement.
Leadership was also defined as a process which has three dimensions-interpersonal, influence and goal.
The unit also discussed three theories of leadership, namely, trait, behavioural, and great man theory.
In discussing approaches to leadership styles, three main categories of leadership styles were listed and discussed in detail.
These are autocratic, participative, and situational leadership.
Finally, nine principles which leaders could adopt to motivate their workers have been discussed.
If you have any problem understanding any of the concepts in the unit, re-read it and attempt the self-assessment exercises in the unit.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) Explain the context of leadership as a process 2) What is the assumption behind a) Trait theory b) Great man’s theories of leadership 3) Differentiate between autocratic, and participative leadership 4) Explain the underlying principle of situational leadership 158  UNIT 2: INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHI PS AT THE PLACE OF WORK CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCT ION An office is a place where particular kinds of business activities take place.
These activities cut across, clerical, monetary, and service delivery, since various functions necessarily bring individual workers to interact, particularly face to face with other workers, how these individual workers relate with their subordinate, other senior and junior workers of the organization becomes very important to the achievement of organizational goals.
This unit, therefore, intends to discuss how we can get along with other workers in our places of work as support to effective managerial leadership.
.
2.0 OBJECTIVES Based on our introduction, after studying this unit, you should be able to: 1) Explain how people get attracted to others 2) Recognize the importance of interpersonal relationship at the place of work 3) Explain the different strategies you might use in developing effective interpersonal relationship with you’re your superiors 4) Explain the strategies which you could use to develop effective interpersonal relationship with your co-workers.
159  3.0 MAIN CONT ENT 3.1 HOW PEOPLE GET ATTRACTED TO OTHERS Have you ever asked yourself why you easily get attracted to person ’A’ and not person ‘B’?
Have you ever asked yourself why you so easily get along with a particular student in your group even though others have not wronged you in any way?
I am sure you would be quick to say ‘I like him because we have the same social background’ OR ‘Because his/her attitude and values are similar to mine’, etc.
The reason why you and others would give answers as above is based on what is called cognitive consistency.
For one to achieve cognitive consistency one must first of all try to reduce or eliminate the inconsistency in his or her choice.
Lawrence Festinger in his theory called ‘Cognitive Dissonance’ explains that people try to reduce or eliminate inconsistency.
Suppose a man with many society lady friends is told that his sexual relationships with them would cause him to contact HIV/AIDs: The question whether to abandon and abstain from meeting those women he has developed deep affection for, or to continue to relate with them would result in discrepancy or frustration which is what Festinger (1956) calls cognitive dissonance.
To reduce the dissonance and try to come to terms with himself, he could decide that only men who deal with prostitutes can have HIV/AIDS and that he is dealing with responsible ladies, so he cannot contact the disease.
In other words, this person has struck a balance between the very bad situation - dealing with prostitutes, and supposedly good situation - dealing with responsible ladies.
The principle of cognitive consistency has been adopted to explain the nature of interpersonal relationships.
This theory is referred to as “Balance Theory”.
That is, people tend to prefer relationships that are balanced or consistent.
To explain further, where people are very similar in terms of what they value, what they do (as in the type of things they do together) or any other things which they see great similarity (e.g.
profession, as in being accountants, film industry workers, entertainers, and office workers), it would be reasonable that such individuals will like each 160  other.
In fact we would equally like individuals whose views and values are consistent or agree with our own.
KEY CONCE PTS COGNI TIVE DISSONANCE This refers to the mental process which we try to reduce or eliminate inconsistency in the information that we receive BALANCE THEORY This explains inter-personal relationships which point to the fact that people tend to prefer relationships that are consistent or balanced.
NOTE: We have to be cautious about the acceptance of balance theory because it does not provide a depth of explanation as to why people get attracted to each other.
Although there is merit in saying that people with similar attributes tend to like themselves, there is also the other position that unlike poles attract, as in the relationship between some men and some women of entirely different professions, culture or religions.
There are examples in organizations that difficult executives tend to like those that enjoy listening instead of questioning them, where other workers would question or oppose their decisions.
3.2 IMPORTANCE OF INTER-PERSONAL S RELATIONSHI P AMONG OFFICE WORKER The issue of effective interpersonal relationships among office workers particularly, and the large spectrum of workers generally, can be very critical in terms of the achievement of organizational goals.
This is more so because, within the context of balance theory, where there is incompatibility in values and other motivational attributes among work group members, goal achievement within the work group could be terribly jeopardized.
161  3.2.1 Professional so cial skills: The reason why som e individuals take jobs, but find it difficult to retain such jobs, relate with their superiors and other workers, can be traced to lack of professional-life skills.
Professional life skills refer to learning which an individual has acquired or seeks to acquire in order to cope with various situations and circumstances relating to his job, career or profession (Ekpenyong, 2008).
Ekpenyong (2008) has listed 20 professional life skills which a worker is expected to acquire if he must cope adequately with his/her interpersonal relationship with his superiors, co-workers, and juniors.
Some of these include working with executives with different leadership styles.
- Working under stress - Under same sex workers, opposite sex - Working with noisy workers - Discussing your problems with your boss, among others.
The central issue here is that workers who have acquired adequate professional life skills should have little or no difficulty in striking interpersonal balance among their co-workers.
The sum total of what we have said here is that training workers in professional social skills, could go a long were in bringing about effective interpersonal relationship among workers in an office, work groups, and organization as a whole.
3.3 BUILDING EFFECTIVE RELATIONSHI P WITH SUPERIORS The general management view of how to build effective relationship with him/her is to perform your assigned duties satisfactorily-as means of creating that first impression.
It has been suggested, that the starting point for success as a new secretary or subordinate officer under a superior or boss is to seek to understand him/her as a person and his personal ways of doing things.
It is important to seek to know the following about your boss: 162  His position in the organizational hierarchy; - His personal str engths and possible weaknesses - His preferred work style, and when he is disposed to discussing issues with you, and son.
Getting to understand your boss within the contexts listed above would enhance your ability to work smoothly with him.
3.3.1 What are His Expectations For you to work smoothly with your boss requires that you try to find out his expectations from you, when you are able to have clarification of your boss’s standards of performance from you, and you work towards meeting those standards, you relationship with him can only be cordial.
3.3.2 Establishing Trust The establishment of trust is like a two-way traffic, when the boss can trust you in terms of delivering you assigned tasks in time, respecting his ideas, being available and whenever your services are needed.
KEY CONCE PT TRUST: Trust is the confidence that the other person will not take unfair advantage of you, either deliberately or accidentally, consciously or unconsciously In addition to these your boss should be able to predict the quality of your performance, and above all be able to ascertain that your loyalty to him is beyond question; with this, you can be rest assured that the level of trust between you and your boss will remain high.
It is equally important that your role as a secretary or personal assistant to your boss is to assist him as much as you can to succeed, particularly when you help him to solve critical organizational problems, and show appreciation and support when he succeeds in his duties and responsibilities.
The boss will in turn be very proud to have you as secretary or personal assistant.
163  BRINGING SOLUT IONS AND PROBLEMS There is a tendency fo r those in subordinate positions, e.g.
secretaries and personal assistants that their boss-should always be in a position to solve problems related to their position-because they are the boss.
An executive who is under pressure to met set target would not be readily disposed to solving additional problems from you.
Consequently, as a good assistant, you should see yourself as part of the solution rather than problem.
Where it becomes absolutely necessary to confront your chief with a problem, think first of all possible alternative solutions to the problem.
The chief will certainly see you always as part of the solution rather than the problem.
You will gain his confidence at all times.
In fact your goal should be to always help your chief to succeed, for his success will also make you a success.
3.4 ADDITIONAL TIPS TO SUCCE SSFUL RELATIONSHI P WITH YOUR CHIEF Socializing your chief: One serious dilemma which secretaries and personal assistants, particularly the female ones generally have, is how to go about socializing with their chiefs, and still remain within the realm of natural relationship.
You should always seek to have a relationship that is shared by the generality of the staff members.
In fact your relationship with your chief should remain strictly at the professional level.
This is because even a casual relationship with him is certainly going to arouse unpalatable comments and petty jealousy from your co-workers.
Above all it could compromise your performance level.
Appreciation: You should learn to appreciate to your chief for any achievement that his office has made.
A note of congratulation for the chief’s success on a given project, a word of praise, can go a long way towards cementing the socialization process you are trying to build with your chief.
Mode of speech: Be careful about what you say either in the office or out of the office about your chief.
Assistants who are unguarded in their utterances can hardly command the confidence of their chiefs, or that of the organization as a whole.
Finally, giving the impression that you know more than your chief can hardly place you in good standing with him/her.
On the other hand, if you have to disagree with your chief do so politely.
For instance, 164  Sir, we have been handling this type of project this way.
I am just wondering whether we couldn’t try it this other way this time.
This kind of statement is going to impress him than just saying, ‘We failed last time’.
‘Why can’t you allow me to do it my way’?
The damage this type of statement can do to your relationship with the executive could be irreparable.
SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1.
How would deal with a chief (boss) who is fund of treating you like a little girl/boy?
2.
Suppose you work in a pool where there are two senior officers in addition to your direct boss.
How would you deal with these senior officers who insist you have to complete their assignments soonest, while your boss had already given you what you have to finish at a fixed time?
DEVELOPING GOOD INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS WITH YOUR CO-WORKERS Good relationship with co-workers whether they are at higher or lower rung of the organization is very important.
This is so because there comes a time that you may need their services or help.
Developing good human relationship within the organization can be a sure of influencing others toward high productivity.
A department or unit of an organization where mutual understanding and cooperation are at low ebb cannot achieve much.
You positive attitude could be a source of encouragement and motivation to other members of the team or department; you could become a source of inspiration, consultation and direction to, and emulation by your co-workers.
In the remaining part of this section, we will briefly discuss some specific principles you could adopt to ensure good human relationship with your co-workers, both seniors and juniors.
165  Showing interest in the work of your co-workers Showing interest in what the other workers do can be sure ways of expressing interest in them.
For instance asking them: a) How they are getting on with their work b) How they gained the knowledge about their c) Their challenges and how they are coping with them d) What aspect of their work they enjoy most and those they dislike or have difficulties with e) How the organization rate their department, among others.
Your interest in these areas can go a long way to endearing most of your colleagues to you: - Relating honestly with co-workers: Let your dealing be seen to be honest, transparent, and open all the time.
In this way they will come to see you as a member that can be trusted and confided upon.
- Giving recognition to other members of staff: From research findings we realize that individuals need recognition, attention and appreciation.
You should always strive to give recognition to them for whatever achievements they have made.
- Courtesy: there is hardly any natural being that does not require courtesy.
So if you are courteous to your fellow workers, even class or group mates, you may be surprised at the level of respect they are likely to accord you.
- You need to use tact in dealing with annoying members of staff because persons in this group are ready to annoy you, if you are not careful in dealing or relating with them.
- Abrasive workers: Next in the line to annoying persons in your organization are those that can be described as abrasive.
Abrasive persons are noted for their rudeness, unkindness, and readiness to hurt others.
As you try to develop good interpersonal relationship among members of your organization, you would need tact and exceptional skill to relate with an abrasive person.
In fact you may need to avoid him/her.
This is because an abrasive personality is associated with the following characteristics: 166  - Tendency towa rds self-centeredness - Tendency towa rd isolation from others - Tendency toward-perfectionism - Contempt for others; and - Tendency to attack people.
You can then see that an abrasive person can be very difficult to relate or work with.
Where you discover an abrasive person in you organization, the only help you can render to him/her is to recommend him/her for proper professional counseling.
SELF ASSESSMENT TEST 1) How would you relate with a fellow worker who always makes financial demands on you?
2) Write a short report to your boss, suggesting how best the support of the staff could be induced 4.0 CONCL USION This unit has been concerned with how best effective personal or interpersonal relationships could be established in an organization.
What the could be seen as conclusion to the unit is that developing interpersonal relationship in an office or organization as a whole is a process that has to be learnt and acquired through experience and interaction with fellow workers.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit started with the explanation of how individuals are attracted to others.
Two basic theories, namely, cognitive dissonance and balance theory were used to show how interpersonal relationship develops.
The importance of interpersonal relationship was explained in the context of the need to developing professional skills.
These skills include being able to work with difficult executives, being able to work with co-workers, and staff with a variety of negative characteristics.
167  A number of strate gies needed to work smoothly with executives include: building good relationship with the executives, knowing their expectations, building trust, and helping the boss in solving organizational problems.
Building good relationships with co-workers was also emphasized and the strategies to adopt for the purpose include the following: showing interest in the work of the co-workers, appreciating them, among others.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a) Define cognitive dissonance b) How does cognitive consistency relate to balance Theory?
2a) Define professional social/life skills b) Explain why it is important to acquire professional social skills 3) Why is it important for a personal assistant to seek to develop trust in her working relationship with her chief?
4) As a personal assistant, explain the place of interest and honesty in developing interpersonal relationship with your co-workers 7.0 REFERENCES Aggarawal, Rohini (2004).
Business Communication and Organization and Management.
New Delhi: Taxman.
Dubrin, J. Andrew (1990) Effective Business Psychology.
Englewood Cliff: Prentice.
Hall.
Ekpenyong, L.E (2008).
Foundations of Technical and Vocational Education: Evolution and Practice.
Benin City: Ambik Press Ltd. Festinger, Lawrence (1957).
A Theory of cognitive dissonance.
New York: Harper and Row Jennings, Eugene E (1967).
The Mobile Manager.
New York: McGraw-Hill: 47-50.
Morgan, Clifford, T and King, Rich and A.
(1975).
Introduction to psychology.
McGraw-Hill Inter.
168  7.0 REFERENCES Aggarawal, Rohini (2004).
Business Communication and Organization and Management.
New Delhi: Taxman.
Certo, Samuel C. (1994).
Principles of Modern Management: Functions and system.
Win.
C: Brown Pub.
Dubrin, J. Andrew (1990) Effective Business Psychology.
Englewood Cliff: Prentice-Hall.
Etzioni, A.
(1964).
Complex Organizations New York: Hole, Rinehart and Winston Ekpenyong, L.E.
National Open University of Nigeria (2009).
Organization and Administration of Technical and Vocational Education: Lagos: National Open University of Nigeria.
Hersey, Paul and Blanchard, Kenneth H. (1996).
Management of Organization Behaviour: Utilizing Human Resources.
New Delhi: Prentice-Hall.
Robbins, Stephen, P. (1989) Organization Behaviour: concepts, controversies and Application.
Prentice-Hall.
Torrington, D. and Hall, Laura (1991) Personnel Management: A New Approach London: Prentice-Hall.
169
