Course Code BED111 Course Title Introduction to Keyboarding and Word Processing Course Team Inegbedion, Juliet O.
(Course Developer/ Writer & Course Coordinator) National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor Assoc.
Prof. L. E. Ekpenyong University of Benin NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos.
Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng National Open University of Nigeria 2007 First Printed 2007 ISBN: 978-058-316-5 All Rights Reserved Printed by ……… For National Open University of Nigeria ii BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Skill Building/Skill Measurement……….. 1 Unit 1 Introduction……………………………….. 1 – 10 Unit 2 Touch Keying and Skill Building on the Alphabetic Keyboard……………………… 11 – 25 Unit 3 Touch Keying and Skill Building on the Numeric Keyboard………………………... 26 – 31 Unit 4 Speed and Accuracy Practice……………... 32 – 43 Module 2 Function Keys I…………………………… 44 Unit 1 Page Setup………………………………… 44 – 53 Unit 2 Line Spacing……………………………… 54 – 57 Unit 3 The Use of White Spaces……………………….. 58 – 60 Unit 4 Page Numbering…………………………... 61 – 66 Unit 5 Headers and Footers……………………….
67 – 73 Module 3 Function Keys II………………………….
74 Unit 1 Templates………………………………….
74 – 80 Unit 2 Document View…………………………… 81 – 86 Unit 3 Line and Page Break……………………… 87 – 91 Unit 4 Print……………………………………….. 92 – 102 Module 4 Production………………………………… 103 Unit 1 Manuscript………………………………… 103 – 109 Unit 2 Simple Editing…………………………….. 110 – 115 Unit 3 Paragraphs………………………………… 116 – 122 Unit 4 Headings…………………………………... 123 – 131 Unit 5 Formatting and other Functions…………… 132 – 146 iiiNoneBED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING MODULE 1 SKILLBUILDING/SKILL MEASUREMENT This module is designed to introduce you to the skills of personal keyboard manipulations.
Do not be in a haste to learn the skills.
Follow every instruction given steadily and you will become perfect with the use of the keyboard through touch keying.
To acquire the desired skills, you shall be taken through the following units: Unit 1 Introduction Unit 2 Touch Keying and Skill Building on the Alphabetic Keyboard Unit 3 Touch Keying and Skill Building on the Numeric Keyboard Unit 4 Speed and Accuracy Practice UNIT 1 INTRODUCTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Origin of Keyboarding 3.2 Types of Keyboarding Machines 3.3 Parts and Uses of the Personal Computer 3.4 Organisation of the Work Environment 3.5 Introduction To Microsoft Word 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The society is dynamic in nature and therefore it is subject to change.
The advancement in technology especially in the use of personal computers, in almost every area of life, calls for the need in keyboarding and word processing skills.
Computers have been found useful in almost all fields – Engineering, Architecture, Surveying, Medicine, Artistic Work, Education, etc.
Gone are those days whereby keyboarding was only associated with typists or secretaries.
It is not enough to finger the keyboard or merely know how to use the mouse to bring out data from 1 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING the computer.
The programmers that programmed the packages that are commonly used today, followed typewriting techniques which cover (1) word processing (text) (this includes letters, speeches, memoranda etc); (2) Display (3) Tabulation.
They tried as much as possible to programme the skills in typewriting so as to make typewriting more enjoyable and meaningful.
The fact remains that the use of personal computers has not come to send typewriting into extinction rather it has come to enhance it.
It should be noted that although the programmers followed typewriting styles, one still needs to learn the skills so as to be able to appreciate the new machine more.
This material is prepared to give you an on hand practical experience in keyboarding and word processing, which is the term that has taken over “typewriting” because of the change in the use of machines and the expanse in the function of the machine.
Today, it is important that everyone becomes proficient in keyboarding and word processing irrespective of the field of specialisation, particularly in the business world.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • Explain the origin of keyboarding and word processing; • Identify the parts and uses of the personal computer 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Origin of Keyboarding The process of representing spoken sound in readable form was first introduced by using the finger to write on sand.
This developed to the use of feathers, slates and writing with pen and paper.
Each of these styles has the problem of legibility and neatness.
Therefore, the need for improvement gave great concern to some scholars.
In 1837, Christopher Shole developed the “qwerty” typewriter which could be used to bring out hand written documents in printed form to make them more legible and decent.
Though this typewriter could not function as well as expected, it gave birth to the whole idea of using machines to represent sounds.
This typewriter passed through successive developments and today, we have more advanced machines – personal computers.
Typewriting can therefore be defined as the process of representing spoken sound in printed form with the use of a typewriter in the way and manner the reader (decoder) would understand it.
Typewriting is not just the art of striking the keyboard to see a letter, word or figure in 2 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING print, rather there are technicalities involved which would make the job more appreciable.
These technicalities are learned and can not be achieved through guesswork.
Through successive development on the qwerty typewriter keyboard, the personal computer keyboard was developed but with additional functions to make working on the personal computer easy.
See pictures below: AdditionalRow The Personal Computer The Qwerty Typewriter k b d k b d Additional Keys From the pictures above, you can observe the similarities in the arrangement of the keys, which make the knowledge and mastery of the qwerty keyboard easy to transfer to the personal computer keyboard.
From what you have observed from the pictures above, locate a qwerty typewriter keyboard in your environment and compare with that of a personal computer keyboard.
Is your observation the same with the illustrations in the picture above?
If not, identify the differences and compare with the illustrations in 3.3 below 3.2 Types of Keyboarding Machines There are different types of typewriting machines, from which the keyboard emanated.
They are basically grouped as manual and electronic.
The manual type functions without electricity while the electronic type needs electricity to function.
The manual type can be found in both standard and portable forms.
The standard typewriter is the normal size of typewriter which can take any size of paper ranging from A7 to A2.
The electric typewriter is also in two forms; standard and portable.
Both manual and electric typewriters have similar keyboards which are the same as that which was first developed by 3 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Shole.
The interesting thing to note is that at each stage, there is an improvement on the old by the kind of functions performed by the additional keys.
For example, there is no carriage return lever on the electric typewriter rather there is a key that does the return or the function that performs automatic wrapping of words.
The electric typewriter can store and retrieve information when need be.
It also has the facilities of viewing what you are typing on the screen.
It is the advancement on the typewriter that gave birth to the personal computer.
The early computers were not meant for typing but further progress in development led to the emergence of the personal computer which now supersedes the use of the typewriter in typing because of its numerous functions.
3.3 Parts and Uses of the Personal Computer The personal computer is divided into various parts and each part performs a function different from the other.
The parts of the personal computer could be likened to the parts of a human being.
For example, the major parts of a human being are the head, the fore limbs, the hind limbs, and the body.
Each of these parts has its own sub-parts and each of these sub-parts performs different interrelated functions.
For instance, in the head you have the eyes, nose, mouth, ear, forehead, hair, skull, brain etc.
The mouth is used for eating and talking therefore it cannot perform the hearing function of the ear because it is not designed to do that, also the forehead cannot perform the function of the brain.
But human beings need the functions of all in order to achieve a normal process.
We can now look at the parts of the personal computer and their roles.
The Main Parts 1.The Monitor 2.
The Central Processing Unit (CPU) 4 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 3.
The Keyboard 4.
The Printer The monitor — The monitor is the part of a personal computer that looks like the television screen.
A monitor has either a monochrome or colour screen in a manner that resembles a printed text.
The character display can normally be generated in two different modes: • The scrolling mode – This is the mode in which lines appear at the bottom and move up the screen.
• The paging mode – In this mode, one complete screen –(a full screen) is replaced by another.
This can be likened to a slide projector.
The Central Processing Unit (CPU) – The CPU of a personal computer contains the power unit.
The CPU contains the processor, the main memory, disk drives and parts for output or input devices.
The processor unit helps to process the input data by changing the input data into a machine code in the language the computer would understand.
The computer can not read our normal way of writing; it works in BINARY form, accepts ONE (1) or ZERO (0).
The main memory helps to store information and releases it when retrieved.
The disk drive is the compartment provided for a floppy disk/diskette which is used for external storage.
There is also the zip drive and CDROM which are the compartments for the zip and compact disk used for large documents.
The keyboard – The keyboard is divided into alphanumeric keys, function keys, control keys, the numeric pad and cursor keys.
The alphanumeric keys contain letters of the alphabet, figures and some symbols and it is divided into six rows.
The second to fifth rows contain these keys.
The function keys are designed to perform more advanced functions to enhance the work on the personal computer.
They are located on the sixth row.
The control keys are basically used to move the cursor to the left, right, up and down within a text or among pages.
The numeric pad is used for easy entering of figures while the cursor keys are used in scrolling on pages vertically and horizontally.
One important thing to note on the keyboard is that it resembles the 5 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING qwerty typewriter.
The alphanumeric keys are arranged in the same way expect for the additional keys meant for more functions.
The printer is an output device which helps in producing the hard copy.
Sub Parts 1.
The mouse is one of the input devices.
An input device is a means used in feeding data into the personal computer.
The keyboard, scanner, joystick, keyboard etc are other input devices.
The mouse is also used to control the cursor.
What is a cursor?
A cursor is a small character-size symbol displayed on the screen.
It can be moved about the screen vertically and horizontally.
As earlier mentioned the control keys can also perform this function.
2.
The alternate key (Alt)is used with other keys to access software options 3.
The backspace key moves the cursor to the left (backwards) and can also be used to delete already typed words.
4.
The caps lock key is used when you want to type all words in capital letters 5.
The cursor serves as an indicator on the display screen that shows the user the exact position within a document.
6.
The delete key is used to delete text.
7.
The disk (diskette/floppy disk) is the most common secondary storage medium used with microcomputers.
Disks are usually made of thin plastic, magnetically coated.
They are protected with opening which allows the disk drive to read or write information.
8.
The disk drive is the compartment of a microcomputer into which the disk is slotted and it does the reading in the disk.
9.
The enter key returns the cursor to the next line of typing.
10.
The insert key allows the user to insert text without deleting previously typed text.
11.
The left shift key is used to capitalise letters keyed with the right hand.
It is also used in combination with other keys to perform specific functions.
6 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 12.
The right shift key is used to capitalise letters keyed with the left hand.
13.
The space bar is used to give space between letters or words.
14.
The tab key moves the cursor directly to a tap stop.
3.4 Organisation of the Work Environment The arrangement of a work environment determines the rate of work flow.
Poor work environment could lead to: • Tiredness • Inefficiency in job performance • A reduction in the rate of work flow To avoid this problem, you should consider the following : 1.
Care for the personal computer: • Plce the personal computer on a flat, smooth surface to prevent it from falling off.
• Shut down the PC properly after use.
• Cover the PC (with its cover) when not in use to protect it from dust.
2.
A correct sitting position; This would: • reduce fatigue • reduce backache and • increase the quality of job production Sitting correctly means you are getting ready to use the machine.
Therefore you need to be well seated so as to achieve the proficiency required.
To achieve good performance of your job and a healthy body, adopt the following sitting posture: • Sit erect with your back resting on the back rest.
To achieve this, make sure that your chair and table are compatible i.e.
the chair should be neither too low nor too high for the table.
They should be proportionate.
• Place your feet flat on the floor to give you a relaxed posture.
7 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING • Relax your nerves, hold your shoulder erect, curve your fingers and let them hover on the home keys.
Learn to keep your eyes off the keyboard.
Your eyes should be either on the copy you are typing from or on the screen if you are typing directly from the brain.
This will help reduce tension and increase your productivity.
A well organised work environment leads to high productivity.
3.5 Introduction to Microsoft Word The most commonly used package today for word processing is Microsoft Word which is commonly referred to as “word”.
This package is chosen as the beginning package because it takes care of most of the jobs done in a modern office and it is the easiest package to use in learning keyboarding.
The mastering of this package would help to ease the difficulty in using other packages.
Starting Microsoft Word To go to the Microsoft Word environment you have to start or launch the personal computer through the following process: Ensure proper connection Switch on the power from the socket Switch on the stabilizer or UPS Press the start button on the CPU Press the on button on the monitor As soon as this stage is completed, the PC would show light on the screen and start to change form.
It is this stage of changing form that is referred to as “booting”.
The computer does not receive data when booting because it is at that stage that is getting itself ready for work.
Icons and the cursor are displayed as soon as the booting is over.
The cursor most times has either an arrow ( ) shape or a plus (+) sign.
At this stage the computer is ready to receive data.
It is only at this point you can start word by doing any of the following: 8 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 1.
Click start from the start menu window, click program, from the pop-up menu, click Microsoft Word.
2.
You can also launch Microsoft Word through the short cut – double click on the Microsoft Word icon on the desktop.
The face of the screen after booting Microsoft Word window screen Exiting Microsoft Word Before you exit from the Word environment ensure that the document in progress is saved except if that document is not needed afterwards, but should you forget to do that before clicking on close or exit, a box will prompt: Note: the name “Document1” is not permanent.
It changes according to the name given to the file If you click on “yes”, it will give you opportunity to make your savings before existing.
But if you click on “no’’ it will exist.
Any of the following methods could be used when you want to exit from the Microsoft Word environment: 1.
Select file, click on “close”, and click on “exit” 2.
Press Alt + F4 3.
Click on Word close window button 9 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 4.0 CONCLUSION It is important to know the rudiment that leads to a good keyboarding and word processing before embarking on the actual practice.
It is therefore advised that you go through this unit once more for a proper understanding before proceeding to the practical session in Unit 2.
Do not be in haste, master the beginning and it will enhance your efficiency.
5.0 SUMMARY The idea of keyboarding and word processing all started as a result of looking for a better way to making hand written documents legible This gave great concern to many scholars amongst whom was Christopher Shole who in 1837 manufactured the first typewriting machine.
Though the machine could not achieve the purpose which it was meant for, it gave further concern to some groups of scholars.
This successive concern gave birth to new types or models of typewriters and today we have the personal computer, which has become very useful in the business world.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
Carefully examine the origin of keyboarding and word processing in the world of business.
2.
Enumerate the criteria that need to be considered when proficiency is desired in keyboarding and word processing.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen,M.
Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond, Archie and Cole-Mogford, Anne (1989) Applied Typing(5th ed)., Maidenhead-Bershire,England:McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd NIIT Global Net (1999) Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers.Pvt Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999) Word.
Ohio:Sonia Printers Pvt.Ltd.
10 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 2 TOUCH KEYING AND SKILL BUILDING ON THE ALPHABETIC BEYBOARD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 keys – asdf ;lkj 3.2 Keys – g and h 3.3 Keys – e and i 3.4 Keys – r and u 3.5 Keys – w and o 3.6 Keys – t and y 3.7 Keys – q and p 3.8 Keys – b and n; c and v 3.9 Keys – x and m 3.10 Key z and quotation mark(s) 3.11 Keys - .
?
shift-key and caps-lock 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This section introduces you to the practical session of keyboarding and word processing.
Follow every instruction carefully and do all the practices presented.
At the beginning, abiding by the instructions may seem difficult especially in the placement of your fingers on the keyboard.
Those you see touching the keys at a very fast rate with the right finger without looking at the keyboard started this way.
That means you will, if possible do better if you follow the given instructions.
Do not see the time spent on trying to master the keys as wasted.
It is time well spent which will bring about your proficiency in keyboarding.
Do not admire those who strike the keys with the wrong fingers, the fingers may look fast when moving but would not be able to attain the desired speed and attain proficiency in production.
Why?
Some people will never be patient to learn.
11 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING This unit will take you through several tasks.
Repeat each task several times until you are comfortable with the manipulation.
Never give up until you are perfect 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Manipulate the alphabetic keys through touch keying • Manipulate the keys with less fatigue • Type simple text 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Keys – asdf; lkj (Home Keys) Alphabetic Keys Before you go into typing, you need to locate the guide keys, home keys, enter key and space bar as well as know their functions.
The guide keys are “a” and “;”.
They are called guide because they guide you on the position of the keyboard to place your fingers.
The Home keys are “ASDF and; LKJ”.
These serve as the beginning keys and fingers are usually returned there when they are not in use when typing; a finger hovers around these keys.
They could be further described as a ; take off and rest keys.
The enter key is used to return the cursor to the left margin when typing.
It also gives space between lines when pressed.
The space bar is the long bar in the first (bottom) row.
It is used to give Space bar space between letters or words.
Eight fingers and one thumb are used in typing.
Among the fingers, there are the guide fingers — the little fingers on the left and right hands.
These fingers are placed on the guide keys —‘a' for the left and ‘;' for the right hand; while other fingers are placed from that point to cover the home keys.
When fingers are properly placed, there will be only two keys left at the middle of the 3rd row.
The thumb is used for the space bar to give space.
You can use either the left or right thumb.
It all depends on the one the learner finds most convenient since we have some persons who are left handed.
Always remember that the guide keys guide the placement of fingers on the home keys while the home keys guide the placement of the fingers on the keyboard.
See the diagram below for finger positioning.
12 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING d f k s j l ; a Left palm Right palm Note: When you are to type from a text-book or manuscript, place the copy you are to type on either side of the keyboard i.e.
either to the left hand side or to the right hand side.
It all depends on the side that is more convenient for the user.
It is wrong to say that you must place your text- book on the right or left since people have different sights.
To some their left eye functions better, than the right and vice-versa.
You are about going into the practical session.
To have an effective practice you are required to have the following materials: • A personal computer – a lap top or desk top computer with Office software.
• A printer.
• A comfortable chair and table to match.
• Good lightening.
• Course material for BED 111 The Task • Is your computer on the table and well connected?
• Have you checked your sitting position?
Be sure you are well seated.
• Now launch your Microsoft Word environment • Practice placing your fingers on the home keys starting with the guide keys.
13 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Did you forget how to achieve any of these?
If yes, go back to the preceding unit to refresh your memory before proceeding.
• Now that you are properly seated and ready for the task, try your hands on the following: Task 1 asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj Read while you type asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj Oh no, you feel like looking at the keyboard, because of the little mistake.
Never mind, you can only look at the keyboard once, at the point of placing your fingers on the keyboard.
Once your fingers are placed, you don’t need to see the keyboard, rather let your eyes be on the course material.
Just remember that your little fingers are the guide keys and memorise the finger that goes with each home key.
asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj asdf ;lkj Good practice.
Now you can see that you can type without looking at the keyboard.
It’s just a matter of determination!
Try again.
On completion, check your work with the one in the course material.
14 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Now that your fingers are getting used to the keyboard, close your course material and try typing from memory.
Sound – asdf space (strike the space bar); lkj and type.
Look at the screen as you sound and type.
How was that practice?
Hope it’s interesting and you are getting more used to using the right finger for the right key on the home key Repeat the practice session several times, until you are comfortable with home keys.
Task 2 Have you placed your fingers properly?
Use the right finger for the right key.
Do not be in hurry.
a; sl dk fj a; sl dk fj a; sl dk fj a; sl dk fj a; sl dk fj ;f ld ks aj ja js jd jf a; al sk dk fj s; sl sk sj d; dl dk dj f; fl fk fj ja js jd jf ka ks kd kf la ls ld fl ;a ;s ;d ;f dk sj a; sl dk fj a; sl dl dk aj dk a; sl dk fj al sk dj fj sk al fk a; sl dk fj sk ak sl dk fj a; sl dk fj a; sl dk fj a; ak dk jf kd ;a kd jf ks a; sk dk fj asa sad ask asks jak jaks jad jal jals dad dads add adds all all; fall falls saff das dask dasks lass lak lads afas kasl faks; jaks; dad; sad lak laks; saak saal safa safas kals jak jaks dal dall lask jad jads jas ask asks; add adds lad lads jak jak; fall falls faks dask dasl las; dall dalls falls; laff; laff Do not be discouraged that you could not type fast.
It is better to be slow now and use the right fingers.
What do you do when you forget what finger should go for what key?
Don’t be tempted to look at the keyboard, rather, pause and think of the right finger while your fingers are hovering on the keyboard.
This may slow down your pace of typing, but never mind, because the speed will come once your fingers master the keys.
You don’t need to struggle for it.
15 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 3.2 Keys – g and h Are you sure you have mastered tasks 1 and 2?
If no, practices some more and if yes proceed to task 3.
Task 3 Keys “g” and “h” are the two middle keys after the home keys.
Instruction: Use “j” finger for “h” and use “f” finger for “g”.
Type the following as they appear.
fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg Sound the jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh letters while fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg jh fg fag gas gad gads gafs you type hall halls hask hall; haj jask hala hass halls; gass hass had hads haff kals kals; jak jaks; hall Check your progress – Did you use the right finger?
Do you have the same line endings as in the text?
Are your errors very many?
Repeat the same task and compare with the first attempt.
Is there improvement over the first attempt?
If yes, in what magnitude?
Is it by looking at the keyboard (bad habit) or by abiding by the given instruction (good habit)?
Task 4 Type as presented Read while you type Sound the letters/words while you type ada jasala hasa hag hags dahl; dass kass has jag jags; gall galls; haks hask haj; las lads halls jaks sad falls gag gags jag jags galls gall hag hags jada kall kalls has has; gas gash hall; haak safa dada sall kala laka lada all all; lafa gaga haala kalaga fag fags fagh kash dash dash; hall halls gaga gags gag gaka gala galas sala salas kada lala sada falasa gas gad gads jak sal salsa salad salsas salsa dada gag dada all gaga hags jak salads salsa saka kall kalls dadas fall; 16 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Check your progress and repeat the task as many times as possible.
You must not look at the keyboard while typing.
Looking at the keyboard in keyboarding is a “criminal”l offence in word processing.
3.3 Keys – e and i So far you have covered ten alphabetical keys on the third row of the keyboard.
Repeat task 1 to task 4 before you proceed; this will increase your mastery.
You are about to go to the upper row (fourth row), to the home key row.
It demands moving your fingers from the third row to the fourth row, therefore move your fingers gently.
Do not be tempted to look at the keyboard when striking the keys STOP, TAKE A LOOK AT THE KEYBOARD ONCE MORE AND STUDY THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE KEYS CAREFULLY.
AFTER WHICH YOU CAN PROCEED TO THE NEXT TASK.
Instruction: use “d” finger for “e” and “k” finger for “i” Task 5 Type as presented ded kik ded kik ded kik ded kik ded kik ded kik ded kik ded kik ded kik ded kik ded kik ded kik ede iki ede iki ede iki ede iki ede iki ede iki ede Sound the letters iki ede iki ede iki ede iki ede iki ede iki ede iki seed seeds ill ills kill /words while you kills lid lids type Repeat this several times until you are fairly comfortable with the keys.
Task 6 Type as presented 17 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING deed kesh dash seda aid aids ail ails; head heads gail ell ells; side sides jask jask; ill ell gill gills gisa hiss hisses hassle hassles lead leads eal Rememb head heads gill gills fill fills feel feels fed did said sill sills sesa sesil fill the right like likes kafadi his hassle gill gisas jig jigs ell ells ell; ado add adds feed desk deed desks; he has all seed as jak said fill eda aka akas lead leads all his fill fig has all feed falls ills his jeaks jek fills all seed gas has deaf gel gels falls Repeat this several times and compare your progress.
3.4 Keys – r and u Task 7 Type as presented and repeat as many times as you can Instruction: use “f” finger for “r” and use “j” finger for “u” Always frf juj frf juj frf juj frf juj frf juj frf juj frf juj frf juj frf juj frf juj frf juj frf remember to use juj frf juj frf juj frf juj rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju the right finger as rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju rfr uju has he said all he see instructed full raff Task 8 raffs dell dells red reds dull dulls urea jug jugs lusk saul seer seers her hers hug hugs full his urea seed seer jug jugs rug rugs dear dears kiss kisses jeer urge urges judges all her ills hur rugs rue rues jude feel jide hur dear his all gill his gear fill all her all feed all his fur feel dear dull his air urges her rugs fill all air judges ask jug jug all her rue gear full.
Do you feel better striking the keys?
Repeat this task several times and check your progress 3.5 Keys – w and o Task 9 Instruction: Use “s” finger for “w”and “ l”finger for “o” 18 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING sws lol sws lol sws lol sws lol sws lol sws lol sws lol sws lol sws lol sws lol sws lol sws lol sws wsw olo wsw olo wsw olo wsw olo wsw olo wsw olo wsw olo wsw olo wsw olo wsw olo wsw few red rug road hour house for Task 10 all his horse does war all doll roll wore were goes dull well wore ore wore goes all her due war are for his wear her shoes as does will guess Sound the letters red for his gall gills or sea sees well read houses ore we will wed /words while you wedded ore how would he goes all rue seed rogges all lolli ore wore red type shoes for his wedded judges has all she were for houses asked war of wars all as his guess war wore ore our will were walled of his gag as he asked for his rue as a judge of all Good practice, keep it up 3.6 Keys – t and y Introduction: Use “f” finger for “t” and “j” finger for “y” Task 11 ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf jyj ftf tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft yjy tft were you there for ada wed jude Task 12 Repeat each of the judge of the house at yogga ore you though thought all the there these tasks those this for fur yolk yours that throw through rugs hay hays year yell several times and to you that your air those yell yells yours to that of those your will of remember to thought that you should show the yelly gasses guess the skill word sound the letters lets your way for the wore of all kids or kiddy doll for dolls at letters/words fees full yoges hour through all there yelly way of does you saddy when you type yoggys rat rattle all he yell for his 3.7 Keys – q and p Instruction: Use “a” finger for ‘ “q” and “;” finger for “p”.
19 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Task 13 Remember aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; your finger aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; movement aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; aqa ;p; qaq p;p qaq p;p qaq p;p qaq a vertical fo p;p qaq p;p qaq p;p qaq p;p qaq p;p qaq p;p qaq p;p qaq p;p qaq p;p Up and bac queue up at the home k Task 14 the tap to get water for the house for your use people equip the pulp for queries quote the right quote at quest for quests pop pipe pope jude quip quite quiet to the pop pops rats quotes; quit paper pepper tosh quire quarter quarters equip quest poppy rag iraq fight fought fifth fourth thirty two too total totals equal equips separated separate ideal peers author saddle saddles Check your progress by comparing your efficiency at the beginning and now If you look at the keyboard, you will notice that you have successfully completed the third and fourth rows of the keyboard.
You are about to enter the last row of letters on the keyboard; which is the second row.
The movement of the fingers will still be in the vertical form.
This time, the fingers will move from the home keys downwards.
Do not look at the keyboard as you move your fingers 3.8 Keys – b and n; c and v Instruction: Use “j’ finger for keys “b” and “n”.
Use “f” finger for keys “c” and“ v”.
You must not look at the keyboard while typing the following: Task 15 jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb fcv jnb vcf nbj vcf jnh fvc jnb cfv bnj fcj jnc vjb cfv jhb 20 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING njb vcf gvc hnb fnc vjf vnb cvn cbnf cbjv njbc bottle but very nerve car carry Task 16 control beautiful betting food best nerves not noting control convey cargoes to their various destinations during the week Thursday is an odd day in November carving is one of the things Benin people are known for in what way would you carry the bag of bottles to the nearest place as required by the director of cargoes often time busy people do not always like to see their children in the house during the working hours so they would always want their children to be in school at these period not very often would battle scared people into their hiding narrow bottled like venue in the village near the bushing center 3.9 Keys – x and m Instruction: Use “d” finger for “x” and “k” finger for “m’’ Task 17 dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd dxd mkm dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd kmk dxd fax vax make Task 18 Merry merriment xylophone market madness man exercise mathematics history physics vascular microphone xylem Matthew mattress matter mother men macro micro microcosm nylon sex sexes export exporter exporting except excepted executive member of the committee in the meeting to be held on the tenth of March the year two thousand and four 3.10 Key z and quotation mark(s) Instruction: Use “s” finger for “z”, “l” finger for “,” and use “;” finger for quotation mark(s).
Task 19 szs l,l szs l,l szs ;’; szs l,l ‘;’ szs l,l ‘;’ szs l,l ‘;’ szs ‘;’ szs l,l ‘;’ zsz ,l, ‘;’ szs l,l ;’; szs l,l ‘;’ szs ,l, ;’; szs ‘;’ ,l, szs ‘;’ zsz ,l, zsz ‘;’ ,l, zsz ‘;’ ,l, szs ;’; ,l, zsz l,l zsz ;’; ask; them, dwelling; ‘market’ zero zebra ‘zebulum’ 21 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING zechariah ezekieh ‘babtolo’ marketers, goodness, hezebal, tobaiah, sibling, Task 20 do you know that men often want to be recognize in functions, in one of such functions zeba said ‘men of integrity are not easy to come across, should you find them, they make you feel happy’ zezebra, zebulum, ‘zephaniah’ zetta, zoro, zero, nylon, zech, zobo, zesh, zoo zest czech czechs ‘mattle’ ‘zero’ ‘nylon’ ‘zech’ ‘zobo’ zesh’ ‘zoo’ ‘waters’ ‘czechs’ ‘zeba’ ‘agbodo’ ‘asaba’ ‘lags’ 3.1 1 Keys - .
?
shift-key and caps-lock Specific Instruction Use “l” finger for “.” , use “;” finger for “?”.There are two shift keys on the keyboard, one on the left and the other on the right hand side.
Use the little finger on the left or right hand for shift key.
To achieve this use the left little finger to hold down the shift key if the letter you want to type is on the right hand side, and use the right little finger to hold down the shift key on the right if the letter you want to type is on the left hand side of the keyboard and as soon as you strike the desired key release your finger from the shift key and continue typing.
The shift key is used when you want to type in initial capital i.e.
the first letter in a word being typed with a capital letter while the subsequent letters in the word are typed in small letters; e.g.
Andrew.
There is no special finger for caps- lock.
Press the caps lock when you want to type your text in capital letters and as soon as you are through, press it again and the function will go off.
Note: 1.
Give two spaces after each full stop.
To achieve this, press the space bar twice before beginning a new sentence.
Start a new sentence after every full stop with a capital letter.
2.
When you are to type the upper letters or symbols on the keys, hold down the shift key and strike the desired key.
If you do not do this you will not achieve the desired result.
E.g.
to type “?”, use your left little finger to hold down the shift key on the left while you use the “;” finger to strike the “?” key.
Another thing to note about the typing of “?” is that after each “?” give two spaces just like in the case of the full stop.
22 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Task 21 l.l l.l l.l l.l l.l .l.
.l.
l.l l.l .l.
l.l l.l l.l .l.
l.l .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
l. .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
l. .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
l. l. .l.
l. l.l l.l l.l l.l l.l .l.
.l.
l.l l.l .l.
l.l l.l l.l .l.
l.l .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
l. .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
l. .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
l. l. .l.
l. l.l l.l l.l l.l l.l .l.
.l.
l.l l.l .l.
l.l l.l l.l .l.
l.l .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
l. .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
l. .l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
.l.
l.l .l.
.l.
l. l. .l.
l. Task 22 When will you go to Ilorin.
Aduke will be getting married in June.
Would you like to be there to grace the occasion?
How often do you go to Lagos?
University of Lagos lagoon is a fine place to visit.
Would you like to be there next Saturday?
Children like Lilly flowers, they would always like to feel it each time they see them.
Would you like to go to Kaduna on the tenth of November, this year?
Do you always feel happy when you are typing?
Or do you think the art of typing is only through the use of the typewriter?
If not, what is your option about typing with other machines?
Abeokuta is the home of Adire.
So should you want to buy any you need to visit and pick your choice.
Never you give up when things are tough, giving up is never the best solution to tough times.
What do you do then?
Look for ways to amend.
Task 23 MEN BY NATURE WANT TO DO LESS WORK AND GET RICH QUICKLY.
THIS IS NOT THE BEST WAY OF LIFE, BECAUSE THIS KIND OF OPTION WOULD ALWAYS INCREASE CRIME IN THE SOCIETY.
THE ART OF GETTING RICH.
LET’S BE PATIENT AND WORK IN A GENUINE WAY.
THE WEALTH, WHICH WE DESIRE, WILL COME IN ITS NATURAL FORM.
Repeat each task several times until you are comfortable typing them.
Congratulations.
You have successfully come to the end of the alphabetical keys.
Although getting used to the keys without looking at the keyboard was very rigorous, I can see you with a smile because you can now manipulate the keys without looking at the keyboard.
Do not mind your speed now, but mind your accuracy and efficiency on the keyboard.
23 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING You have been a very wonderful student who keeps to instructions, which is the secret of your success.
Keep it up.
4.0 CONCLUSION The horizontal method was used to introduce you to the keyboard This method introduces a beginner to the home key row first before other keys.
The advantage is that it gives you the opportunity to master the guide and home keys and takes you through the horizontal movement of your fingers.
Also, it gives you the opportunity of learning more than one key at a time, which makes learning less monotonous.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taken you through the alphabetical keys, starting with the guide and home keys with a successive improvement to the fourth and second rows.
To acquire the desired skills the following are important: • Do not look at the keyboard when typing • Sound the letters \words as you type • Keep to all instructions • Practice very often If you are able to achieve this, you will discover that in no time you will become comfortable using the keyboard.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Task 1 Type the following as presented: Some years ago, typewriting was basically associated with the typists and secretaries only.
Therefore all manuscripts were directed to the typist or secretary for typing.
This single act led to the misconception of the role of secretaries in an organisation.
Some typists assumed the position of secretaries while most of the very few qualified secretaries were denied the opportunity of performing their roles, most especially in Nigeria where they were restricted to performing the role of typists.
24 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Task 2 Today the art of typing is no more for the typist or computer operator or secretary only.
It is now for everyone who needs proficiency in his or her daily activities.
This makes it important for everyone to learn how to use the keyboard which is fundamental in the use of the computer in every field of specialisation.
But it has been discovered that people are not ready to learn these basics which are fundamental in the application of the computer to their specific areas.
They see it as a waste of time, but the time that is considered to have been wasted in learning keyboarding is gained several times during application.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987) Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond,Archie and Cole-Mogford,Anne (1989) Applied Typing( 5th ed).Maidenhead-Bershire England:McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999) Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999) Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 25 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 3 TOUCH KEYING AND SKILL BUILDING ON THE NUMERIC KEYBOARD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Keys 1 2 0 and 9 3.2 Keys 3 4 8 and 7 3.3 Keys - 5 and 6 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Personal Computer keyboard as introduced to you earlier contains letters of the alphabet, numerical and functions keys.
The last unit took you through the alphabetical keys.
This unit is designed to introduce you to numerical keys.
To be well acquainted with the desired skills, follow all the given instructions.
The instructions you are expecting to meet are in line with the kind of instructions you are already used to.
Therefore relax and proceed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Manipulate numerical keys • Type a simple text with numbers 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Keys 1 2 0 and 9 This section introduces you to the fifth row on the keyboard.
This requires further movement of your fingers upward.
Use the “a” finger for “1”,the “s” finger for “2” , the “L” finger for “0” and the same “L” finger for “9” Be systematic with the movement of your fingers.
Try your hands on the following task: 26 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Task 24 Aq1 sw2 lo0 lo9 aq1 lo0 sw2 lo9 aq1 sw2 lo0 lo9 aq1 lo0 sw2 lo9 aq1 Remember the lo0 sw2 lo9 sw2 lo9 aq1 lo0 2ws 9ol 0ol 1qa q1a lo0 9ol 2ws aq1 o9l rule: Do not ws2 o0l 2ws lo0 q1a ol9 ws2 lo0 qa1 0ol q1a 0ol.
Aq1 sw2 lo0 lo9 aq1 look at the key lo0 sw2 lo9 aq1 sw2 lo0 lo9 aq1 lo0 sw2 lo9 aq1 lo0 sw2 lo9 sw2 lo9 board when aq1 lo0 2ws 9ol 0ol 1qa q1a lo0 9ol 2ws aq1 o9l ws2 o0l 2ws lo0 q1a typing.
ol9 ws2 lo0 qa1 0ol q1a 0ol.
Repeat this three times.
At the end of each session, check your progress.
Yes!
I can make it.
Just a little effort is all I need.
Good Student.
I commend your effort, repeat Task 23 once more and you will discover you have made significant progress Task 25 Type the following as presented There are 20 villages in the land of Akoko.
Adekoke will be one year old on Sunday 20th April 2007.
90 persons were reported dead in the plane crash, 901 persons were hospitalised.
Children within the ages of 9 are always anxious to go to secondary school.
What age do you think is most desirable for children to start school?
Take note of the following figures: 1, 2, 10, 19, 101, 120, 129, 921, 2002, 191 and 900.
Life is interesting when you have to live in a country with a buoyant economy.
Such a country caters for her masses and sees beyond just today.
Repeat task 25 as many times as you want.
Aim at proficiency 27 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 3.2 Keys 3, 4, 8 and 7 These numbers are also on the fifth row on the keyboard.
Take a look at the keyboard once more to study the arrangement of the keys.
This session requires the same style of finger movement, which is in the upward direction.
Remember you will not get the best if you look at the keyboard when typing, so avoid the temptation.
Instruction: Use the “d” finger for keys “3” and “4”,the “k” finger for “8” and the “j”finger for “7”.
Task 26 Type the following as presented de3 de4 ki8 ju7 de3 de4 ki8 ju7 de3 de4 ki8 ju7 de3 ki8 de4 ju7 de3 ju7 de4 ki8 de3 ki8 de3 ki8 ed3 4ed ki8 i8k 7uj u7j e3d 4ed ki8 u7j 4ed ju7 de4 ju7 de4 8ik 4ed ki8 ed3 ik8 3ed ju7 ki8 ju7 101 202 303 404 191 292 282 272 300 303 393 383 373 400 494 484 474 990 294 193 778 483 287 183 478 134 890 214 838 288 283 1892 2,44.00 23, 8,990 390 4990 1000 2000 3000 4000 9000 8000 7000 2001 3002 4002 22 334 129 988 7990 321 234 431 908 291 290 390 2090 2101 When we are talking about figures that end with round figures we are referring to such figures as 100, 200, 300, 400, 700, 800, 900 etc.
Some persons like odd numbers like 3, 7, and 9.
Repeat this task 10 times SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 React to the following at the completion of the ten.
1.
Compare your performance in the ten.
Is the performance good or bad?
2.
List points to support your answer to question one above.
3.
Suggest ways of possible improvement based on the difficulty you encountered during the task.
28 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 3.3 Keys 5 and 6 You are on the verge of completing the numerical keys.
What seemed difficult and unrealistic at first has become interesting and exciting.
So with this interest and excitement complete the following task.
Instruction: Use the “f” finger for “‘5” and “6” and the “;” finger for “-” Task 27 Fr5 ft6 ;p- fr5 ft6 ;p- fr5 ;p- ft6 ;p- fr5 ft6 ;p- fr5 ft6 ;p- fr5 ft6 ;p- fr5 ft6 ;p- fr5 ft6 ;p- fr5 ft6 ;p- ft6 ;p- ft6 6tf p;- fr5 ft6 ;p- 500 600 670 465 567 678 312 565 764 765 896 805 669 660 661 559 557 556 679 667 9006 6009 670 679 6003 5006 5007 5009 5008 1005 1006 2660 66231 3659 The numbers 666 and 419 have some connotations.
Many people dread these numbers and seldom use them for any thing that connotes the positive.
You may want to know more about these numbers – 666 is a mark of the anti-Christ, and 419 connotes a dubious character.
There are some compound words we use often, such as co-operation, co- worker and inter-face.
Repeat this task 10 times SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Identify your areas of difficulties 2.
Identify at least two ways of overcoming the difficulties 3.. Repeat the task, using the solutions provided in“2” above.
4.
Has the new method improved your performance?
Yes or No.
5.
State reasons to support your answer to 4 above.
4.0 CONCLUSION I want to congratulate you for your ability to manipulate the keyboard without looking at the keys.
It is not magic to gain competency, but it comes through self-discipline and determination.
Keep these criteria in mind as you work through the rest of this material so as to be able to improve your competency.
You have successfully completed alphabetical and numerical keys.
The function keys and other signs that are placed at the top of the numerical keys can be typed at a glance.
These are not frequently used; therefore 29 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING typing them will not pose a problem.
The alphabetic and numeric keys are the ones that are mostly used, hence the need look for a way of improving to the speed of using them.
Remember to use the shift keys when you are to type any of the signs at the top of the major keys.
The other keys whose functions you may need to master – home, end pg up and pg down.
The first two can not work on their own; they need a combination of the control (Ctrl) key.
See the following: • Ctrl + Home – takes you to the beginning of the current document • Ctrl + End – takes you to the end of the current document But in case of the last two keys tapping either of them once will give you the following result: Page Up – When you press this key it takes you towards the beginning of the document in a successive manner.
Page Down – When you press this key , it takes you to the page(s) after the current page in the document.
You will be introduced to the function keys as you proceed in Word Processing.
Practice using the home, end, page down and page up keys following the instructions above.
5.0 SUMMARY In summary, you have typed all the basic numbers used in mathematics.
You need constant practice to improve your proficiency.
In 3.0 you were reminded not to look at the keyboard when typing, remember to keep to this as you progress.
This is one sure way for you to gain speed steadily.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Explain your experience in keyboarding with reference to: 1.
Difficulty encountered 2.
Encouragement received 30 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 3.
Suggestion to others who want to learn keyboarding 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London,: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond, Archie and Cole-Morgford, Anne (1989).
Applied Typing, McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd, Maidenhead – Bershire England.
(5th ed.)
NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts, Ohio, Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word, Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 31 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 4 SPEED AND ACCURACY PRACTICE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is going to teach you how to complete a given task that is error free, and that in time too.
You can do this effectively if you have successfully gone through units 2 and 3, if not you may not achieve the objective set for this unit.
It is advised, therefore, that you go through units 2 and 3 again, but if you know you have already done that and you can fairly type without looking at the keyboard, you may then proceed to the tasks in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • Type a simple text at 15 words per minute with a minimum of 2% error.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Type the following passages to ensure a proper mastery of the keyboard.
At the end of each paragraph, press the enter key twice before you start a new paragraph, when more than one paragraph is required.
Repeat each task as many times as you wish to gain perfection.
Task 28 68 words at 22 w.p.m.
for 3 minutes If the new shop is to be ready in June, there are a few jobs that must be done at once.
First, we must find a person who is able to make some effort to put this business on its feet again, and, further, I am sure that the person must be given a free hand as to how many people we should employ and what pay each will receive for full-time work (SI 1.19) 32 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Task 29 140 words at 28 w.p.m.
for 3 minutes Yes, they should call here to see the goods which I spoke to you about last Monday.
I do send stock out on approval.
I shall be very pleased to do business with you and to allow monthly credit of N10, 000.
In the late autumn I hope to offer some first-class quality goods, and in the meantime, I can let you have the best value in woollens, with a special line in sweaters.
I am sorry that I am unable to suggest a reliable house for socks: this is part of the trade in which I have not done business, and it would not be fair of me to pass an opinion on the firms whose names you mention in your letter.
I have always kept my prices low, and will write to you when next I have some special offers.
(SI 1.23) Task 30 201 words at 28 w.p.m.
for 7 minutes All of you will be glad to hear that we now have a scheme for refunding to staff that part of their expenses for travelling long distances to work.
Some details of local conditions and of the grades of staff will help you to understand our query.
We are faced with a sharp division between town-based staff, who would pay fares of between =N=6 and =N=9 a week, and members of staff living in the country who are paying between =N=10 and =N=17 a week.
There are about 500 people on the office staff - four-fifths live within the city boundary (a radius of some 4 miles) and the rest live at distances varying from 6 to 12 miles.
Some time ago a plan was thought up for paying travelling costs on a mileage basis to all employees who travel a distance of more than 4 miles from the city centre; however, the scheme was not a success.
It is hoped that the new plan which was put into operation last week will prove to be fairer.
The scheme ensures that no one in this group pays more than =N=9 a week to get to and from her/his work.
(SI 1.27) Task 31 264 words at 33 w.p.m.
for 8 minutes We understand that you will be leaving this country shortly to take a job overseas, and we thought that your friends and family might like an up- 33 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING to-date photograph of you before you leave.
We can supply large prints, and we should be pleased to arrange a sitting at short notice when convenient to you.
May we also mention that we offer to businessmen a service which is both efficient and complete in every way.
We will be pleased to show you numerous pictures which show clearly the eye-catching style presented by our photographers.
We enclose a list of firms that employ us and for whom we have produced many advertisements for industrial magazines.
Transfer Travel, our branch in High Street, can help you in a number of ways to solve your travel and transport queries.
In these days when time seems to be the most important commodity of all, you can depend on Transfer Travel to deal with all your arrangements.
Just telephone Sean Gallapher and he will use both his own and his staff’s time in dealing with the hundred and one irritating little things that crop up, but which are so easily overcome by the expert who has made the whole subject his own intimate profession.
Should you wish to do business with a country with which you are not in touch, our agents will be pleased to help you with advice and contacts.
(SI 1.27) Task 32 361 words at 36 w.p.m.
for 10 minutes Proof-reading is a skill and like any skill it must be practiced.
If you are to become efficient at spotting errors of all kinds, it is necessary to undergo training in the art of proof-reading.
To be effective as a proof- reader you need to be able to spell and punctuate correctly, and to know the basic rules of grammar, as well as acceptable typewriting display and layout.
It is not a question of just reading through a completed piece of typescript in case a typing error may have been overlooked; it is often necessary to ask the help of a colleague to go through the copy to make certain that figures are correct, that nothing has been omitted, or that unreadable handwriting has been deciphered correctly.
It may be that you are an audio typist and that you have to listen to a recording on a transcribing machine.
You will need to take great care when proof-reading, and, in order to check certain details, it may be necessary for you to play part of the recording again.
34 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING If the transcription is from shorthand notes, it is a good plan to check the transcript very closely with the notes to make certain that nothing has been omitted.
Keep one finger following the shorthand notes with a finger of the other hand following each word on the typed copy.
Take particular care with words that sound alike but are spelt differently – homophones, e.g., check and cheque; aloud and allowed.
If you have any doubt as to which spelling is required, check the meaning of the word in a dictionary.
If you are proof-reading from VDU, it may be helpful to use the cursor to guide the eye across the screen, and to vary the density of the brightness on the screen.
Make sure that you have used the correct stationery, type accurately any labels or envelopes required, and attach any enclosure before the documents are placed for signature.
(SI 1.27) Task 33 84 words at 42 w.p.m.
for 2 minutes My brothers and I were terrors when we were boys, but I do not believe we were really bad.
In those days boys were forced into mischief, for there were not yet any movies or radio, and television was a mystery of the future.
When the police chased us for some of our pranks, we always had somewhere to hide.
As we lay breathless in our lair, we often heard the tread of heavy boots as the policeman went on his way.
(SI 1.27) Task 34 87 words at 43 w.p.m.
for 2 minutes There has always been a great deal of good advice available for the person seeking a job.
Much of this excellent advice lays stress on making a good first impression, and I do feel that the first few minutes are critical to your chances of being selected for a job.
This means that you should carry out some careful planning before the interview.
The clothes you wear must be neat and clean and suitable for the job for which you are applying.
(SI 1.35) Task 35 161 words at 40 w.p.m.
for 4 minutes 35 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Electronic mail sends, receives, and stores messages and the main reason for using it is to speed the delivery of large amounts of information: it offers immediate delivery if this is required.
There is one or 2 points you should remember about this means of communication.
To start with, different pieces of electronic equipment can communicate with each other – telephone lines, telegraph lines, satellites are examples.
Further, the information between communicating machines is in the form of electronic signals, not a copy on paper.
If desired, information may be sent to a location and stored until it is needed by the receiver.
Also, the receiver may view the message on a screen or print it out as and when a copy is required.
This means a great saving, in paper, additional copies, and mailing costs.
(SI 1.56) Task 36 242 words at 40 w.p.m.
for 6 minutes Perhaps you have seen typists’ jobs advertised in the papers and wished you could apply.
Or you may have spent some time in an office and have an idea of the different types of work the typist has to tackle.
For the better-paid typist’s job you should have appropriate qualifications: a Stage III in typing, Stage II/III in audio transcription, and a good knowledge of English language.
This job usually demands common sense, initiative, and tact.
However rushed you may be, you will have to be pleasant to the boss who will often deviate from the topic and perhaps waste your time.
If you have a query, always ask for advice – never undertake a job unless you are sure you know what is required.
You may be required to deal with internal and external telephone calls and to make certain decisions.
The typist often has to operate a photo- copying machine and to maintain a filing system.
Typing is also a means of providing input for word processors and computers and it may be that you will have extra pay for operating these machines.
Employment prospects for typists are excellent.
Thousands of typists are added to the work-force each year, and the typist who is familiar with processing equipment has an even better chance.
(SI 1.40) 36 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Task 37 329 words at 46 w.p.m.
for 7 minutes A FAX or facsimile machine is a copier which will transmit a document by electronic means usually over telephone lines from one location to another.
At the distant end it appears as a printed copy, or facsimile, of the original.
Almost anything that can be put on paper can be transmitted by facsimile – text, graphs, charts, etc, can be sent and also received.
Quotations, orders, price-lists, delivery schedules, specifications, etc, are just a few examples.
As originally used it was slow and the quality was certainly poor.
The equipment used today takes advantage of today’s technology which means that it is much faster and of good reproduction.
Today, many new special-purpose systems will transmit a page in as little as 15 seconds; however, all high-speed transmission equipment is expensive.
One of the great advantages of facsimile is the reduction of keyboarding errors because if the original copy is correctly prepared, no further typing or checking is necessary, and no carbon copies, envelopes, postage, etc, are required.
Also, you will know that the document cannot get lost in the post.
These machines have answering devices and other automatic mechanisms which means they can receive documents without an individual being present, and documents may be sent when phone prices are at a lower rate, such as in the evening.
Up until 1987 most electronic mail was transferred on internal networks by individual companies.
However, towards the end of 1987, an American company started to develop in Great Britain, a public worldwide electronic mail service.
It would seem that in the years ahead facsimile will be a major means of transmitting information.
(SI 1.59) Task 38 392 words at 49 w.p.m.
for 8 minutes We receive constant reminders of the importance of good communication.
Vast sums are expended by both individuals and organisations to convey a desired message or image to the public.
Politicians and their parties engage the services of high-powered promotion experts to sell their messages; companies employ advertising agents to put forward the qualities of their products; PR people devote 37 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING their expertise to enhance the reputation of organisations; individuals in the public eye use the media to create a particular image so that some manage to make a lucrative career merely out of being a personality or well-known figure, recognised for who or what they are rather than for what they do.
All these interests are devoted to using professional communicators to promote a particular message in order to provoke the intended response.
Individual members of staff will also play a part in enhancing or detracting from the impression given by the organisation.
You will be able to think of examples such as using a snack bar regularly because of the pleasant staff or deciding not to return to a shop because of the surly off-hand manner of an assistant.
You may think of occasions when you were trying to obtain information but were discouraged by being kept waiting on the telephone or having to experience difficulty in understanding the manual accompanying an unfamiliar piece of equipment or despaired of filling in an application form neatly because of its poor design.
Alternatively, you may have noticed examples of an attractively written invitation or good presentation in a notice or advertisement.
Such experiences almost certainly influence your response to the company concerned and may determine whether you wish to have further dealings with them.
In a secretarial role you should be especially conscious of the vital importance of conveying the desired message in an appropriate form.
(SI 1.61) Task 39 318 words at 53 w.p.m.
for 6 minutes Before leaving for your holidays, give your car a good wash, and waxing can be important if you plan to stay by the sea.
Salt air is highly corrosive and can damage the finish on an unprotected car.
Keeping the outside of your car in good condition will help when you want to sell it.
Also, when driving on a motorway, do not stay too close to the car in front as, apart from being dangerous, its tyres will throw up stones and other debris that can chip the paint on your car.
If a breakdown should occur, the first rule is to remain calm and report to the police or a motoring association.
On motorways, there are emergency telephones at regular intervals.
In addition, the motorways are well patrolled by the police.
When something goes wrong on a country road, determine your location, then try to find a phone and call a garage or a motoring association.
38 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Do not give your car a lengthy warm-up.
When the engine starts to run smoothly, pull away from the kerb.
Contrary to popular belief, a lengthy warm-up wastes fuel and causes excessive wear.
Avoid fast stops and starts.
Whenever possible, stop gently and start slowly.
Fast acceleration wastes fuel.
Before moving away from the kerb, check to see that it is safe to move off, and when pulling into the kerb, give a timely and clear indication that you are doing so.
If you are involved in an accident, remember to write down the name and address of a witness, if there is one, and also to record the name and address of the other driver, owner of the vehicle, if different, and name and address of the other driver’s insurance company.
(SI 1.39) Task 40 239 words at 59 w.p.m.
for 4 minutes The interview is a 2-way process.
The interviewer should find out if you have the desired qualifications and suitable personality.
You must try to size up the job to see if it is what you are looking for.
Before the interview, the interviewer would have studied your Application Form and Job Sheet to find out what the job is about – what has to be done, where it has to be done, and how it has to be done.
He will then be ready to ask you a number of questions, designed to confirm statements made on your Application Form and to discover other facts about you.
When the most suitable person has been chosen, references will be checked.
This may be done by mail or by telephone.
If they are in order, the chosen person will be offered the job.
When you receive a letter offering you a post, see that you write back straight away, thanking the writer for the offer and giving your decision.
In the new job there are many things to learn.
No matter how well you have been trained, your new employer is sure to ask you to do one or 2 tasks in a different way.
When he does so, carry out all instructions he gives.
If, later on, you feel your way is better, there is usually no harm in saying that you think so.
(SI 1.33) 39 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Task 41 396 words at 56 w.p.m.
for 7 minutes A visit to India is a unique experience because this vast nation is a blend of races, religions and cultures; it is one of the most fascinating places in the world.
It is a country rich in tradition and legend, covering more than 5,000 years of history.
It is a land of great variety and contrast with tranquil temples and exciting bazaars, always a vivid mixture of colour and sounds.
We start at Delhi where we arrive at 6 am and go straight to our hotel, the Kanishka.
Today we are free to relax and wander at our leisure round the city, and after a good night’s sleep we join our coach for a tour of New Delhi and Old Delhi.
We visit the Red Fort, India’s largest mosque, the Jama Masjid, and the site where Gandhi was cremated.
We also have time to see the Raj Ghat, in Old Delhi, and the Qutab Minas and India Gate in New Delhi.
Next day, after breakfast, we leave by coach for Jaipur, the Pink City, where we arrive in the early afternoon.
We stay at the Hotel Ashok and, after checking in; go by coach to the Palace of the Winds, and the grand eighteenth-century observatory.
The following morning we will visit nearby Amber, a large hilltop palace-fortress which we enter in style on the back of an elephant.
The afternoon is free.
After breakfast we leave by coach for a visit to the Ghana Bird Sanctuary, one of the world’s finest bird reserves and also call at the deserted city of Fatehpur Sikri, one-time capital of Emperor Akbar.
In the afternoon we go on to Agra, city of the magnificent Taj Mahal, which we visit in the evening when it is said to be at its most beautiful.
Our hotel is the Galaxy Ashok.
We leave Agra after breakfast and stop at Sikandra to see the great mausoleum of Emperor Akbar.
The afternoon will be free in Delhi for any last-minute shopping, and we will have dinner before leaving for the airport.
This will be a holiday to remember and we are sure you will wish to go back and enjoy the beauty of Kashmir, the very tempting shops of Bombay, and laze on the tropical beaches of Goal.
(SI 1.43) 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit has been designed to help you increase your speed and accuracy, which can only be gained through several practice sessions 40 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Therefore endeavour to do all the practices until you are very comfortable with the keys.
5.0 SUMMARY Speed and accuracy is important in keyboarding.
One thing is to type and the other is to have a mailable document produced from what is typed.
This is where the untrained users of the keyboard are faced with problems.
Now that you are undergoing the training ensure you follow all the rudiments prescribed so that you can gain the proficiency needed.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 405 words at 67 w.p.m.
for 6 minutes Shorthand writers should always be ready to take dictation.
A notebook should be easily available at all times to take instant dictation.
If you place a rubber band around the used pages, the first blank sheet will be found quickly.
A pen or pencil can be slotted through the rubber band, and the book placed by the side of your typewriter ready for use as soon as you are asked to take dictation.
When you are taking dictation, concentrate on the content of the matter being dictated.
For easy reference, date each page of your shorthand notebook at the bottom.
Always have a wide margin so that you can mark very clearly any special instructions such as the urgency of a particular document, items to be verified, etc.
If the dictator is accustomed to giving additional instructions during or after dictating, it may be a good plan to have an extra shorthand notebook specifically for the purpose of making notes.
Never rely on your memory.
If additions have to be made to your shorthand notes, each one should be numbered and a numbered caret sign inserted in your notes at the appropriate point.
If the dictator pauses in the dictation to find some notes or to consider a point, use the time beneficially by reading through the shorthand already taken down – do not yawn, tap the desk with you pen or stare at the dictator.
If you feel at all unsure about being able to transcribe the notes accurately, clear up any queries immediately.
It is just possible that the dictator may be leaving the office for the remainder of the day and the finished documents may be urgent.
If you cannot read your notes immediately after the dictation, it is unlikely that you will be able to do 41 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING so later on in the day.
Ask if you may read through any part of your notes about which you feel unsure.
Shorthand, like typewriting, is a skill and the clarity with which you write and the accuracy of your transcript will be dependent on dedicated practice and a wide vocabulary.
In addition, you must be able to spell, punctuate and use words correctly.
(SI 1.44) 519 words at 64 w.p.m.
for 8 minutes If you were asked to list all activities you do just for pleasure of doing them, how many different items would there be in your list?
The chances are that the list most of us could compile would contain very few things.
Even if we could make a rather lengthy list, it seems likely that most of the activities would be those in which we engage on an irregular basis, if indeed there is sufficient repetition of any one activity to indicate any sort of schedule at all.
At first glance, it might seem that such a question has very little significance at all; yet, in a sense, it does seem to be important in the opinion of many employers.
Every job application form that I can ever remember filling in or studying always had the same question: what do you do with your spare time; how much time do you devote to each activity?
Regardless of how the question was worded, the main point of the question seems to be that it is important for a person not to devote too much time to work, the idea being that all work and no play makes you extremely dull.
I feel it must be true that spending several hours a week on activities that are in no way connected with your job, and deriving sheer pleasure and relaxation from doing so, must make a person a less dull individual; however, when I have discussed the subject with other people, it does seem that a great many individuals did not engage in any activity solely for the purpose of deriving pleasure from it.
Four persons, who gave me their views on the subject, said that they would be more than happy to take up a hobby of some kind if they could only find the time to research the various pastimes available, and then choose one that they thought might be something that would indeed provide complete relaxation.
The number of working wives and the number of husbands who work at two jobs, one of which is performed on a regular full-time basis and the other on regular part-time basis, seems to be ample testimony to the fact that a great many people do not have the time for engaging in hobbies at all, to say nothing of doing so for whatever pleasure they may derive from them.
Not that the wives and husbands with whom I have spoken feel that they are martyrs of some kind, but they usually point out the 42 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING economic necessity of having two breadwinners in the family.
It seems to me that it is not what a person is but what he does.
There is just one more point I must mention, and that is to remind you of how difficult it can be for older people to settle down when they retire, and this is especially so if they do not have a hobby.
(SI 1.33) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987) Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond,Archie and Cole-Mogford,Anne (1989) Applied Typing( 5th ed).
Maidenhead-Bershire England:McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 43 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING MODULE 2 FUNCTION KEYS I Apart from keyboarding, there are aspects of word processing that need to be learnt.
These aspects are vital in document production failing which an unmailable document would be the resultant output.
This module will therefore introduce you to them as stated below: Unit 1 Page Setup Unit 2 Line Spacing Unit 3 Use of White Space Unit 4 Page Numbering Unit 5 Headers and Footers UNIT 1 PAGE SETUP CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is going to introduce you to the technicalities in word processing.
Learning the skills leads to proficiency; therefore, as you are introduced to the functions practice, use the functions as directed so as to gain the desired proficiency.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Set desired margins • Select appropriate paper sizes • Apply selected margins and paper sizes to documents as desired 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Page Setup is an aspect of Microsoft Word that gives opportunity to users to select margins, paper size and layout of documents.
These are basic aspects in word processing for document production.
44 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING How Do I Get a Page Setup?
To get the Page Setup, do the following: Click on file on the menu bar and the following drop menu will appear Select Page Setup by clicking on Page Setup, once the cursor gets there it will highlight as shown in the above dropped down menu.
When you click on Page Setup the following dropped down menu will appear: 45 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Immediately after the blue part that contains?
and x, you will see three words reading Margins, Paper and Layout.
A click on any of these will produce a different setting.
When you click on Margins, you will see the setting shown below.
Let’s take the parts one after the order.
Scroll button After each word, there is a box to the right where setting and adjustment is done.
In every document spaces are left to the top, bottom, left and right for the purpose of fine presentation.
These spaces are referred to as margins.
The personal computer provides you the opportunity of setting these margins as desired.
The top, bottom, left and right margins are set in 1 inch or 2.5 cm but there are times the top, right and bottom margins may be set at ½ an inch, but on no account should the left margin be set on less than 1 inch except on special display work.
46 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING To set the margins, you either highlight the existing number in the box and type in a new number or you use the scroll buttons provided at the right of each box.
The upper button will increase the number, while the lower button will decrease the number.
The gutter function sets aside the part of the paper that need not be used when typing.
It may be provided for the purpose of punching holes for filing.
But this can also be achieved by increasing the number of inches left on the part you would like the document to be punched.
It is therefore advised that you leave the gutter setting at ‘0’.
For the purpose of practice you may increase the number upward and view the resultant effect on the preview.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Type any of the exercises in Module 1 and do the following: 1.
Set the left, right, top and bottom margins at 1 inch each 2.
Set the left margin at 1½ inches, top and bottom ½ an inch each, and right 1 inch.
3.
Set the gutter at 0 inch 4.
Set the gutter at 1 inch 5.
Repeat 1 to 4 at different stages before typing the same exercise in Module 1.
Compare your results and discuss with your colleagues in the class.
The next part is the Orientation, which gives you the opportunity of selecting the way you want the document to appear on the paper, either portrait or landscape.
All you need to do is to click on the desired type and a blue square will appear on the selected part as shown below.
The next part is From this part you could select the way you wish your document to appear.
In the box above, to the right you will notice a white box, inside 47 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING it reads “Normal” and to the right is a scroll button.
A click on the button will further present a dropped down menu through which selection can be made.
If you work with the normal, your document will appear in the normal way of presenting a document, which is the common way people are used to.
But apart from the normal way, there are other ways documents could be presented depending on the type of document.
Let’s see the other parts by clicking on the scroll button.
Click on each of them one after the other and see the resultant effect in the preview.
For now you may concentrate on using the normal pattern until later when others would be used.
The next part is the preview.
This section gives you a view of how the final document would look like.
So before you select OK ensure you are satisfied with the selected pattern.
But should you click on OK, you can always reselect what you desire and re-apply.
After selecting the desired pattern, you need to choose the aspect of the document to which you would want it applied.
Choose this from the portion reading “Apply to” as shown in the diagram below.
In the box under “apply to”, you have “whole document” and to the right of it is a scroll button.
If you want it apply to the whole document, leave it as it is, if not click on the scroll button and select the desired part.
A click on the scroll button would appear thus: 48 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING But where you need the selections to affect only a part in the whole document select that part by highlighting it.
When this is done the resultant effect would be: What is Highlighting?
Highlight means to select.
To achieve this, take the cursor to the beginning point of where you want to highlight and left click, hold down the button and drag it to the end point of selection and release your finger.
Upon your releasing your finger, that part will appear dark.
See the next box.
At the end of all selections, click ok at the bottom of the dropped down menu: Another way of setting the margin is to: • Double click on the top of the ruler 49 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING The Ruler R The ruler shows settings, also you can make indentation and tab changes directly to the ruler to eliminate the display of dialog boxes every time you want to change an indentation or tab value.
Click any where on the ruler to add a tab stop after you select the appropriate tab from the tab selection area.
To remove a tab, drag the tab stop down off the ruler.
By dragging an indentation handle, you can change a paragraph's indentation on the file.
Double click the bottom of the ruler to display the tabs dialog box, and double click the top of the ruler to display the page setup dialog box.
We will discuss this later.
Once again go through each of the discussions above and demonstrate each section on your computer as illustrated.
The next major part in the Page Setup is “Paper”.
A click on “ paper” will present this: The concentration here will be on the selection of different paper sizes and print options.
The procedure for the preview session is the same all the time as the one discussed above.
At this level set the paper source as default tray (automatically).
It is always on this, so you may not need any adjustment.
The table below shows standard paper sizes 50 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Sizes of Papers and Their Uses Paper Size Uses (International Inches standard) Computer measurement A4 portrait 8¼ x 8.25 x Business letters, 11¾ 11.75 memoranda, agenda, minutes of meeting, report, literary documents etc.
A4 Landscape 11¾ x 11.75 x Tabulated statements 8¼ 8.25 A5 Portrait 5⅞ x 5.88 x 8.25 Short letters, short 8¼ memoranda, A5 Landscape 8¼ x 8.25 x 5.88 Short notices etc.
5⅞ A6 postcard 5⅞ x 5.88 x 4.13 Postcards index and, 4⅛ receipts.
2/3 A4 Portrait 8⅞ x 8.25 x 7.8 4⅛ From the dialog box shown above select the desired paper size.
When you click on the Print Option the following dialog box will appear.
51 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING In this box we may only concern ourselves now with the section of Options for Duplex Printing If it is only the odd numbers in the document that is you require, click on the small box in front of the odd numbers and if it is even numbers you do same in the box in front of the even numbers.
A click will show a little tick.
See below: When you are satisfied with your selection, click on OK. 4.0 CONCLUSION It is very important that a user of the word processor learns how to set his/her document to meet the desired specification.
This is to say that knowing how to use the keyboard is not enough in achieving the proficiency required in word processing rather, it is only a stepping 52 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING stone to the proficiency required.
This calls for a thorough understanding of the skills required in document presentation.
5.0 SUMMARY Page Setup is a function in Microsoft Word that gives the user the opportunity to set his/her documents in the way and manner that he/she desires.
To launch Page Setup, click on file on the menu bar and follow the directions in the box.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Type Task 41 and: 1.
Set the paper size on landscape 2.
Set the paper size on portrait 3.
Set the top, bottom, left and right margins at 1 inch each 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond, Archie and Cole-Mogford,Anne (1989).
Applied Typing(5th ed.
).Maidenhead-Bershire,England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 53 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 2 LINE SPACING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The function of Line Spacing is to give you the opportunity of setting spaces between lines of typing the way you like.
The type of document determines the type of line spacing that would be set.
Well set line spacing enhances the understanding of the information presented in the document and the reverse is the case when a document is not well set.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you will be able to: • Set line spacing in different ways • Determine appropriate line spacing for a document 3.0 MAIN CONTENT To launch line spacing in Microsoft Word, click on Format at the menu bar Click on format The following dropped down menu will appear: 54 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Click on paragraph, and the following dialog box will appear: In the dialog box, locate line spacing.
Underneath is a box specifying the types of line spacing.
Click on the spacing you desire and click OK. 55 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING On the left of line spacing underneath, you have Before and After.
It is advised that you leave the setting at 0 pt except on special a display in which you may need to increase the point (pt).
An increase in the point increases the spaces between lines irrespective of the line spacing set SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES Type a document of your choice.
Highlight the document and select each of the line spacing and view the resultant effect.
Compare the results and share your comments with your colleagues Repeat what you have just done and set the spacing at different points.
Share your observation(s) with your colleagues.
4.0 CONCLUSION Line spacing is used to demarcate lines of typing.
The nature of the document determines the type of line spacing that should be selected.
Later in this course you will be taught the appropriate line spacing for different documents.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has introduced you to line spacing; how to launch it and how it is applied in a document.
Apart from line spacing, the unit also emphasised the use of spacing in terms of points, which further space the spaces between lines irrespective of the line spacing selected.
A further practice of this will enhance proficiency.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
State the difference between line spacing and spacing 2.
Explain the usefulness of line spacing and spacing in a document 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond, Archie and Cole-Mogford,Anne (1989).
Applied Typing(5th ed).Maidenhead – Bershire England:McGraw-Hill Book Company(UK) Ltd. 56 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 57 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 3 THE USE OF WHITE SPACES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION We are going to discuss two types of White Spaces in this unit.
One is the inbuilt white space in Microsoft Word and the other is provided for specific uses in a document.
Read the presentations carefully.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • Identify the white spaces • Utilise the white spaces 3.0 MAIN CONTENT White space This is the original white space which acts as a demarcation between pages.
It enables the user to identify different pages in a document.
You can hide the white space by clicking on it.
When it is hidden, it 58 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING appears thus: Hidden white space To regain the white space, click on the thin line.
The other white space is purposely created in a document.
It is mostly used in documents prepared for distance learning.
The purpose is to provide enough space for learners to make side notes when they are reading.
See below: White space If you look at the above document, you will discover that the spaces with arrows are wider than the inside margin spaces.
As earlier mentioned, the spaces are provided for side notes.
The outside margin on BED 111 is an example i.e.
this material you are reading.
59 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING This is only an example, it does not mean that the white space would always form the outside margins; the margins where it would be provided are to be determined by the person creating the document.
But it is important to determine the number of spaces that make up a white space.
A white space should be set at a minimum of 2 inches and maximum of 3 inches.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1.
Identify the original white space in your document.
2.
Hide the white space.
3.
Create a document with a white space for note taking.
4.0 CONCLUSION When typing, it is good to leave your settings to show the white space because it will easily show you where each page ends and where another begins.
Documents that are prepared for adult learners should be provided with white spaces for note taking, especially if they are prepared for distance learners.
5.0 SUMMARY There are two types of white spaces; the original white space that comes with Microsoft Word and the purposely built white space for note taking.
The first is used to demarcate pages while the second is meant for learners to jot their side notes while reading.
The white space for note taking should be set at a minimum of 2 inches (5cm) and maximum of 3 inches (7½ cm).
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Create a two page document and set white margins for the reader’s jotting.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond,Archie and Cole-Mogford, Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).
Maidenhead – Bershire England:MacGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. (5th Edition) 60 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 61 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 4 PAGE NUMBERING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last few units you were introduced to Page Setup, Line Spacing and White Spaces.
In addition to these functions, there are others that are going to be discussed amongst which is Page Numbering.
Why page numbering?
Have you ever had a mix up of documents and you tried to sort them out?
You will discover that for you to succeed in such sorting, you will need title of the document and more importantly the page numbering which will enable you know where each page of the document falls into.
This only helps to highlight the importance of page numbering.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Launch page numbering functions • Select appropriate page numbering formats • Apply page numbering on a document 3.0 MAIN CONTENT In page numbering, the page number should not appear on the first page in all documents, but the next page should read page 2 which by implication shows that the first page is page 1 though not shown as 1.
How do we launch page numbering?
This is can be done as shown below: Click on insert on the menu bar and a dialog box will appear thus: 62 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Click on page numbers, a dialog box will further appear thus: Now study the dialog box above, you have position, alignment, preview, show number on first page, format, OK and cancel.
The functions of each of these will be explained.
Position gives you the opportunity to select the portion of the page where you would like the numbering to appear, usually top or bottom.
Click on the scroll button at the side to show the available options and select as desired.
Preview shows how the document would look like, and when you are satisfied with the selected option(s) as previewed then click on OK .
Alignment helps to determine the side on which the numbering should appear.
A click on the scroll button will produce this: Select as desired.
For example let’s select “Inside”.
It will appear thus: 63 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Now let’s click on “outside”.
The result will be: What do you observe?
• The numbering is at the bottom of the page • The preview formats are in book form.
• The numbering of the inside page numbering is appearing at the right hand margin of the left page and left hand margin of the right page.
Since it is in book form the said margins form the inside margin.
• The appearance of the margins set as outside margins are opposite of the inside margins.
To round up this demonstration, let’s set the page numbering at the center.
The following will be the resultant effect.
There is a box before the words “show number on first page”.
If you click in the box and it shows a tick as in the box below it means you want the numbering to appear on the first page.
However if you do not want the numbering to appear on the first page click on that box to remove the tick, which will appear thus: 64 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING When you are satisfied with these selections, click on OK and it will apply on the document.
But should you mistakenly click on page numbering and it is not needed, click on cancel and continue your work.
Repeat each of this stages several times and ensure you master each function.
Compare your work with that of your colleagues Another important aspect we need to discuss is the Format.
The function of the format is to enable the user select the desired format for pagination.
When you click on format, the following dialog box will appear: The number format in the above dialog box shows 1, 2, 3, a click on the scroll button will produce other formats thus: Click on the desired format and click on OK.
This box shows the various formats available for page numbering.
You may want the page numbering to appear in Arabic, Roman numeral or in letters of the alphabet.
A look at the Page Number Format box above shows page numbering.
Use the scroll button to indicate the number at which you wish the numbering to start.
65 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Type a document and apply the page numbering format above.
Should you encounter any problem, ask questions.
4.0 CONCLUSION To master the use of page numbering you need to practice the explanation given above.
Do not assume but practice as directed and you will achieve your goal.
Give your self tasks and practice before going on to the task on TMA.
5.0 SUMMARY Page numbering is an important aspect of any document because it enables the user of the document to sort the pages for easy reading, especially when the pages fall apart.
Microsoft Word does not only provide the function, but also provides alternative formats for page numbering.
In which case, the page numbering can be in Arabic, Roman numerals or letters of the alphabet.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) If you were asked to list all activities you do just for the pleasure of doing them, how many different items would there be in your list?
The chances are that the list most of us could compile would contain very few things.
Even if we could make a rather lengthy list, it seems likely that most of the activities would be those in which we engage on an irregular basis, if indeed there is sufficient repetition of any one activity to indicate any sort of schedule at all.
At first glance, it might seem that such a question has very little significance at all; yet, in a sense, it does seem to be important in the opinion of many employers.
Every job application form that I can ever remember filling in or studying always had the same question: what do you do with your spare time; how much time do you devote to each activity?
Regardless of how the question was worded, the main point of the question seems to be that it is important for a person not to devote too much time to work, the idea being that all work and no play makes you extremely dull.
I feel it must be true that spending several hours a week on activities that are in no way connected with your job, and deriving sheer pleasure and relaxation from doing so, must make a person a less dull individual; however, when I have discussed the subject with other people, it does 66 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING seem that a great many individuals did not engage in any activity solely for the purpose of deriving pleasure from it.
Four persons, who gave me their views on the subject, said that they would be more than happy to take up a hobby of some kind if they could only find the time to research the various pastimes available, and then choose one that they thought might be something that would indeed provide complete relaxation.
The number of working wives and the number of husbands who work at two jobs, one of which is performed on a regular full-time basis and the other on a regular part-time basis, seems to be ample testimony to the fact that a great many people do not have the time for engaging in hobbies at all, to say nothing of doing so for whatever pleasure they may derive from them.
Not that the wives and husbands with whom I have spoken feel that they are martyrs of some kind, but they usually point out the economic necessity of having two breadwinners in the family.
It seems to me that it is not the person but what he does.
There is just one more point I must mention, and that is to remind you of how difficult it can be for older people to settle down when they retire, and this is especially so if they do not have a hobby.
1.
Type the above document.
2.
Insert page numbering, using the outside format and let the numbering be at the top.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond,Archie and Cole-Mogford,Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).
Maidenhead – Bershire England McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. N IIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concept., Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 67 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 5 HEADERS AND FOOTERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This aspect of word processing helps to enhance your document.
It makes your document looks great.
For example you may want a particular word or sentence to appear as the Header or Footer of all the pages of your document.
You do not need to keep typing it at every page, which may be tedious to do; rather you can use either the footer or header in achieving this.
This is what this unit is out to teach you.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to: • Identify headers and footers in any document • Create footers or headers in a document • Manipulate headers or footers in a document 3.0 MAIN CONTENT How do I launch my header and footer?
Click on view on the menu bar.
It will show the above dropped down menu.
From the dropped down menu click on header and footer and the following dropped down menu will appear: 68 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING You will observe a broken rectangle with a header at the top and a cursor at the left top corner inside the rectangle which indicates where the typing line starts.
There is another long bar below the rectangular box, this carries other functions that could be used along with header and footer.
At the end of typing, click on close on the bar and it will automatically appear on all the pages of typing.
Let’s see the function(s) of the sub menu on the bar.
A click on insert autotext shows the above dropped down menu, they are automatic text.
With a click on any of them, the text will automatically appear in the header or footer box depending on the one that is in operation at a time.
For example if you click on page x of y the following resultant effect would occur: 69 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING This indicates page 2 out of 3 pages.
At a glance you know the total number of pages the document has and the particular page you are currently on.
Check your progress Click on insert auto text in your header and footer and apply each of the texts in the dropped down menu in your document.
What did you observe?
Write down your observation(s) and repeat same.Again write down your observation(s) and compare with the first.
Are you happy with your progress?
Now let’s proceed.
A click on the highlighted icon will automatically insert page number(s).
Now go to your computer and try it.
Did you achieve the same result?
If not, try again and if yes, repeat to master the function.
70 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING A click on the highlighted icon will insert the total number of pages.
A click on the highlighted icon (page number format) will produce a dropped down menu as shown on the right.
This box will enable you to format page numbers as you desire.
Click on OK when you have selected the formatting .
A click on the highlighted icon would automatically insert the current date.
A click on the highlighted icon will automatically insert the current time on the document.
71 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING A click on the highlighted icon will produce a page setup dialog box.
I hope you are now familiar with the page setup environment.
From this dialog box, you can reset the margins, paper size and layout of the document.
A click on the highlighted icon will either show or hide document text.
A click on the highlighted icon will enable you to switch from header to footer and from footer to header.
A click on the highlighted icon will show previous as indicated above.
72 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING A click on the highlighted icon will show the next as indicated above.
A click on the highlighted icon (close) closes the header and footer.
Did you understand the presentations?
Don’t be confused, a little practice will lead to more understanding.
Now, practice all the presentations above on your computer.
Are you confused, stop for a while and go through the presentation again and continue.
4.0 CONCLUSION To gain more efficiency on the use of headers and footers, practice more.
Create your document and wordings for headers or footers.
It is only through several practices can you gain the desired proficiency.
5.0 SUMMARY Headers and footers are used to enhance documentation.
They are created by clicking on view on the menu bar, and clicking on headers and footers from the dropped down menu.Now follow the direction to achieve your goal.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Type Task 29 and: 1.
Type “Introduction to Keyboarding” as the header 2.
Use page x of y as the footer 73 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond,Archie and Cole-Mogford,Anne (1989).
Applied Typing(5th ed).. Maidenhead–Bershire England:McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 74 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING MODULE 3 FUNCTION KEYS II This module will introduce you to more functions that are used in Word Processing.
They are: Unit 1 Templates Unit 2 Document View Unit 3 Line and Page Break Unit 4 Print UNIT 1 TEMPLATES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Templates are samples of various documents.
Creating a document is usually a difficult task for most persons, especially those who did not undergo the training before jumping into word processing.
The problem of presentation usually lies with meeting the international standards in line with typewriting skills.
Microsoft Word programmers came up with some samples of some commonly used documents to ease the presentation of such documents by the users.
All the users need to do is to change the wordings.
This unit will expatiate on this.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Launch templates • Identify templates • Use templates 3.0 MAIN CONTENT How do I launch a template?
There are two ways to it.
75 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING First, as you launch the Microsoft Word environment, the task pane will appear on the right side of the screen thus: Task pane Below is a bold look of the task pane: 76 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Open a document – This shows recently opened documents.
To go to any of the documents, all the user needs to do is to click on the desired document and it will open.
This is a short cut to the document.
New – Any of the documents listed underneath can be created.
When you click on “ blank document”, it gives you opportunity to work on a new document; a click on “blank web page” takes you to the Web page.
It is a short cut.
Blank e-mail message is a short cut to e-mail message, a click on it automatically takes you there.
With these short cuts you may not need to go through the longer process.
New from existing document – This gives you opportunity to open a document that has been saved.
A click on it takes you to the save document environment as shown below: New from template – There are different templates presented here; templates for memos and general templates.
Should you want to type a memo and you are confused on how to present it, just click on the memo template, which will automatically give you different styles of memos.
A click on memo wizard will produce the following: 77 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING To the left, you have start, style, title, heading fields, recipient, closing fields, header/footer and finish.
A click on each of these will give you the opportunity to effect the desired information.
For example a click on style will produce the following result: All the user needs to do is to select the desired pattern – professional, contemporary or elegant.
A click on any of the sub titles on the left will 78 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING give you the opportunity to effect the necessary information as you desire.
Now let’s work on the general template.
A click on it will produce this: At the top of the dialog box, you have general, legal pleadings, letters & faxes, mail merge, memos and other documents.
A click on each of these will give you a different dialog box, which produces other documents for you to select on.
Like the face of the dialog box above it shows the face of the general dialog box.
Now let’s see the face of the dialog box of letters and faxes: 79 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING A click on any of these will further produce a dialog box.
Follow the direction(s) and you will achieve the desired goal.
Through this process, you can easily mail merge by clicking on mail merge, and it will appear thus: Point to any of the icons and view the preview on the right, on satisfaction, click on OK or double click the desired icon.
Then follow the directives.
This is a short cut to mail merge.
Where the template does not meet your need, you can add your own information or improvise.
The second way is to click on view on the menu bar and click on task pane for it to appear on the right hand side of the screen.
Practice working with all the templates and you will be happy you did.
80 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 4.0 CONCLUSION To effectively use the template, follow the guide lines given once you click on the template.
And where you can not get the information required you can either improvise or supply your information.
5.0 SUMMARY Templates are samples of documents that are commonly used in day to day business.
They serve as short cuts in document creation.
There are two ways of launching a template in Microsoft Word; either it appears on the right hand margin as soon as you launch the Microsoft Word environment or you click on view on the menu bar and click on task pane.
The second method is used when it is no more visible on the screen.
A good use of it enhances speed in document creation.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Click on the various memo templates and write out your observations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond, Archie and Cole-Mogford, Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5thed).
Maidenhead-Bershire England:McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd.. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concept., Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 81 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 2 DOCUMENT VIEW CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The past units dwelled on how to create a document.
It is also important to view the document created and know if it is well presented or not.
To save costs, it is always advisable to view the document on the screen to ensure that it meets with the desired layout before it is printed out on paper, which serves as the hard copy.
This unit will therefore take you through how you will view your documents before printing.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Launch a document view • View a document 3.0 MAIN CONTENT To view a document, click on view on the menu bar and it will produce the following: 82 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING From the dropped down menu, the frequently used document views are normal, web layout, print layout and outline.
Now let’s click on each and see the resultant effect.
Normal View 83 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Web Layout Print Layout 84 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Outline If you look at the different views above, you will observe that each view has its unique form.
Among the four views stated above two will be further highlighted, the outlines of which show dots to indicate the lines of typing.
For normal typing, the document should be set at print layout because it gives a full view of how the typed document would look like when it is printed on paper.
Apart from using this process, there is a short cut, which is shown as follows: Normal View short cut Web Layout View short cut 85 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Print Layout View short cut Outline View short cut The highlighted parts; where the arrows are pointing to indicate the point to click on to give the resultant effect.
To locate this in your computer, locate the start menu at the bottom part of the screen and at the third row above the start menu at the left hand corner you will find the short cut as shown in the above displays.
4.0 CONCLUSION To have a good grip of this function, practice more of it and compare your results with the displays given in this text.
You can also discuss with your colleagues.
Should you encounter any problem, go through the presentations above once more and repeat your practice.
5.0 SUMMARY Document view is an essential function that gives opportunity to a computer operator to view his/her document before printing.
There are four common document views – normal view, web layout view, print layout view and outline view.
The commonly used document view is the print layout view because it shows the exact way the document will appear on paper after printing.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Why is document view necessary in word processing?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. 86 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Drummond,and Cole-Mogford ,Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).
Maidenhead – Bershire England:McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 87 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 3 LINE AND PAGE BREAKS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last unit emphasised four different ways in which you can view documents – normal view, web layout view, print layout view and outline view.
Through these views the computer user or operator is able to ascertain the document’s position before it is finally used.
This unit will introduce you to another function that will help to further enhance your documents.
This will be treated as Line and Page Break.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Utilise line and page breaks in a document.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT When you click on the paragraph from format, a dialog box showing the line and page breaks tab is displayed: 88 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Note: As you click on paragraph two major headings are shown within the dialog box – “indents and spacing” and “line and page breaks”.
To get the exact dialog box above; click on “line and page breaks” when you get to the paragraph environment.
We can briefly talk about the sub titles on the dialog box.
A widow is a paragraph's last line that prints at the top of the next page, and an orphan is a paragraph's first line that prints at the bottom of a page.
Most of the time, widowed and orphaned lines look incomplete.
If you click the widow/orphan control option, Word adjusts page breaks, if necessary, so that two or more paragraph lines always begin a page and so that two or more paragraph lines always end a page.
The “keep lines together”, check box ensures that a page break never breaks the selected paragraph.
The “keep with next” check box ensures that a page break never appears between the current paragraph and the next.
The “page break before” check box forces a page break before the selected paragraph even if a page break would not normally appear for several more lines.
Another important aspect that needs to be discussed in this dialog box is the “tab” option.
The tab option is used to set the tab.
Tab is the abbreviation for tabulation.
In word processing the use of tabs is 89 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING inevitable.
Tabs are used for paragraphing or for tabular jobs.
A tab controls the vertical spacing for certain items in your text.
Tab Settings Click on format from the menu bar, click on the paragraph dialog box, click on the tab command.
Option Description Tab stop position allows you to enter individual measurement values such as 25” to represent one-fourth of an inch.
After you type a value, press set to add that value to the list of tab settings.
To clear a tab stop, select the value and click clear.
Click clear all to clear the entire tab list.
Left left-aligns text at the tab stop (the default).
Center centers text at the tab stop.
Right right-aligns text at the tab stop Decimal aligns lists of numbers by ensuring that their decimal points align with each other.
Leader /none Displays a series of hyphens inside the tabs.
Displays a series of underlines inside the tabs.
90 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Character Spacing You could determine the space you want between characters before or after typing.
To achieve this do the following: • Click on format.
• From the drop down menu, click on font • From the dialog box, click on character spacing Note that the computer is already formatted for normal character spacing, you only need to change it if you desire to use spacing out side the normal spacing.
4.0 CONCLUSION In addition to the format stated above, tabs can also be set on the ruler, by clicking directly on the ruler the spot where you want the tab to stop.
A click will form a small dark ‘L’ shape; and to remove, left click on the “L” shape, hold the mouse down and drag it to the extreme left corner to meet the “L” shape in that corner.
See example of a tab set on ruler: To remove tabs, move each of the ‘“L” shap e to this point.
Left click and d The arrows are pointing to the small “L” shapes where the tabs are set.
From the setting, the tabs are set on ½, 2, 3 and 4 on the ruler.
The implication is that once the tab key is pressed, the cursor would automatically move to ½ and pressing the tab key from ½ moves the cursor to 2, pressing, it again moves the cursor to 3 and pressing it 91 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING again moves cursor to 4 .
This means you have given a command of where the cursor should go each time you press the tab key .
5.0 SUMMARY Line and page break, tabs play a unique role in document creation.
A good setting of line and page breaks makes the paragraphs and continuation pages of a document to appear neatly.
While the setting of the tabs enhance tabular work.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 1.
State the usefulness of line and page break in word processing 2.
How would tabular set enrich a document?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond,Archie and Cole-Mogford, Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).
Maidenhead–Bershire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 92 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 4 PRINTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The use of paper work cannot be totally eliminated from the business environment.
The use of paper documents calls for printing; which is the only way hard copies of documents typed can be produced.
A hard copy is a copy of document printed on paper.
Can you recall how many printed documents you have come across recently?
If not, you may recall your admission letter.
Apart from your seeing your name in the soft copy among the list of students given admission on NOUN web site, you were also given a hard copy of your admission letter, which invariably served as an evidence for your admission.
This unit will show you how to print your document on paper.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Select a print format • Print a simple document 3.0 MAIN CONTENT When do we print?
Print after you have previewed your document.
To preview means you have to look at your document in a paper format while still in the computer to ascertain the correctness of the layout in the way it is designed before sending it to print.
There are two major ways of launching a print preview.
You may either use the short cut on the tool bar 93 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING or click on file on the menu bar, and click on print preview.
Print Preview will appear thus: 94 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING The purpose of bringing this part out is to highlight the function of each icon.
A click on this icon will result to printing.
But the printer type needs to have been installed in the computer failing which printing will not take place, it will rather produce a dialog box alerting you that the printer is not installed.
The same thing happens when the printer is not connected to power.
A click on this produces a magnifier.
Take the magnifier to the document and click on it; this will make the document to be enlarged for view.
Should you want to enlarge it further re-click on it in the same manner.
A click on this icon makes you view your document a page at a time.
To scroll from page to page, you can use the scroll button on the right hand corner of the screen or use the four directional arrow keys.
95 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Scroll buttons A click on the upper scroll button moves the document to the previous page, and a scroll of the lower button moves the document to the next page.
Use this icon when you want to view more than a page at a time.
A click on it produces a dialog box through which the required number of pages required to be viewed at a time is selected.
Let’s assume we are selecting 1 x 2 pages.
In this case you would click on only the first box in the dialog box and the resultant effect would be: 96 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING And if it is 2 x 2 pages it will appear thus: You may ask: “How would I know 1 x 2 and 2 x 2?” As you point your cursor on the sub icon of the icon of multiple pages 1 x 2, 2 x 2 etc would appear; It depends on how the icons are highlighted.
97 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING shows the percentage of document width.
The percentage could be increased or decreased by using the scroll button at the side.
Click on this icon if you want to view ruler.
Click on this icon if you want the document to shrink and fit into a page.
You should use it when you know that the document would not normally fit into a page and you want such a document to go into a page.
A click on this icon enables you to view your document in full screen.
A click on this icon closes the view and takes you back to the original document.
Click on this icon when you need clarification.
Through this process necessary adjustments are made on the document.
If you are satisfied, proceed.
A click on the print option would produce a dialog box thus: 98 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING There are a few things that we need to discuss in the above dialog box.
Name The name may not all the time be “HP Laser Jet 1200 Series PCL” as shown in the dialog box.
The type of printer in use would determine the name that would be in the box name.
Where several printers have been installed in the computer, use the scroll button by the side to select the right printer, failing which there would be print failure.
Page range Click on “all” when printing all the pages in the document; click on “current page” when printing the page where the cursor is; click on “selection” when printing only the highlighted part(s) in a document and 99 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING click on “pages” when printing a selection of pages and indicate the pages in the box in front thus: 12 – 26.
Copies Indicate the number of copies required in the box, either by typing it in or by using the scroll button.
Click on “collate” to show a tick, if you want the machine to do that and if not re-click on it to remove the tick.
Under “print what”, use the scroll button to select what you want to print.
If it is a document, you do not need any selection since “document” is already selected.
The print option in the dialog box is requesting for how the printing should be.
A click on the scroll button would produce this: Select “all pages in range” if printing all pages in the document; select “odd pages” if printing just the odd pages and select “even pages” if printing only even pages.
The “option” allow you to further format your print as desired.
A click on the option button will produce: 100 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING At this stage, you may not need to do any adjustment here until later when you have been exposed to some other topics.
“Pages per sheet” in the above box indicates the numbers of document pages that may be printed on a sheet.
Click on the scroll button and select the number of pages needed on a sheet.
Use “scale to paper size” when you want the document to fit into a particular size of paper.
Click on the scroll button and select as you desire.
Click on “ok” if you are satisfied with all selections.
As soon as this is clicked the document goes on printing.
But remember to put papers into the tray.
When you no more require printing, click on “cancel” to leave the print environment.
101 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Go to your computer and practice each of these.
Should you encounter any problem, stop and go through the presentations once more before you continue.
Remember it is only through practice you can gain proficiency.
4.0 CONCLUSION To reduce the number of papers wasted during printing, always preview your work before printing.
What do you need to look out for?
Check the size of paper, margins and general display of the document.
It is always better to waste a little more time in adjusting your document before sending it for printing than printing before adjustment.
Wasting of papers is a result of inefficiency.
5.0 SUMMARY Printing is the only way a soft copy can be duplicated on paper.
Paper work is sometimes vital in business and therefore we can not do without having hard copies of some documents.
To access the print dialog box, you could click on file and access or use short cuts, either Ctrl + P or a click on the printer icon on the menu bar.
Any method of launching the printer’s box is acceptable, it all depends on the one the user finds most convenient.
Before clicking on OK in the print box ensure that you have supplied the necessary information.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Explain the usefulness of the following icon in a printer’s dialog box: 102 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond, Archie and Cole-Mogford, Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).
Maidenhead–Bershire England:McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 103 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING MODULE 4 PRODUCTION All that you have learnt in modules 1 to 3 are preliminaries which will enhance the main work.
A good knowledge of keyboarding and different functions in Microsoft Word is the basic knowledge required in production work.
At this point you are going to be introduced to production work in word processing.
Production work is the main documents typed.
But to make this document presentable, some intricacies are required, which is why the need for the basic and elementary parts of production are critical.
For example, should you need to type a business letter or memorandum, you won’t need to be told how to set margins, or the type of heading or paragraph that you should use, all that would be expected is a good document that is presentable.
And making a document presentable would involve all that we have discussed earlier.
This module is designed to teach: Unit 1 Manuscript Unit 2 Simple Editing Unit 3 Paragraphs Unit 4 Headings Unit 5 Formatting/Other Functions UNIT 1 THE MANUSCRIPT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Many people still do not know how to use the personal computer all on their own, especially in the developing countries.
Some who know how to do a few things on the computer find it easier to do so by looking at the manuscript and not by working directly on the computer.
This invariably indicates that the use of manuscripts is still very much on the high side in our society.
One way or the other, we all work with 104 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING manuscripts.
It therefore means we need to study it so as to be able to cope with it accurately.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Interpret the printer’s signs • Type a simple manuscript 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Meaning of Manuscript A Manuscript is the representation of spoken sound on paper with the use of a pen.
A manuscript is usually hand written.
The art of writing with pen can not be removed from communication.
Most times we need to write with pen and paper before the material is typed out with the machine.
During this process of writing, the writer has to make one adjustment or the other.
In typing, these adjustments have to be put in the proper order.
The signs that are usually used by the writer are referred to as the printer's signs.
Some of such printer's signs are given below.
105 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING The Printer’s Signs/Proofreader’s Marks Type the following: Exercise 1 A manuscript is the representation of spoken sound on Caps paper with the use of a pen.
A manuscript is usually hand written.
The art of writing with a pen can not be removed NP from communication.
Most times we need to write with pen and paper before the material is typed out with the machine.
During this process of writing, the writer has to make one adjustment or the other.
In typing these adjustments have to be put in the proper order.
The signs that are usually used by the writer are referred to as the printer's signs.
Some of such printer's signs are given below.
106 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Exercise 2 central processing unit (cpu) - The CPU of a personal caps computer contains the power unit.
The CPU contains the processor, main memory, disk drives and parts for output trs or input devices.
The processor unit helps to process the changing data by input the input data into machine code in the language the computer would understand.
The computer can not read our normal way of writing; it works in BINARY form, accepts ONE (1) or ZERO (0).
The main memory helps to store informa tion and releases it when retrieved.
The disk drive is the compartment provided for a floppy disk/diskette which is used for external storage.
run on There is also the zip drive and CDROM which are the compartments for zip and compact disk used for large documents.
Exercise 3 Proofreading is a skill and like any skill it must be practiced.
If you are to become efficient at spotting errors of all kinds, it is necessary to undergo training in the art of proofreading.
To be effective a proof reader needs to be able to spell and punctuate correctly, and to know the stet basic rules of grammar, as well as acceptable typewriting display and layout.
107 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING If the transcription is from shorthand notes, it is a good plan to check the transcript very closely with the notes to make certain that nothing has been omitted.
Keep one finger following the shorthand notes with a finger of the other hand following each word.
It is not a question of just reading through a completed piece of typescript in case a typing error may have been overlooked; it is often necessary to ask the help of a colleague to read through the copy to make certain that figures are correct, that nothing has been omitted, or that unreadable handwriting has been deciphered correctly.
It may be that you are an audio typist and that you have to listen to a recording on a transcribing machine.
You will need to take great care when proofreading, and, in order to check certain details, it may be necessary for you to play part of the recording again.
caps If you are proofreading from vdu, it may be helpful to use NP the cursor to guide the eye across the screen, and to vary bold the density of the brightness on the screen.
Make sure that you have used the correct stationery, typed accurately any labels or envelopes required, and attached any enclosure before the documents are placed for signature.
4.0 CONCLUSION It is always better to read through your manuscript before typing.
This will enable you get familiar with the hand writing and at the same time let you have a good knowledge of all the instructions.
If you don’t read the manuscript before setting out to type you may run into the problem of reduced speed in completing the task on the typed copy.
Take particular care with words that sound alike but are spelt differently – homophones, e.g., check and cheque; aloud and allowed.
If you have any doubt as to which spelling is required, check the meaning of the word in a dictionary.
5.0 SUMMARY A manuscript is the representation of spoken sound on paper with the use of a pen.
The legibility of what is written is dependant of the writer’s hand writing.
This therefore calls for a careful study of handwriting to be able to understand what is written.
People have different ways of 108 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING writing and not all handwriting may be appealing at a time.
Also you can not totally condemn the way an individual writes.
Writing varies from person to person.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Type the following: The ability to speak effectively is nowhere put to a more rigorous test than in a meeting.
The following rules-of- thumb illustrate areas involving such skills: Listen first Each meeting develops its own climate.
Its bold temperature may become boiling or frosty.
where sympathies or antipathies lie By listening and waiting, you will be able to assess not only the general climate, stet but also the moods and attitudes of individuals.
Test the temperature first, before diving in!
See where the land lies Most meetings tend to comprise bold sub-groups or caucuses allied to achieve common objectives.
While speaking or providing feedback, others may reveal .
Timing If your contribution is to be important , then bold timing the moment to speak is all-important.
Personal judgement is effective here to perceive when a developed argument proposed by another is falling, or when the ground has been prepared and participants are sympathetic or amenable.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London, Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond, Archie and Cole-Mogford,Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).
Maidenhead – Bershire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 109 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 2 SIMPLE EDITING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we discussed the manuscript.
From the manuscripts presented it would be observed that there were some transpositions, deletions and restatement of words.
In typing also, there are times you may need to change or transpose words or make a total change in the construction of tenses.
All these call for a re-typing and some times a re-display.
This unit is therefore designed to educate you on how corrections can be effected.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Locate the tools for computer editing • Effect simple corrections on soft copy documents 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Meaning Editing means to correct or to set the document in the way you want it.
Some simple editing tools are: • Insert & delete text • Copy, cut and paste • Locate text fast • Selecting text • Auto correct and auto formatting If you have already typed a text and you want to replace the typed text with a new one all you need to do is to highlight the text and press the insert key on the control keys and type the new text.
110 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING To delete already typed text, highlight the text to be deleted and press the delete key on the control keys.
You may also use the back space key (←) on the keyboard.
To highlight, take the cursor to the beginning point of what you want to highlight, left click on that point, and hold the left button and drag through the position of all you want to highlight then release your finger and it will show a dark shade.
E.g.
THE MAN IS To copy a text that is already typed, highlight the text, click on edit on the menu file.
From the dropped down menu click on copy.
See picture: Step 1 highlight the text Step 2 click on edit on the menu file.
111 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Step 3 From the dropped down menu click on copy Or click on the short cut on the menu file: Copy paste Cut Next, take the cursor to the point where you want the text and click on paste either from edit or short cut.
If you want to cut, use the same procedure, the difference between cut and paste is that when you cut the text will change its position entirely from the original position, but when you copy, the text remains in its original position, it only duplicates itself in another environment.
Locating a text To locate a text fast, select edit/find; a dialog box will appear.
From the space provided type the text you want to locate.
112 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING E.g.
When you click on “find” a dialog box will appear thus: On the dialog box, you have, find, replace and go to.
A click on “find” would ask find what.
In front of the find what is a white box..
Type in the word you want to find and click on find next or press the enter key, the word is automatically highlighted.
Click on find next if the word appears in more than one place, keep doing that until a command tells you no more.
E.g.
: But if the word you are looking for is not available it will show: 113 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING If you need to replace such a text, click on replace and follow the instruction provided in the dialog box.
The box above indicates that what you want to find is “men”.
Under replace you need to indicate what you want to use to replace men; e.g.
women.
Then type women on the box of replace thus: A click on replace at the bottom would replace “men” with “women” at a time, but a click on replace all would replace all “men” in the document with “women” Selecting Text means highlighting the text that you want to work on as a single block.
This is usually referred to as selection.
Another way of launching the find command is to press Ctrl + F. Click on the undo function “undo” in the dialog box under “edit” when you want to undo a command.
114 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING How did you find reading through this session?
Was it interesting?
Now go through this session again with careful practice on your computer.
4.0 CONCLUSION Should you make a mistake when typing, do not worry; you do not need to start all over, there is a way out.
All you need is to locate the right command you need to effect the correction; be it to delete, copy, cut, paste, find, replace or undo.
5.0 SUMMARY Effecting corrections or setting documents in the desired order is referred to as editing.
Sometimes there is a need to delete, copy, cut, paste, undo, find and replace words.
These are some of the functions that were very difficult with manual typewriters and a little better off with electric typewriters but professionalised with the personal computer.
The beauty of these functions makes word processing more interesting.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Explain the following as used in word processing: 1.
Cut 2.
Paste 3.
Copy 4.
Undo 5.
Replace 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond,Archie and Cole-Mogford,Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).Maidenhead– Bershire England:McGraw-Hill BookCompany (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 115 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 3 PARAGRAPHS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Paragraphing is a very important aspect of written communication; it helps in expression coordination.
The grammarians would say that every new idea forms a new paragraph.
This calls for a good display to facilitate the reader’s understanding.
Pick a text and identify the number of paragraphs in it.
Now answer the following questions: • How many paragraphs do you have in the text?
• How did you identify the paragraphs?
• Did the beginning line of each paragraph start at the same point?
Share your answers with your colleagues and facilitator.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to: • Identify different types of paragraphs • Format a document in different kinds of paragraphs 3.0 MAIN CONTENT There are three main types of paragraphs, namely • Blocked paragraphs • Indented paragraphs • Hanging paragraphs 116 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Blocked Paragraphs All lines begin at the left-hand margin, e.g.
Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Blocked Paragrphs Note: Give one clear space between paragraphs if you are using single line spacing.
To achieve this, press the enter key twice before you start the next paragraph.
If you are using one and half line spacing, give two clear spaces i.e.
press the enter key twice.
Since you already set it to a one and half line spacing, it will automatically give two clear spaces.
Also if you are using a double line spacing, give three clear spaces i.e.
press the enter key twice.
Since you have set a double line spacing it will automatically give you three clear spaces.
117 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING See the following examples: Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xx xxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxx xx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xx xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Single line spacing One and half line spacing D ouble line spacing Indented Paragraphs In the indented style, the first line in each paragraph begins at five spaces to the right while subsequent lines begin at the left hand margin.
E.g.
Indented Paragraphs Note: Give one clear space in between paragraphs if you are using the single line spacing (press the enter key twice).
For a one and half line spacing, give two clear spaces (press the enter key twice).
If you are using double 118 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING line spacing, it is advisable that you maintain it all through, but remember to indent the first line in each paragraph.
It is advisable that you always set the line spacing before you start to type.
You don't need to end your typing before setting or formatting your document, it then becomes more difficult.
So avoid it.
Once you set the line spacing, the only thing you then need to control is the enter key to get the clear spaces you need between paragraphs.
See the following examples: Xxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx xxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx Single line spacing One and half Double line spacing line spacing Hanging Paragraphs The first line in each paragraph starts from the left hand margin, while subsequent lines start at least two and at most five spaces to the right, i.e.
you indent the subsequent lines.
E.g.
119 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Hanging Paragraphs Note: For hanging paragraphs, the most commonly used line spaces are single and one and half.
The space in between paragraphs is the same with that of indented paragraphs.
Use the tab to get the indentation you require.
Go through the presentations once again and practice as you read through.
Should there be any problem, go through it again and ask your facilitator questions.
4.0 CONCLUSION To achieve a well set paragraph, determine the line spacing you wish to use and where each line of the paragraph should begin.
Remember there are three main types of paragraphs – blocked, indented and hanging.
The type of document you are typing may also serve as a determinant of the type of paragraph to use.
5.0 SUMMARY Paragraphs help to determine the idea in a text and therefore are set out in to make readers have a good understanding of the text.
The three types of paragraphs begin in different ways.
All lines of typing in a 120 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING blocked paragraph begin from the left hand margin; the first line of typing in an indented paragraph is indented five spaces to the right while the first line of typing in a hanging paragraph begins from the left hand margin and the subsequent lines in the paragraph are typed five spaces to the left.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Exercise I The ability to speak effectively is nowhere put to a more rigorous test than in a meeting.
The following rules-of- thumb illustrate areas involving such skills: Listen first Each meeting develops its own climate.
Its bold temperature may become boiling or frosty.
where sympathies or antipathies lie By listening and waiting, you will be able to assess not only the general climate, stet but also the moods and attitudes of individuals.
Test the temperature first, before diving in!
See where the land lies Most meetings tend to comprise bold sub-groups or caucuses allied to achieve common objectives.
While speaking or providing feedback, others may reveal .
Timing If your contribution is to be important , then bold timing the moment to speak is all-important.
Personal judgement is effective here to perceive when a developed argument proposed by another is falling, or when the ground has been prepared and participants are sympathetic or amenable.
Type the above text in: 1.
Indented paragraphs 2.
Hanging paragraphs Exercise II Type the following in blocked paragraphs 121 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond, Archie and Cole-Mogford, Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).
Maidenhead – Bershire England:McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 122 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 4 HEADINGS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Main Headings 3.2 Sub Headings 3.3 Side Headings 3.4 Paragraph Headings 3.5 Shoulder Headings 3.6 Headings in Spaced Capitals 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Headings are used as caption for readers, and therefore need to be well structured and displayed to appeal to the reader.
Have you ever been attracted to a story because of the caption?
Or you were attracted to buy a particular textbook or novel because of the title?
If yes, that tells you the importance of captions.
Captions are so important that we should be particular about their structure and the way they are displayed.
Headings also serve vital role when sorting documents in the office.
It is the heading that is used to determine what document should go where.
Therefore a document that is wrongly headed or has a wrong display of its heading may be wrongly placed; which may affect the decision to be taken on such document.
It is therefore important that you ensure that the headings of all your typed documents are well structured and displayed if they must get the required attention.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Identify different types of headings • Type different types of headings 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 123 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING The following are the common types of headings used: • Main headings • Sub headings • Side headings • Paragraph headings • Shoulder headings • Headings in spaced capitals (caps) 3.1 Main Headings Main headings are the headings that carry the main idea of what the document is all about.
A main heading may be blocked or indented; it all depends on the required style.
With the blocked style, the heading is typed and flushed to the left-hand margin but if it is indented the heading is typed to center on the typing line or the paper.
A main heading may be typed with capital letters, with or without an underscore.
But if the heading is bold, do not underscore.
“Bold” and “underscore” perform the same function of emphasis.
E.g.
Blocked style Indented style To centralise the heading, do the following: • Type the text • Highlight the text • Click on the centralised short cut icon on the menu bar and it will automatically centralise the text.
124 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 3.2 Sub Headings Sub headings are usually typed after the main heading.
Sub headings are expressions within the main headings.
Give one clear space between a sub heading and the main heading.
The style used in typing the main heading determines the style to be used for sub headings.
For example,.
if the blocked style is used for the main heading, it means the blocked style will also be used for the sub headings.
Sub headings could be typed in capital letters or in initial capitals.
See the following example.
CREATING WEALTH One-clear space The Grass Roots Blocked style CREATING WEALTH One-clear space The Grass Roots Indented style 3.3 Side Headings Side headings are typed on the left-hand side of the paper while the contents are typed on the right hand side.
Give two or at most five clear spaces between the heading and the content.
Where there are several headings to type, use the heading with the longest line to determine the space to be left for the headings.
Also, where you have a long heading to type, use your own discretion to break the line to run through the following line.
125 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING E.g.
From the box above we can see there are four headings - General, Statistics, Spell Checker and Grammar Checker.
Counting the strokes on each of the headings, General is 7, Statistics 10, and Spell Checker 13.
Grammar Checker occupies two lines because of its length, but should we consider the spaces, we will choose the longer of the two lines which is “ Grammar”; it has 7 spaces.
These strokes represent the number of spaces required for typing.
Talking about the number of spaces required, the longest heading - Spell Checker has to be considered to determine the space between the headings and the contents.
Do not allow the heading to occupy too much space since you have more to type on the right hand side than the left.
Once the spaces to be left between the heading and the content have been determined, use tab to set stops for the beginning of the content.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE BREAK Try what you have learnt so far in your computer.
How did you find the practice?
Practice several times before you continue, to ensure proper mastering.
3.4 Paragraph Headings Paragraph headings form part of the paragraph.
After typing the heading, you may end it with a full stop or colon.
Give two or at most five spaces between the heading and the content.
The heading may be typed in initial capitals or in capital letters.
The heading may or may not 126 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING be underscored.
But you must not underscore when the headings are typed in bold letters.
E.g THE PAGE LAYOUT If you want to view your document exactly the way the document will print, select the page layout view.
The page layout view shows any details, such as headers and footers, and shows you where page breaks occur.
Or THE PAGE LAYOUT If you want to view your document exactly the way the document will print, select the page layout view.
The page layout view shows any details, such as headers and footers, and shows you where page breaks occur.
Or The Outline View This gives you true expandable and collapsible views of your document in outline form.
If you prefer to write an outline, you can use word predefined heading styles to create your document’s outline, and then expand the outline when you’re ready to add detail.
Or The Outline View This gives you true expandable and collapsible views of your document in outline form.
If you prefer to write an outline, you can use word predefined heading styles to create your document’s outline, and then expand on the outline when you’re ready to add detail.
3.5 Shoulder Headings Shoulder headings are typed one clear space above the contents.
The headings could be typed in initial capitals with an underscore or in capital letters with or without an underscore or in bold letters without an underscore.
E.g.
THE PAGE LAYOUT If you want to view your document exactly the way the document will print, select the page layout view.
The page layout view shows any 127 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING details, such as headers and footers, and shows you where page breaks occur.
THE OUTLINE VIEW This gives you true expandable and collapsible views of your document in outline form.
If you prefer to write an outline, you can.
Use word predefined heading styles to create your document’s outline, and then expand the outline when you’re ready to add detail.
How do I differentiate between initial capitals and capitals?
Capitals.
All letters are typed in capitals.
E.g.
THE OUTLINE VIEW Initial Capitals.
The first letter in a word is typed in capital while others are typed in small letters .E.g.
The Outline View 3.6 Headings in Spaced Capitals (CAPS) Some times headings are typed in spaced capitals either because the heading is too short or for emphasis.
To type a heading in space caps means leaving one space in between letters and three spaces between words.
E.g.
E X I T I N G W O R D. Headings typed in spaced caps may or may not be underscored.
NOTE: HEADINGS WITH MORE THAN A LINE MUST BE TYPED IN SINGLE LINE SPACING TO SHOW THAT THEY ARE TOGETHER AND PROPER ALLIGNMENT MUST BE MADE.
.
E. g MANAGING DOCUMENTS AND CUSTOMISING WORD 4.0 CONCLUSION We have discussed six different ways of presenting headings.
The most important thing that concerns us is the display pattern.
We should be able to display the skill of appropriate display each time we type.
Our headings should not be placed haphazardly, rather they should be orderly.
5.0 SUMMARY There are six major ways of presenting headings in a document –The main heading, sub heading, side heading, paragraph heading, shoulder 128 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING heading and headings in spaced capitals.
Each of these headings has its peculiar way of display and is applicable at different times.
It is important for you to know when each can apply.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Type the following Visual Thinking Preparation for a multimedia script is a process of visual thinking or visualisation.
The dictum is – “Think Visually”.
In order to think visually, you need to create an overall conceptual design of the programme that you are planning to make.
Creation of mind maps of the content area is a good first step.
However, the words in the mind map must synchronise graphically.
When you have an idea, consider relating it to some graphics and see how the idea can be represented graphically.
The process of visualisation is basically section, creation, and editing of images into a meaningful sequence.
In reality it takes a lot of practice to “see” the programmes to be developed successfully.
The Scriptwriting Process The scriptwriting process has the following stages: Programme idea: The programme idea needs to be discussed vis-à-vis the strength of multimedia.
You must ask at this stage: why is it necessary to have a multimedia programme for this particular idea?
Programme brief: At this stage, the programme idea needs to be expanded to include the title, target audience, objectives of the programme, content outline, etc.
A rationale for the multimedia programme and project beneficiaries is useful, if included in the programme brief.
Research: Planning and carrying out a thorough research on the topic of the programme idea and the target audience will be useful in designing the multimedia.
Identifying relevant graphics content and experts on the programme will be useful to consult and select appropriate content.
129 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Identify and select content elements: Having done the research, it is appropriate to develop the best way or a sequence to deliver the message.
Though multimedia provides the user with a hypermedia navigation opportunity, it is important to have a “‘default’ sequence.
The content elements can be visualized in terms of text, audio, video, graphics animation, etc.
Interface design and layout: The interface design is one of the most creative stages of scripting for multimedia.
Here, the look and feel of the programme needs to be decided.
While deciding on this, it is important to keep in mind the target audience’s choice and the nature of the topic.
There can be so many ways of designing the interface depending on the creativity of the designer.
However, it is essential to decide on one layout design in the beginning and stick to that for uniformity and also for the reason that the learners will not appreciate a different layout for all different screens of the multimedia programme.
Preparing the storyboard: The storyboard is a detailed shot-by-shot or screen-by-screen description of the programme on a sheet of paper or card.
The storyboard forces the scriptwriter to think in terms of multiple media use in a multimedia programme.
It is also a blueprint for action that can be given to a multimedia designer to execute as depicted in the storyboard.
It allows the working of different groups of people in the same project developing different components of it with similar design and compatibility.
We will now present to you a systematic approach to preparing a storyboard for multimedia.
Type all the paragraph headings as shoulder headings.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. 130 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Drummond, Archie and Cole-Mogford, Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).
Maidenhead – Bershire England:McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK) (Ltd).
NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 131 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING UNIT 5 FORMATTING AND OTHER FUNCTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last two units we discussed paragraphs and headings.
The purpose was to ensure that our documents are set out in an attractive manner.
This takes us to formatting and other functions that can make our documents more presentable.
There are different ways of presenting documents, and there are functions provided to make this a success.
This unit is designed to educate us on how to use these functions in achieving our aims.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Format simple documents • Apply the different functions required in formatting 3.0 MAIN CONTENT Formatting means choosing a style with which a document could be displayed.
There are different styles of typing.
In typing a document the typist has to choose a desired style to display or present the document.
It could also be seen as the way in which we want our document to appear.
The following are the different types of formatting.
• Simple character formatting; e.g.
underline, bold, italic etc.
• Special character formatting; e.g.
font colour, colourize the document background, subscript, superscript, strike through, double strikethrough, shadow, outline, emboss, engrave, small letters, capital letters, hidden, etc.
• Paragraph formatting 132 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Simple Character Formatting; e.g.
underline, boldface, italicise your text.
To achieve this, click on edit on the menu bar and from the drop down menu click on the format you desire.
You could also use the short cut keys.
Press ctrl + B for bold, ctrl + L for italics and ctrl + U for underscore.
Press one of the short cut keys before you type the text you want to format.
When you want to stop formatting press the same short cut key to turn off the formatting.
Go through Unit 2 of this module once more to refresh your memory on this.
Remember to always highlight the text before you click on “edit” in the menu bar; if not the required function will not be highlighted.
Special character formatting; e.g.
font colour, colourize the document background, subscript, superscript, strike through, double strikethrough, shadow, outline, emboss, engrave, small letters, capital letters, hidden etc.
• Font colour • Colourize the document background • Subscript • Superscript • Strike through • Double strike through • Shadow • Outline • Emboss • Engrave • Small cap • All caps • Hidden To achieve any of these, click on “format”; from the drop down menu click on “font”.
Again from the dropped down menu click on the option 133 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING You require.
Study the box and click on the function you need.
But remember to always highlight the affected word(s) before clicking on format.
Stop for a while and try your hands on what you have just studied.
Did you understanding it?
Do not rush over it, study it carefully and you will achieve your aim.
134 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Paragraph Formatting Part of paragraph formatting has been discussed above in addition; justification of text may apply as stated below: • Left-justification • Right-justification • Center-justification • Full-justification To justify text do any of the following: 1.
Click on format, paragraph and indent and spacing and select the one you require from alignment using the scroll button.
135 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Drop down menu from alignment 2.
Use the short cut in the menu bar: Align Left Center Align Right Justify When you click on justify, all the lines of typing will flush at both left and right hand margins.
E.g.
Paragraph A In a class the class teacher wanted the class to participate in one of the pupil’s birthday celebration.
The said pupil was absent from school on account of ill health.
The teacher then asked: “When is Yetunde’s birthday?” Abu answered and said it was 6th of March 2007 but Maria disagreed, saying Abu was not right, because he did not know the exact date.
Nobody knew the date.
136 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Paragraph B In a class the class teacher wanted the class to participate the birthday of one of the pupils who was absent from school on account of ill health.
The teacher then asked: “When is Yetunde’s birthday?” Abu answered and said it was 6th of March 2007 but Maria disagreed, saying Abu was not right because he did not know the exact date.
Nobody knew the date.
In the two paragraphs above, you will observe that paragraph A has a better line ending.
All the lines of typing in paragraph A are aligned at both left and right, this shows the paragraph is justified.
But in paragraph B, the lines of typing only align on the left and do not align on the right.
Always justify your document, it presents a better appearance.
Click on this to get more short cut icons.
After clicking, a dropped down menu will appear thus: Select as appropriate.
Drop Cap To achieve this, type the word, highlight the letter you intend to drop, click on format, from the drop down menu, click on “drop cap”.
See below: 1.
Type the word e.g.
Man 2.
Highlight the letter e.g.
3.
Click on format, from the drop down menu, click on drop cap.
137 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 4.
As you click on drop cap, the following dialog box will appear: In the box, identify “position” and “option”.
Under position you have “none”, “dropped” and “in margin”.
Click on none when you do not want drop cap; click on dropped when you want a letter to drop and click on in margin when you want the letter to be in margin.
Under “options”, there is “font”; click on the scroll button and choose the font type you require.
Under “font” there is “lines to drop”.
Use the scroll button to indicate how many lines you wish the letter in question to cover.
For the “distance from text” indicate how far the said letter should be from the text.
See the following example: P olitics would have been cherished by everyone in the nation, but the way politicians take it is what make most people to refer to it as a dirty game.
For example, a politician always fails to 138 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING recognise the good his opponent has done.
Instead of facing facts they deceive.
Even when you notice the deceit in them, they argue with you.
Auto Text Entries Follow the following procedure: 1.
Type and format the text you want to add to the auto text entries.
2.
Select the text.
3.
Select insert/auto text/auto text.
Word displays a dialog box.
139 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Where you have auto text entries in the box, type in the new word you want to add and click on add and ok. With this, each time you need to use the word, you may not need to type it.
You could instead use the insert auto text by clicking on the word among the auto text.
4.
Type and abbreviate for the auto text entry in the field labeled.
Enter auto text entries here.
5.
Press enter.
Customize: If you don't like the way Word does something, you can customize Word to act the way you want.
The tool menu contains options that let you customize Word.
140 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Customize lets you change the layout of Word toolbars and menus.
Options let you control the behaviour of most of Word’s automatic and manual editing features 141 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Note: You may not need to use these options except when it is essential for you to do so.
Special Characters Symbols are special characters that don't always appear on your keyboard.
To insert a special symbol, select “insert/symbol” to display the symbol dialog box.
If you don't see the symbol you want to insert, select a different font from the font drop-down list.
Many fonts, such as wing dings, supply special symbols from which you can choose.
142 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING From the box, click on what you need and click on “insert” and the symbol will automatically be inserted where you place the cursor.
If you need to insert a particular symbol often, add that symbol to the auto correct table.
Click on the auto correct button to see the auto correct dialog box, type the auto correct entry that you will use to produce the special symbol, press enter, and you would have created the auto correct entry for that symbol.
You can also assign a short cut key to any symbol; such as alt + shift + S, press enter.
Additional Insert • You can insert date and time.
Select Insert/Date and Time.
• Insert Page Numbers.
Select Insert/Page Numbers You can insert a comment.
A comment does not print but does show up on your screen highlighted in yellow so you're sure to see it.
You can read or remove the comment whenever you want.
To insert a comment in your text, select insert/comment.
When you type your comment and click on close, Word attaches the comment to your text and indicates the comment by highlighting the anchor text in bright yellow and inserting the comment name inside square brackets.
Subsequently, when you edit your document, you will see the comment in yellow.
If you right click on the comment, Word pop-up lets you edit the comment, or it deletes the comment from the text.
143 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Using the Spell Checker: Word helps in checking spelling and grammar as you type.
A red wavy underline suggests a suspicious spelling problem: A gray wavy underlines suggest a grammar problem: When you see a red wavy line, you can correct the problem in any of these ways: • Edit the misspelling.
• Right-click on the misspelling to display the pop-up menu.
You can select from the suggested options.
To check for miss-spelt word(s) apart from the method stated above, you may do this: click on tools and click on spelling and grammar.
Using the Thesaurus: The Thesaurus helps to check for synonym (a different word whose meaning is similar).
To see a list of synonyms, select a word and select tools/language/thesaurus (or Press Shift + F7).
Word displays the thesaurus dialog box.
144 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING Note: It is not all errors that the computer can detect through advanced proof reading.
There are errors that need to be corrected manually; such as display, transposition of words and inconsistency in spelling e.g.
British or American or native.
Using Automatic Hyphenation: To automatically hyphenate your document as you type, select tools/language/hyphenation to display the hyphenation dialog box.
The hyphenation zone lets you determine the amount of space between the end of a line's last word and the right margin.
A higher value reduces the number of hyphens that Word adds.
To manually hyphenate your document after you have created it, select tools/language/hyphenation and click on manual.
Word prompts for your approval at each hyphen location.
If you want to stop Word from hyphenating particular paragraphs, select those paragraphs, then select format/paragraph, click on the line and page breaks tab, and check the don't hyphenate option.
Did you stop at each stage to practice what you have learnt in your computer?
If no, go through once more and practice.
If yes, go through again and ensure mastery.
145 BED111 INTRODUCTION TO KEYBOARDING AND WORD PROCESSING 4.0 CONCLUSION Know what you want and it will aid you to know how to get it.
There is no sure way of using these functions other than working with them; therefore create time to practice and master them.
When you do not understand it; slow down the pace of reading and study line by line with practice.
5.0 SUMMARY There is no way we type documents without formatting and using some special functions.
The type of formatting that are often used in documents include paragraph formatting, formatting with styles, drop caps, auto correct; and for functions we have spell checker, grammar checker, thesaurus and hyphenation.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) Write brief note on the following: 1.
Drop Caps 2.
Auto Correct 3.
Thesaurus 4.
Hyphenation 5.
Grammar checker 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ailen, M. Prince (1987).
Walmsley’s Commercial Typewriting.
London: Pitman Publishing Ltd. Drummond, Archie and Cole-Mogford, Anne (1989).
Applied Typing (5th ed).
Maidenhead – Bershire England: McGraw-Hill Book Company (UK).
NIIT Global Net (1999).
Computer Concepts.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. NIIT Global Net (1999).
Word.
Ohio: Sona Printers Pvt.
Ltd. 146
