 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: ECE 123 COURSE TITLE: HEALTHCARE IN THE EARLY YEARS 1  COURSE GUIDE ECE 123 HEALTHCAR E IN THE EARLY YEARS Course Developer: Dr. Wyorks Zamani Bulus Physical and Health Education Department Federal College of Education, Zaria.
Unit Writer: Dr. Wyorks Zamani Bulus Physical and Health Education Department Federal College of Education, Zaria.
Course Editor: Prof. Tanglang Nebath National Open University of Nigeria Study Centre, Gombe Course Coordinator: Mrs. H. I. Johnson School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
2  1.0 INTRODUC TION ECE 123: Healthcare in the Early Years is a 2-credit unit course that will discuss the development of healthcare system from the early years up till the present time.
The course is made up three modules.
The first module is made up of 5 units and it discusses about maternal wellbeing, foundation for survival healthy growth and child development.
The second module is also made up of 5 units and it talks about child healthcare in the early years.
The third module is made up of 5 units and it discusses the intervention measures on early childhood health problems.
This course guide tells you briefly what the course (ECE 123) is all about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you care likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully 2.0 WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURS E ECE 123: Healthcare in the early years introduces you to various ways by which we can take care of our health and prevent invasion of diseases in our body.
3.0 COURSE AIMS The aim of the course can be summarised as follows:  the course aims to give you an understanding of the nature and mode of maternal wellbeing from the early years till date;  it exposes you to the nature of child healthcare in the early years up till the present time;  it will also help you to understand the intervention measures on early childhood health problems by international donor agencies.
4.0 COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set out above, the course has generated the following objectives which should be achieved at the end of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: (1) explain the concept of health and wellbeing; (2) discuss issues relating to maternal wellbeing; (3) mention the traditional and modern methods of family planning; (4) name and discuss the causes of infertility in women; (5) discuss the various threats to childhood healthy growth and development; (6) explain the various types of child healthcare in the early years; 3  (7) list some international donor agencies that control childhood health problems; (8) discuss the activities of some of these donor agencies listed in item 7 above.
5.0 WORK ING THROUGH THIS COURSE To complete this course, you are required to read the study units, read set books and read other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises, and at a point in the course, you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, is a final examination.
The course should take you about 16 – 17 weeks in total to complete.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do, and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Below are the lists of all the components of the course: 6.0 COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are:  Course Guide  Study Units  References  Assignment  Presentation Schedule 7.0 STUDY UNITS The study units in this course are as follows: Module 1: Unit 1: Issues relating to maternal wellbeing Unit 2: Family planning in maternal wellbeing Unit 3: Infertility in the female Unit 4: Threats to childhood healthy growth and development 1 Unit 5: Threats to childhood healthy growth and development 2 Module 2: Unit 1: Determinants of child health Unit 2: An overview of the general characteristics of children Unit 3: Provision of school health services for children Unit 4: World Declaration on the Rights of a Child Unit 5: World Declaration on Child Abuse Module 3: 4  Unit 1: Intervention measure s by the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) Unit 2: Intervention measures by the United States Agencies for International Development (USAID) Unit 3: Roles/intervention measures by the World Health Organisation (WHO) on childhood health problems Unit 4: Roles/intervention measures by the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) 1 Unit 5: Roles/intervention measures by the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) 2.
8.0 ASSIGNM ENT FILES There are fifteen assignments in this course.
The fifteen-course assignment which cover all the topics in the course material are there to guide you to have proper understanding and grasp of the course.
9.0 PRESEN TATION SCHEDU LE The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
10.0 ASSESSM ENT There are three aspects to the assessment of the course: first are self-assessment exercises, second, are the tutor-marked assignments; and third, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises; you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment File.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 50% of your total Course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of ‘three hours’ duration.
This examination will also count for 50% of your total course mark.
11.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNM ENT (TMAs) There are nine tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You only need to submit five of the eight assignments.
You are encouraged, however, to submit all eight assignments in which case the highest five of the eight marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
However, it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that 5  you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint and ma y provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Presentation Schedule and Assignment File.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
12.0 FINAL EXAM INATION AND GRADING The final examination for ECE 123 will be of three hours’ duration and have a value of 50% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-tests, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
13.0 COURSE MARKING SCHEM E Total Course Marking Scheme ASSESSM ENT MARKS Assignment 1 – 9 Nine assignments, best three marks of the nine count @ 10% each = 30% of course marks Final Examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks 14.0 HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study unit will tell you when to read your other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit, and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
6  Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed th e unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from a Reading Section of some other sources.
Self-tests are interspersed throughout the end of units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self-test as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
(1) Read this course guide thoroughly.
(2) Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the course overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester will be made available.
You need to gather all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
(3) Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their coursework.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
(4) Turn to unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
(5) Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your references, on your desk at the same time.
(6) Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the units, you will be instructed to read sections from your other sources.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
(7) Well before the relevant due date, check your Assignment File and make sure you attend to the next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the exam.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
7  (8) Review of the objectives for each study unit confirms that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
(9) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
(10) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
(11) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide).
15.0 TUTORS AND TUTORIA LS There are 17 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the names and phone numbers of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if:  You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
 You have difficulty with the self-test or exercise.
 You have a question or problem with an assignment with your tutor’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
16.0 SUMM ARY 8  CE 123: Healthcare in the Early Years are to introduce you to s, practices, etc.
relating to healthcare in Nigeria.
We hope you enjoy your acquaintances with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
We wish you every success in the future.
As earlier stated above this course E various techniques, guides, principle 9  ECE 123 HEALTHCAR E IN THE EARLY YEARS Course Developer: Dr. Wyorks Zamani Bulus Physical and Health Education Department Federal College of Education, Zaria.
Unit Writer: Dr. Wyorks Zamani Bulus Physical and Health Education Department Federal College of Education, Zaria.
Course Editor: Prof. Tanglang Nebath National Open University of Nigeria Study Centre, Gombe Course Coordinator: Mrs. H. I. Johnson School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
10  MODULE I MATERNAL WELLBEING: THE FOUNDAT ION FOR SURVIVAL, HEALTHY GROWTH AND DEVELOPM ENT OF THE CHILD INTRODUC TION UNIT 1: Issues Relating to Maternal Wellbeing.
UNIT 2: Family Planning in Maternal Wellbeing.
UNIT 3: Infertility in the Female.
UNITS 4 & 5: Threats to childhood Healthy Growth and Development.
UNIT 1: ISSUES RELATING TO MATERNAL WELLB EING CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definitions and Concepts of Wellbeing.
3.2 The scope of maternal wellbeing.
3.3 .0 Diet in pregnant woman.
3.3.1 Pregnancy: Signs and symptoms.
3.3.2 Foetal Growth and Development.
3.3.3 Guides to a Healthy Pregnancy.
3.3.4 Antenatal Care During Pregnancy.
3.3.5 Conditions that require close medical attention to a pregnant woman.
3.3.6 Reasons why pregnant women do not go for Antenatal Health.
3.3.7 Aims and Objectives of Antenatal Health Care Services.
3.3.8 Causes of Maternal Death.
3.3.9 Minor and Major Disorders of pregnancy.
3.3.10 Still-birth and its causes.
3.3.11 The scope of Health Education for pregnant women.
3.3.12 Labour and Child Birth.
4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING.
11  1.0 INTRODUC TION Maternal wellbeing is the fo undation for the health of the children.
As it was conceived by the Ancient Greeks, a healthy and strong woman has the tendency to give birth to a strong and healthy child.
This belief was responsible for the involvement of girls in active life style.
After all, heredity is one of the major determinants of the child health.
The health care services that are given to the pregnant woman are not only for her, but are also for the child in the womb.
This implies that the nutritious problems of the pregnant woman are also shared between her and the foetus.
This is the more reason why every pregnant woman needs adequate health care and medical attention if she must give birth to a healthy and strong child.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (1) Explain why maternal wellbeing is said to be the foundation for child survival, growth and development.
(2) List the stages of foetal growth and development.
(3) Explain the importance of antenatal health care to the pregnant woman and the child.
(4) Identify the possible causes of maternal and foetal death, etc.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definitions and Concept s of Maternal Wellbein g Maternal wellbeing is associated with the reproductive health care services given to the pregnant woman.
It is the total wellbeing of a woman who is within the child bearing age (15-45 years).
Olaniyan (2003) The role of a woman in the promotion and maintenance of the health of a child cannot be over-emphasized.
Maternal health is directed towards promotion and maintenance of the health of a woman for safe child bearing and weaning.
Maternal wellbeing encompasses healthy conditions of the anatomical and physiological aspects of the woman’s reproductive system and organs.
Maternal health is the foundation for healthy children.
3.2 The Scope of Maternal Wellbeing -Health care given to the pregnant woman right from the conception -Antenatal health care -Prenatal health care -Post natal health care -Reproductive anatomy and physiology -Foetal development -Examination of the reproductive system and organs during pregnancy -Diet during pregnancy to meet the needs of the growing foetus -Maintenance and promotion of maternal health -Examination of the breast to ensure adequate provision of the needed nutrients for the foetus -Personal hygiene of the pregnant woman -Health education for the pregnant woman -Drug and alcohol education for the pregnant woman -Virginal examination -Causes of maternal death -Prevention of maternal death through antenatal health care - Disorders of pregnancy 12  -Diseases associated w ith pregnancy -Care of the pregnant woman during labour -Signs and symptoms of labour -Causes of prolonged labour -Education of the pregnant woman on exclusive-breast feeding -Still-birth and its causes -Family planning: Its definitions, concepts and methods -Aims and objectives of family planning -Infertility in woman: Its definition, concepts, types and causes, etc.
3.3.0 Diet in Pregnant Woman There should be the intake of all classes of food nutrients in order to meet the necessary required nutrients for the woman and the growing foetus.
Such classes of food nutrients are: (1) Carbohydrates which is an energy giving food.
(2) Protein repairs the worn out tissues in the body.
(3) Fats are also energy giving foods.
(4) Minerals help in the formation of the bones and teeth e.g.
calcium, magnesium and phosphorus.
(5) Vitamins are the organic regulators which help in blood clothing and function as coenzymes for energy production, protein metabolism, DNA formation, development of red blood cells, carbohydrate metabolism, energy production, etc.
Vitamins are of different types – A, B1, B12, C, D, E & K. (6) Water helps in regulating body temperature and in food digestion.
3.3.1 Pregnancy: Signs and Sympt oms Pregnancy refers to the process in which a new individual develops in a woman’s uterus.
It starts with fertilization of the ovum when the ovum combines with the sperm.
The signs and symptoms of pregnancy include: (1) Missed period (menstruation) (2) Enlargement of breast and tenderness (3) Nausea (4) Vomiting (5) Change in frequency of urination (6) Fatigue and dizziness (7) Increased virginal secretion 3.3.2 Foetal Growth and Development During Pregn ancy (a) First Trimester (0 – 14 Weeks) -Formation of the eyes ears, hands and feet -The head is large compared with the body -Formation of the main organs e.g.
heart, kidneys and lungs -The heart beat starts, the blood circulates through blood vessels -Kidneys and liver begin to function -Development of external genitalia (b) Second Trimester (14 – 28 Weeks) -The heart beats strongly -The sex of the foetus may be distinguished 13  -The foetus is clearly human in appearance -The lungs are still not properly developed -The skin remains reddish and covered with a waxy protective substance -The foetus can live after 24 weeks but with specialized care.
(c) Third Trimester (28 – 40 Weeks) -The skin is reddened and wrinkled -The lungs are well developed to support life -Pregnancy reaches full term -The head is proportionate to the body -The ears, nose and genitals are well formed.
3.3.3 Guides to a Healthy Pregnancy -Pregnancy test as soon the woman’s period is missen for confirmation -Talk with your partner or someone else you trust -Decide on whether the pregnancy will be brought to term -Begin antenatal care -Check-ups with the medical provider -Follow proper antenatal care instruction.
This includes avoiding all drugs and medicines that are not prescribed by a medical provider -Do not smoke cigarettes or take alcohol -Eat nourishing foods, rich in protein, calcium, folic acid, iodine, iron and drink plenty of water and fruits juices.
-Get adequate rest, sleep and recreation -Proper dressing.
3.3.4 Antenatal Care During Pregnancy -During pregnancy, another living being is growing inside the woman.
At this time, the woman needs lots of energy, protein, vitamins, and minerals for her health and that of the foetus in her womb.
There are several steps to providing proper and adequate care during pregnancy.
Antenatal care involves the steps taken during pregnancy, including medical check-ups to be sure that all is well with the woman and the foetus.
3.3.5 Condit ions that requi re close medica l attention to a Pregnant Woman (1) Difficulty in last pregnancy or birth (2) Anaemia (3) Hypertension (High Blood Pressure) (4) Bladder/Kidney infection (5) HIV/AIDS infection (6) Convulsion (7) Malaria (8) Sexually Transmitted infections (STIs) (9) Untreated Tuberculosis (10) Hepatitis ‘B’ (11) Poor food intake due to poverty (12) Diabetes (13) Swelling of legs (14) Poor sanitation, etc.
3.3.6 Reasons why pregnant women do not go for antenatal health care 14  (1) Ignorance (2) Fear (3) Shame (4) Cultural factors (5) Poverty (6) Lack of encouragement or motivation (7) Carelessness 3.3.7 Aims and Objectives of Antenatal Health Care for Pregnant Women It is essential that every pregnant woman receives adequate antenatal health care from competent providers as soon as pregnancy is detected.
The following are the aims and objectives of antenatal health care for pregnant women: (1) Preparing pregnant women for normal labour and safe delivery.
(2) Preparing pregnant women for successful lactation.
(3) Preparing pregnant women for proper care of the child after delivery .
(4) To give pregnant women toxoid to prevent tetanus in both woman and children.
(5) To reduce or prevent maternal morbidity and mortality rate of both pregnant women and children.
(6) To give pregnant women adequate and proper health education on relevant topics such as nutrition, personal environmental hygiene, exercise, rest, recreation, family planning, immunization, dressing, dangers of self-medication, cigarette smoking, alcohol, etc.
3.3.8 Causes of Maternal Mortality -Anaemia --Nutritional deficiency -Abnomal haemoglobin -Obstructed labour -Rupture of the uterus -Eclampsia -Cardiac failure -Haemorrhagia -Acute renal failure -Asphyxia -Post operative complication -Abortion -Hepatic coma 3.3.9 Minor and M ajor Disorders of Pregnancy (a) Minor Disorders -Morning sickness -Heart burn -Constipation -Vaginal discharge -Cramp -oedema (b) Major Disorders -Excessive vomiting -Dehydration 15  -Eclampsia --Hypertensio n 3.3.10 Stillbirth and its causes in pregnancy Stillbirth refers to situation in which a child is born already dead which might have occurred few days or weeks in the uterus before birth.
The causes of stillbirth include the following: (1) Post-maturity placenta deficiency (2) Accident that affects the abdomen of the pregnant woman (3) Eclampsia (4) Drugs (5) Cord anoxia (6) Severe anaemia (7) Placenta privia.
3.3.11 The scope of Health Educat ion for Pregn ant Women The areas of coverage in the health education for pregnant women include the following: (1) Posture and dressing (2) Nutrition (3) Care of the baby (4) Preparation for child delivery (5) Food hygiene (6) Personal and environmental hygiene (7) What the woman should do during labour (8) Signs and symptoms of labour (9) Exercise, Rest Sleep and Recreation (10)Dangers of drugs abuse, self-medication, alcohol and cigarette smoking (11)Breast-feeding.
3.3.12 Labour and Birth Labour is the period in which the process of child delivery starts.
It begins with the opening dilation of the cervix and ends with the delivery of the placenta.
The happenings during labour are as follows: (1) For many women, labour starts with the gushing out of fluid or a bit of blood.
(2) Each individual labour/childbirth differs.
(3) The woman experiences pains with variation.
(4) The onset of labour is marked by regular painful uterine contractions.
(5) The lasting period of labour varies among women ranging from hours to a day or more in some cases.
(6) In some labour cases a baby is removed through surgical operation (caesarean section).
(7) Blood stained discharge from the vagina.
(8) There is the rupture of membranes follow by a flood of clear fluid.
(9) Contraction of the muscles of the uterus.
This facilitates the opening of the cervix and the expulsion of the baby.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt that maternal health care is the foundation for child survival, healthy growth and development.
You have also learnt in this unit that the quality of 16  maternal health care deter m ines to a great extent the survival, healthy growth and development of both the preg nant woman and the child.
5.0 SUMM ARY In this Unit, you have learnt about the scope of maternal health care services.
These services are geared towards ensuring the survival of both the pregnant woman and the child.
The areas of coverage in this Unit include: -Definitions and concepts of maternal wellbeing.
-Pregnancy -Diet in pregnant women.
-Foetal growth and development.
-Tips/guides to healthy pregnancy.
-Antenatal care during pregnancy.
-Conditions that require close medical attention to pregnant women.
-Reasons why pregnant women do not go for antenatal health care.
-Aims and objectives of antenatal health care.
-Causes of maternal death.
-Disorders of pregnancy.
-Causes of still-birth.
-Health education for pregnant women.
-Labour and birth.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) 1.
It is said that “maternal well-being is the foundation for child survival, growth and development”.
Discuss the statement.
2.
Explain the stages of Foetal development.
3.
Explain any five (5) reasons why most Nigerian pregnant women and adolescent girls do not attend antenatal clinics.
4.
Advanced any five (5) causes of maternal death.
5.
Discuss any five (5) areas of health education for pregnant women.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DINGS Adegoroye, A.
(1984).
Community Health Care.
Macmillam Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series.
Macmillam Publishers.
Olaniyan, R.F.
(2003).
Lecture Notes on maternal Health and Family Planning for Community Health Extension Workers.
17  UNIT 2: FAMILY PLANNIN G IN MATERNAL WELLBEING.
CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definitions and concepts of Family planning.
3.2 Aims and Objectives of family planning.
3.3 Benefits of family planning to the family and the Nation.
3.4 Methods of family planning.
3.5 Description, Advantages and Disadvantages of Different methods of Family Planning 3.6 Reasons why couples may not want to have more children at a particular period 3.7 Factors that may inhibit the practice of Family Planning in Nigeria 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.0 INTRODUC TION Family planning plays a vital role in the lives of the reproducing women as well as in the lives of the children.
It helps in child-spacing which in turn gives room for equal quality attention to children’ proper upbring of the children, proper and adequate nutrition and provision of adequate medical services for the children.
Unfortunately, children from many families in Nigeria today are undernourished, malnourished and are not given their well deserved medical, and health care services due to non-availability of resources to meet their various needs.
The resources for the healthy growth and development of many children are so meager due to non-commensuration of the family socio-economic status to its size.
In a situation where the take-home-play of the parents does not commensurate with the size of the family, meeting the nutritional requirement of the children, provision of the required health care services and paying equal parental attention to a long family size proves very difficult.
These limitations are responsible for many health problems faced by children from the families with low socio-economic status.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (1) Explain the relevance of family planning to the wellbeing of both the mothers and children in the family.
(2) Discuss the aims and objectives of family planning.
(3) State the methods of family planning.
(4) Explain the advantages and disadvantages of each method of family planning.
(5) List and explain factors that inhibit family planning practice in Nigeria, etc.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definitions and concept s of family planning Family planning refers to those attempts made by the couples to control their fertility.
Family planning involves contraception which is referred to as the means or 18  ways of preventing c onception or pregnancy.
It also refers to birth control or child spacing and egg are p revented from ovulation (uniting).
The contraceptives are the devices used for preventing pregnancy.
Family planning is also defined as a way of thinking and living that is adopted voluntarily on the basis of knowledge, attitude and responsible decisions are made by the individual couples to promote the health and welfare of the entire family.
Family planning is a way of having free sexual intercourse without fear of pregnancy, and thereby having children by choice and not per chance in order for the family and the nation to be in good health.
3.2 Aims and Objectives of Family Planning (1) To encourage good building up of the community and family health.
(2) To promote the health of the mother and the children.
(3) To reduce the high incidence of infant and maternal morbidity and mortalit y rates.
(4) To reduced or eradicate the incidence of STDs.
(5) To control the population of the country and make everybody healthy.
(6) To prepare boys and girls for puberty age of child bearing.
(7) To help the couples in spacing their children to make them have better and brighter future.
(8) To enable parents give their children quality parental care.
(9) To make the take-home-pay commensurable to the size of the family, etc.
3.3 Benefits of Family Planning to the Family and the Nation (1) It provides better health, good clothing, good feeding, better education and housing.
(2) It provides better condition of living.
(3) It makes the family to be happy.
(4) It encourages devotion of time to one another in the family.
(5) It promotes effective sharing of the available resources, no matter how meager it may be.
(6) It promotes effective monitoring and modification of way ward behaviours in the children.
(7) It helps in reducing juvenile delinquency rates in the family.
(8) It helps in building a happy, healthy and wealthy nation, etc.
3.4 Methods of Family Planning There are many methods of family planning, each with its advantages and disadvantages.
These family planning methods are grouped into the following categories/classes: (1) Traditional Methods consist of: (a) Total abstinence method.
(b) Withdrawal method.
(c) Natural Family Planning.
(2) Barrier Methods consist of: (a) Male condom (b) Female condom (femidom) (c) Vaginal spermicides (d) Diaphragm (3) Reversible Methods consist of: 19  (a) Oral contrace ptive pills ) (b) Injectables ) (c) Hormonal implants ) Female (d) Emergency contraceptives ) (e) Intra-Uterine Contraceptive Device (IUCD) (4) Permanent Methods consist of: (a) Tubal ligation - Female (b) Vasectomy - Male 3.5 Description, Advant ages and Disadvant ages of Different Methods of Family Planning METHOD DESCRIPTION ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES TOTAL Keeping away from having It is the only It can be difficult to be ABSTINENCY sex when a decision of not completely safe implemented.
having a child has been method.
It costs reach by the couple.
nothing and easy to obtain.
WITHDRAWAL It involves no artificial No supply of Withdrawal of the penis devices or chemical.
It equipment is requires perfect timing prevents fertilization by needed.
No and self-control on the preventing contact between introduction of part of the male.
sperm and the egg.
It chemicals into the Semen and sperm are involves with-drawing the body.
It is released into the vagina penis from the vagina at the available in any in most sexual point of ejaculation.
situation.
intercourse.
20  It includes rhythm method, No protection against NATURAL the basal body temperature It increases the STIs.
Male partner’s co- FAMILY (BBT) method, the user’s knowledge operation is difficult.
It PLANNING Ovulation Billings method of reproductive involves careful and the symptom-thermal physiology.
It monitoring by the woman method.
It involves timing enhances self- for several months.
The and recording of the awareness and self- informa- tion may not be menstrual cycle of female.
reliance.
It has no accurate.
adverse side effects.
No cost, no fuss and no mess.
METHOD DESCRIPTION ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES MALE CONDOM It involves fitting the Easily and widely Reduces sensitivity.
condom over male’s penis.
available without Decreases pleasure.
It It is rolled onto erect penis prescription.
interrupts foreplay to put before sexual intercourse.
Generally on the condom.
In rare It catches and holds the inexpensive.
It cases, allergic reaction semen that is released provides protection occurs.
Break-age of the during the inter- course.
against STls.
It condom.
Sizes not helps users always suitable.
It may maintain an slip off.
erection longer.
Prevents pre- mature ejaculation.
It is hygienic, etc.
FEMALE CONDOM It is a thin, loose, polyure- It protects against Some of them are thame (plastic) sheath with STls.
It does not expensive.
It is bulky, two flexible plastic rings on alter the woman’s noisy and unattractive.
either end.
It provides a hormonal patterns.
Vaginal discomfort.
Not physical barrier that lines No systematic side readily available for the entire vagina and part effects.
most.
May require of the external vulva.
It is additional support to keep inserted into the vagina in place.
before sexual intercourse.
VAGINAL It is a vaginal cream or Could be used Not recommended as an SPERMICIDES jelly foaming tablets which alongside with effective method to be act by killing the sperm.
other methods.
used on its own.
Such tablets are inserted Widely available May not always be 21  into the vagi nal before without available.
It is messy and sexual interco urse.
These prescription.
Have may be allergic to tablets can provide both few side effects.
individuals.
Requires physical and chemical road Easy to use.
precise techniques of blocks to sperm.
They Provides protection insertion.
Protection is could be used alongside against STls.
short-lived.
Does not with condom.
Provide lubrication provide full protection during intercourse.
against STls.
METHOD DESCRIPTION ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES DIAPHRAGM It is one of the barrier It prevents It offers very little methods.
It involves pregnancy.
protection against STls.
It inserting a rubber cap into is complicated to be used.
the vagina shortly before It may shift during sexual the sexual intercourse.
It inter-course.
There may covers the entrance of the be spillage of sperm on womb so as to prevent the the process of sperm from entering the removal.
uterus.
It must be left in place at least 6 hours after sexual intercourse.
ORAL This method purely It offers continuous Pills must be taken daily.
CONTRACEPTIVES involves the use of pills protection against Pills may be expensive.
which prevent pregnancy STls.
It is highly In some cases, pills by suppressing ovulation effective.
It produce nausea and through the combined regulates monthly vomiting.
Depression action of oestrogen and periods.
It has and other mood changes.
progestin.
protective effects There is risk of against pelvic complications with inflammatory cardio-vascular diseases.
diseases.
Protects Decreased libido in some against ovarian and women.
Provides no endometrial cancer.
protection against STls.
Decreases risks of Leads to weight gain.
breast tumours.
Decreases lubrication (dryness).
22  METHOD DESCRIPTION ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES INJECTABLES It is given to the female in It provides It does not protect against the form of an injection.
It continuous and STIs/HIV.
Menstruation works like the pill by long term becomes light and suppressing ovulation.
It protection.
It is irregular.
It stops contains progestin hormone highly effective it menstruation in many which alters the living of does not interfere women.
Weight gain is the uterus so that it cannot with spontaneity of common.
It requires accept a fertilized egg.
It sexual intercourse.
medical supervision.
It makes sperm difficult to It has lower failure also requires constant penetrate and altering the rate than other clinic visits.
It can not be ability of the fallopian contraceptive reversed.
In some tubes to transport the ovum methods.
It helps women it becomes to the uterus.
with menstrual difficult to get pregnancy problems.
It after discontinuation of reduces the use.
It is difficult to incidences of determine when the drug ovarian cancer, wears off.
anaemia, ectopic pregnancy, breast lumps, etc.
HORMONAL Norplant is the brand name It provides long It produces irregular IMPLANTS for a set of tiny, silicon lasting and bleeding.
It requires rubber tubes, each continuous minor surgery for containing a manufactured protection.
It insertion and removal.
It form of a single hormone requires no produces unknown long called progesterone.
They attention after term risks.
It does not are implanted by a doctor insertion.
It does provide protection against or specially trained nurse not interfere with STIs.
just under the skin on the intercourse.
inside of the woman’s upper arm.
They become invisible after insertion.
METHOD DESCRIPTION ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES EMERGENCY These are used during It is easy to use.
It Nausea and vomiting is CONTRACEPTIVES problematic situations that has minimal common.
It does not 23  may require emergency medical risks.
Out provide protection against contraception .
A woman of 100 women STIs/HIV.
may have mi ssed too many using this method, oral contraceptive pills, the 98% of them will condom broke, the woman not be pregnant.
was raped or simply did not 2% have the think of having sexual chances of being intercourse.
This method is pregnant.
use to protect unplanned or unwanted pregnancy.
INTRA-UTERINE Examples of this method It provides long Expulsion of the device CONTRACEPTIVE includes; Henley’s Loop or lasting and by 2-10% of the users in DEVICES (IUCD) Cooper – T. It is a small, continuous the first year of use.
It flexible plastic device protection from requires medical which is inserted into the pregnancy.
It is examination.
Not womb by a doctor.
It is a inexpensive.
It advisable for women who little piece of soft plastic, does not involve have not had children.
usually with a tiny, nylon insertion during There is increased risks tail thread attached to it.
It sexual intercourse.
of pelvic infections.
Risk can be lest in the woman’s Out of 100 women of increased menstrual uterus for 1-8 years.
It who use IUCD bleeding.
immobilizes sperm or its method for one Increased risk of ectopic movement to the fallopian year, only 1-2 will pregnancy.
tubes or irritating the wall become pregnant.
Uncomfortability during of the womb preventing the sexual intercourse.
fertilized egg from Does not protect against attaching to the wall of the STIs.
uterine.
METHOD DESCRIPTION ADVANTAGES DISADVANTAGES TUBAL LIGATION It is an operation on It is safe.
It is It leads to permanent women in which the highly effective.
It sterilization.
fallopian tubes are cut and has no long term The procedure requires tied off so that no egg is side effects.
highly skilled personnel.
able to reach the uterus or It does not protect against be reached by the sperm.
It STIs/ HIV.
sterilizes the woman.
It involves surgery.
VASECTOMY It is a safe surgical It is safe.
It is Permanent sterilization.
procedure for men.
It highly effective.
It Does not provide involves cutting and tying is 100% against protection against of the tubes through which pregnancy.
It is STIs/HIV.
sperm travels during sexual permanent.
No Psychologically induces 24  intercourse.
It sterilizes the known long term sexual dysfunction in man.
side effects.
man.
Available, though not widely used as a result of fear of negative effects on sexual performance.
3.6 Reasons why couples may not want to have more children at a particular period There are reasons why couples may not want to have more children at a particular time, and as such will adopt certain family planning methods.
Some of these reasons may include the following: (1) It may be that they cannot afford to have additional children for economic reason.
(2) They may feel that they have had enough children.
(3) Wanting to provide emotional support for a few children.
(4) For medical reasons.
(5) For health reasons e.g.
cycle-cell anaemia.
(6) For educational purpose (one of the couples may still be interested in schooling).
(7) One may feel too young to have children.
(8) One may prefer to have children only after marriage.
(9) Not ready to have children.
(10)Demand of jobs.
(11)Other psychological and social reasons.
3.7 Factors that may inhibit the practice of Family planning in Nigeria (1) Religious factors.
(2) Cultural factors.
(3) Socio-economic factors.
(4) Educational background/ignorance.
(5) Fear.
(6) Lack of enlightenment.
(7) Carelessness.
(8) Lack of concern for healthy growth and development of the children.
(9) Lack of understanding and agreement between couples.
(10)Lack of accessibility to child and family health services.
(11)Lack of provision of health counseling services.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt about the concepts of family planning, aims and objectives of family planning, benefits of family planning to the children, family and the nation and methods of family planning.
You have also learnt about the advantages and disadvantages of each method of family planning.
In addition to the above, you have also learnt about those factors that may inhibit the practice of family planning in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMM ARY 25  In this Unit, you have learn t about the role of family planning in the healthy growth and development of the children.
You also learnt about the objectives of family planning such as: (1) Promoting the health of the mother and children.
(2) Building up of the health of the family and the community.
(3) Reducing high incidence of infant ad maternal morbidity and mortality rates in society.
(4) Population control, etc.
You also learnt that family planning has many benefits to the children, family, community and the society at large.
Various methods of family planning were discussed in this unit.
These include: (1) Total abstinency (2) Withdrawal method (3) Natural family planning method (4) The use of male condom (5) The use of female condom (6) Vaginal spermicides (7) Diaphragm (8) Pills (9) Injectables (10)Hormonal implants (11)Emergency contraceptives (12)Tubal ligation (13)Vasectomy, and (14)Intra-uterine contraceptive device You learnt about the advantages and disadvantages of each of the above listed methods of family planning.
The reasons why couples may not want to have more children at certain periods were discussed, and factors that inhibit the family planning practice in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) (1) Explain the concepts of family planning.
(2) Enumerate any five (5) objectives of family planning.
(3) Explain the relevance of family planning to child health care.
(4) Identify any four (4) family planning methods and explain each of them under the following: (a) Description, (b) Advantages and (c) Disadvantages (5) Explain any five (5) factors that could inhibit the practice of family planning in Nigeria.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DINGS Adegoroye, A.
(1984).
Community Health Care.
Macmillam Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series.
Macmillam Publishers.
Udoh, C. O.
(1999).
Fundamentals of Health Education.
Heinemann Semester Series Education.
Heinemann Education Books (Nigeria) PLC.
Comprehensive Sexuality Education Trainer’s Resource Manual by Action Health Inc. 17 Lawal Street, Off Oweh Street, Fadeyi Lagos, Nigeria.
26  UNIT 3: INFERTILITY IN T HE FEMALE CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definitions and Concepts of infertility 3.2 Types of infertility 3.3 Causes of infertility 3.4 Risk Factors of infertility 3.5 Factors that promote fertility in the female 3.6 What to do in the case of infertility 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 7.0 REFERENCES 1.0 INTRODUC TION Infertility in either the man or the woman constitutes a serious problem to every family in Nigeria and Africa as a continent.
On the other hand, fertility is what every family prays for, because it is the sign of fruitfulness in every marriage.
Infertility is of two (2) types, and is caused by certain factors.
But with good medical care, infertility could be overcomed either in the male or in the female.
Infertility is a serious problem in marriage because it inhibits conception, and without conception there can be no child bearing.
This makes fertility the most important aspect of the process of the life of a human being.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (1) Explain what infertility is all about.
(2) Explain the causes of infertility in the female.
(3) Explain the signs and symptoms of fertility in the female.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definition and Concept s of infertility Infertility is the failure of a couple to achieve pregnancy after one year of regular unprotected sexual intercourse.
It is also defined as the inability of a couple to conceive after one or more years of frequent unprotected sexual intercourse.
Rutishauser (1994).
3.2 Types of Infertility Infertility has been classified into two (2) types: (1) Primary infertility.
(2) Secondary infertility.
Primary infertility refers to the inability of a woman to get pregnant despite frequent unprotected sexual intercourse and she is willing to become pregnant.
Secondary infertility refers to the situation whereby the woman has become pregnant at least once before and she is unable to become pregnant any more despite frequent unprotected sexual intercourse with the desire to be pregnant.
3.3 Causes of infertility in the female 27  (1) Inability of the ov um to reach the uterus.
(2) Inability of the sp erm to reach the ovum.
(3) Obstruction of the uterine tubes due to infection.
(4) Previous surgery (tubal ligation).
(5) Retrovertion of the uterus (backward tilting of the uterus) which prevents the collection of semen around the cervix.
(6) Infection of the cervix in which the pus and infected mucus forms a barrier to sperm.
(7) Irregular normal ovulation.
This could be caused by: (a) Severe physical or mental illness (b) Anorexia (c) Nervosa (d) Obesity (e) Lack of, or infrequent ovulation due to disorders of the ovaries; which is caused by cysts, tumours or endometriosis.
(8) Endocrine disorders affecting the production of follicle stimulating hormones (FSH) and Luteinising hormones (LH) may also prevent ovulation.
(9) Inability of the fertilized ovum to implant into the uterus.
(10)The endometrium may not be receptive due to hormonal imbalance (Oestrogen and progesterone).
(11)Congenital abnormalities.
(12)Blockage of fallopian tube.
(13)Pelvic inflammatory diseases.
(14)Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs).
(15)Uterione fibroid cancer.
(16)Adhesion of the fallopian tubes, uterus and ovaries.
(17Cervical hostility and incompetence.
3.4 Risk Factors of Infertility (1) Malnutrition (2) Prostitution, multiple sexual partners which make a woman more prove to all kinds of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) and sexually transmitted/infections (STIs).
(3) Illegal abortions which may cause serious damages to the reproductive organs.
(4) Tropic infections, e.g.
malaria.
(5) Voluntary surgical sterilization.
(6) Late marriage.
(7) Too much exposure to radiation such as X-ray.
3.5 Factors that promote fertility in the female (1) Ability of the female to ovulate regularly every month.
(2) When a man is able to produce normal and healthy sperm.
(3) Ability of the female to react favourably to the normal and healthy sperm.
(4) Ability of the sperm to move normally to fertilize the ovum.
28  (5) Ability of the f ertilized ovum to travel successfully to the uterus for the embodiment.
(6) Ability of the uterus to nourish the fertilize ovum until delivery.
3.6 What to do in the cases of Infertility (1) The history of the client should be consider by the family doctor.
(2) The client may need counseling.
(3) Health education of the client.
(4) Attending gynaecological clinics for proper medical attention.
(5) Use of fertility drugs e.g.
gonadotropic hormones that stimulate the ovaries and bring about ovulation.
(6) Adoption of a child when reproduction does not occur in the usual manner.
(7) Adoption of assisted reproductive technologies such as: (a) Artificial insemination which involves placing sperm in the vagina by a physician.
(b) In – Vitro fertilization (IVF) in which conception takes place in the laboratory with the use of ultra-sound machines.
(c) Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) which involves injecting a single sperm into an egg when a man has severe infertile problems.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt about infertility in the woman: Its concepts, types, causes, risk factors that could lead to infertility and what to do as the way out or alternatives.
5.0 SUMM ARY You have learnt in this unit that infertility is a serious problem to the affected families.
This is because, it inhibits conception which is an important aspect of the process of the beginning of the life of human beings.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (1) Identify and explain two (2) types of infertility in the female.
(2) State any eight (8) causes of infertility in the female.
(3) Explain any five (5) risk factors of infertility in the female.
(4) Discuss any five (5) measures that could be taken when reproduction fails to occur in the usual manner.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DINGS Comprehensive Sexuality Education Trainer’s Resource Manual by Action Health Inc. 17 Lawal Street, Off Oweh Street, Fadeyi Lagos, Nigeria.
Rutishauser, S. (1994).
Physiology and Anatomy: A Basis for Nursing and Health Care.
Churchill Livingstone Edinburgh Londong Madrid Melibourne, New York.
29  UNITS 4 & 5: Threats to Childho od Healthy Growth and Development .
CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Nutritional-Related threats to childhood Healthy Growth and Development.
3.2 Nutritional-Related problems and Diseases that Threaten childhood healthy growth and Development.
3.3 Role of Nutrition in the Promotion of Childhood Health.
3.4 Measures for the Intervention of Childhood Health Problems.
4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.0 INTRODUC TION Child health is related to so many factors.
The relationship of such factors to health is either positive or negative.
Factors that exert negative effects on the health of a child constitute the threats to his physical, cognitive, social and emotional growth and development.
Nutritional deficiencies constitute the major source of many threats to the childhood healthy growth and development.
Therefore, the family, school, government and non-governmental organization (NGOs) and the international health organizations, must put all hands on deck to combat all those factors that constitute threats to the health of the children.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (1) Enumerate those factors that threaten healthy growth and development of the children.
(2) Explain the intervention measures to be taken on the threats to early childhood health.
(3) Discuss the collaborative roles of the parents, schools, government and non- governmental organizations in combating the threats to the childhood health.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Nutritional-Related threats to childhood health Growth and Development As earlier mentioned, nutrition constitutes one of the major sources of childhood health problems.
These problems emanate from either malnutrition or undernourishment which result to certain deficiencies that threaten the life of pre- primary and primary school age children.
Nutrition plays a vital role in the life of every child, especially to the most vulnerable and disadvantaged children in society.
Children, in their early years, need proper and adequate nutrition for healthy growth and development.
But the bad news is that millions of children lack these advantages and are locked at an early age into long-term cycles of deprivation.
Some of the adverse effects of malnutrition on the childhood health include the following: (1) Malnutrition or micronutrients deficiency in the early years of a child can impair brain development.
(2) Malnutrition impairs the functioning of the central nervous system wit h irreversible consequences.
30  (3) Nutritional defici encies lead to poor cognitive development which is responsible for weaker academ ic outcomes and more limited life chances.
(4) High levels of child mortality and malnutrition represent a formidable developmental challenge to every human society.
(5) A high percentage of the pre-mature death of the pre-primary and primary school-age children is attributed to malnutrition and early childhood diseases.
(6) Micronutrients deficiency is the cause of diarrhea in children.
(7) Many children in developing nations who are below the age of 6 start primary school with their bodies, brains and long-term learning prospects permanently damaged by malnutrition and ill-health.
(8) So many children entering schools have had their lives blighted by sickness and hunger which affects their education negatively.
(9) Malnutrition causes severe stunting in school children.
(10)Poor nutrition in early childhood affects cognitive development, fine motor skills, learning acquisition and behavior.
Even moderate malnutrition results in altered behavior including lower activity levels, greater apathy and less enthusiasm for play and exploration.
(11)Malnourished children are less likely to start school at the official age and less equipped to learn.
(12)Malnutrition is one of the leading causes of diminished learning capacity.
Micronutrients are pervasive.
Iodine deficiency in pregnant women can cause congenital mental impairment in children.
(13)Malnutrition impairs cognitive development and increases vulnerability to infectious diseases in many pre-school children; etc.
3.2 Nutritional-Related Problems and Diseases that Threaten Childhood Health (1) Diarrhea (2) Pneumonia (3) Tetanus (4) Measles (5) Low birth weight (6) Diphtheria (7) Whooping cough (8) Malaria (9) Intrauterine growth retardation (10)Childhood anaemia (1)HIV/AIDS 3.3 The Role of Nutrition in the Promotion of Childhood Health (1) Good nutrition promotes healthy growth and development of children (2) Good nutrition enhances learning and promotes good academic achievement among children (3) Nutrition promotes good quality of health which is the foundation of child’s learning (4) Nutrition and health are the two foundations for early childhood development and life-long learning (5) Good nutrition reduces mortality and morbidity rates in children 31  (6) Child’s developm ent starts from the womb where it is affected by the state of mother’s health a nd nutrition (7) Children, in their crucial early years need god nutrition and health, because it is a critical period for acquisition of the cognitive skills that will carry them through school and influence their life chances in adulthood.
(8) Good nutrition enhances healthy development of the child’s brain and prevents impairment of the functions of the central nervous system, etc.
3.4 Measures for Intervention on Childhood Health Problems (1) Formulation and enforcement of child health policy (2) Expanded Immunization program for children (3) Provision of anti-mosquito bed-nets (4) Provision of preventive drugs for malaria treatment (5) Distribution of key micronutrients to vulnerable children (6) Measures to prevent mother-to-child HIV transmission (7) Embarking on integrated maternal and child health interventions which should include improved water and sanitation provision, mass immunization, and malaria prevention (8) Comprehensive antenatal health care program (9) Provision of essential drugs and vaccines to combat children health problems (10)Provision of DPT3 vaccination (11)Improvement of family socio-economic status through provision of employment opportunities to enable parents met the nutritional requirements of the children (12)Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) programs to combat children malnutrition (13)Lowering of food prices to enable those families with low incomes to meet the nutritional needs of the children (14)Pre-school provision should be made.
This should include good qualit y nutritional services for healthy growth and development of the children (15)Provision of good nutrition for those women undergoing exclusive breast- feeding (16)Nursery, Day Care and Child Development Centres should provide good play space with equipment for play and exploration.
This will enhance development of physical fitness and muscular coordination in children.
(17)Producing mothers should be given adequate maternal education (18)Provision of good water, clothing and sanitary conditions for children, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt about the threats to childhood health, the role of good nutrition in the promotion of childhood health, the negative effects of nutritional deficiencies on the childhood healthy growth and development.
You also learnt about the various intervention measures to the children’s health problems.
5.0 SUMM ARY In this Unit, you learnt about the health problems which nutritional deficiencies cause in children.
Some of these problems include: (1) Child stunting (2) Diseases such as diarrhea, pneumonia, anaemia, malaria, whooping cough, measles, HIV, tetanus, etc.
32  (3) Impairment in brain deve lopment (4) Impairment in the functio ns of the central nervous system, etc.
You also learnt about the important role of good nutrition in the early childhood growth and development.
In addition to the above, you learnt about the various intervention measures for combating various childhood health problems.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) (1) Identify and explain any five (5) negative effects of poor nutrition on the health of the children.
(2) Discuss the role of nutrition in the healthy growth and development of the pre-primary school children.
(3) Explain any five (5) intervention measures that should be taken to combat childhood health problems in Nigeria.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DING Adegoroye, A.
(1984).
Community Health Care.
Macmillam Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series.
Macmillam Publishers.
Udoh, C. O.
(1999).
Fundamentals of Health Education.
Heinemann Semester Series Education.
Heinemann Education Books (Nigeria) PLC.
UNESCO (2009).
Education for All (EFA) Global Monitoring Report.
33  MOD ULE 2 CHILD HEALTH C ARE IN THE EARLY YEARS INTRODUC TION Unit 1: Determinants of child health Unit 2: An Overview of the general characteristics of children Unit 3: Provision of school health services for children Unit 4: World Declaration on the rights of a child Unit 5: World Declaration on child abuse.
UNIT 1: DETERM INANTS OF CHILD HEALTH CONTENT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main body 3.1 Nutrition/Breast feeding 3.2 Personal hygiene 3.3 Heredity 3.4 Medical care 3.5 Socio-economic status of parents 3.6 Environment 3.7 Parental care 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – marked assignment 7.0 References/Further readings 1.0 INTRODUC TION Health has wide range meanings as defined by different authors and organizations.
Health is dynamic and not static in nature.
It is dynamic because it keeps changing in quality and levels.
It can be quantified, measured and appraised.
Health depends upon multiple factors, and has qualitative and quantitative dimensions.
It is optimal personal fitness for full, fruitful and creative living.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), health is a state of complete physical, mental, social and emotional wellbeing of an individual, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: - Explain the concepts of health - State those factors that determine the health of an individual 34  - Explain how nutrition, h eredity, personal hygiene, lifestyle, medical care, environment and socio-economic status of parents affect the health of children.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Nutrition as one of the determinant s of health Nutrition contributes greatly in determining the health of an individual.
It is the science of feeding.
It deals with the study of foods and nutrients and their effect on health, growth, and development of the individual.
The body needs all the food nutrients for healthy growth and development.
A well fed child has the tendency to grow and develop much better than his malnourished and undernourished counterparts.
Malnutrition and under-nourishment make children more prone to diseases.
For healthy growth and development of children, they require all the food nutrients (carbohydrate, protein, fats, vitamins, water and minerals in appropriate proportions.
3.2 Persona l Hygiene This has to do with personal cleanliness of an individual which include the following: - Care of the hands (finger nails) by washing the hands with clean water and soap after visiting toilets or after touching dirty or harmful objects.
Finger nails should be cut frequently.
- Care of the skin by constant bathing and wearing of the appropriate clothes.
The skin should not be exposed to harmful chemicals and injurious objects.
No sharing of clothes with those who have skin disease.
- Care of the mouth by constant washing and brushing with clean water and tooth paste.
Chewing sticks from appropriate or harmless plants could be used in the absence of tooth-brush and paste.
- Care of the hair by washing with clean water and soap.
The hair should be well kept by combing and trimming (cutting).
- Care of the clothes through washing with clean water and soap and ironing.
- Care of the nose.
This can be done by avoiding of pushing sharp objectives inside.
The nostrils should be cleaned with clean handkerchiefs.
- Care of the eyes by avoiding straining the eyes, visiting the ophthalmologist or optician when having eye-problem, avoiding prolonged reading of books with tiny writings and avoiding using light that is either too bright or dull.
Provision of adequate proteins and vitamins A & B for children also helps in caring for the eyes.
Children should avoid dust and smoked environment.
They should also avoid rubbing of eyes with dirty hands and dirty handkerchief.
In the cases of short – sightedness and long-sightedness, the correct lenses should be used.
- Care of the ears.
The lining of the ear tube and the drum especially are very delicate, and as such could easily get damaged.
Therefore, ears should be cleaned with extra care.
Sharp objects should not be used in poking the ears.
Consult the 35  doctors when having ear problem.
A doctor should be consulted when a foreign object enters the ear.
- Physical exercise, rest, sleep, and recreation.
Physical exercise promotes effective functions of the heart and lungs.
This can be achieved through running, jogging, endurance trek, and playing games/sport participation.
Rest and sleep are good health practices.
One could rest by sleeping, reading, watching games or films, listening to music, playing guiter or piano, etc.
recreation could take the form of playing games or sport, dancing, sight-seeing, outdoor pursuit such as camping and mountaineering.
- Good eating habits.
This involves eating the right food at the right time.
Eating in- between meals is not a good eating habit.
Eating moderately is encouraging.
Eating in dirty environment e.g.
toilets is a bad health attitude.
Eating while talking or vice-versa is not encouraging because one could get choked.
Eating different kinds of food at short interval creates digestion problems.
- Proper nutrition.
This can be ensured by eating balanced diet food that contains all the nutrients such as carbohydrate, proteins, vitamins, minerals, water and fats.
This also entails eating regular meals (breakfast, lunch and dinner at the appropriate time).
This will prevent malnutrition and malnourishment.
- Good toilet habits.
This requires emptying of bowl when it is full and when there is the urge to do so.
This should not be delayed, hence one would not be comfortable.
The habit of holding urine and faeces for a prolonged period even with the pressing urge to empty one’s bowl is extremely bad.
After visiting toilet hands should be properly washed with clean water and soap.
It is good to sit and not to stand on the water-system toilets.
But sitting is only encouraging in the toilet that is clean.
Use either water or tissue paper and not hard objects such as sticks or tones or hard papers that do not dissolve easily and cause blockage.
- Desirable table manners.
These include eating quietly, drinking water to facilitate digestion and eating slowly with proper chewing before swallowing.
3.3 Heredity/Biologica l Factors It is the major factor that determines and/or influences the health of individuals.
It is the innate endowment which is given to an individual by his parents or ancestors.
Each generation passes on to the next generation a distinct genetic message, transmitted through genes and chromosomes.
One could inherit his quality of health from the genes and chromosomes of his parents.
On the other hand, one could also inherit certain health problems from his parents, e.g.
Obesity, high blood pressure, epilepsy, diabetes, etc.
Good heredity provides the basis for a sound health, a well developed body and normal intelligence.
3.4 Medical/Health Care The quality of medical care determines to a great extent the healthy growth and development of every child.
This include: Good nutrition, dental care, auditory 36  care, medical chec k-ups, health screening and appraisal, medical treatment, immunization against the killer diseases, anthropometric assessment, provision of drugs, etc.
3.5 Socio-Economic Status This has to do with the income of the family.
Other determinants of health such as nutrition and medical care of a child depend greatly upon the socio- economic status of the parents.
Meagre incomes have negative effects on the healthy growth and development of children.
The income of each family determines the quality and quantity of the food provided for the children.
Similarly, the income of the family also determines the quality of medical care and health services provided its members.
Poor people are unable to enjoy the luxury of preventive, curative and promotive health care services.
The poor usually live in conditions which undermine physical and mental health, malnutrition, under-nourishment, crowded and unclean housing, inadequate sanitary facilities, poor provision for personal hygiene, etc.
3.6 Environmental Factors The healthy growth and development of children also depends upon the environment in which they live.
A particular environment is either comfortable or detrimental to the live of an organism, human beings inclusive.
The environmental factors which influence the health of individuals include: - The Physical Environment.
There are factors that constitute physical environment.
These factors exert influence on the health of individuals.
Such factors include weather or climatic conditions (temperature), water, air, food, light, noise, pollutants, refuse, sewage, drainage, houses, industries, roads, chemicals, etc.
These factors affect our health and life either positively or negatively.
- The Biological Environment.
This encompasses all living things and plants that exist in our environment.
Germs, living organisms (animals, reptiles, insects, birds, etc).
These factors are very helpful to man, and at the same time constitute danger to his health, if not properly controlled.
- The Psychological Environment.
This deals with those factors that influence human behavior, such as fear, anxiety, motivation, interest, perception, anger, aggression, temperament, self–esteem, self– actualization, love, hatred, recognition, happiness, sadness, sense of belongingness, etc.
These factors have the tendency of influencing one’s health both positively and negatively.
- The Chemical Environment.
There are chemical substances that have both positive and negative influence on our health.
Some of these substances include Kerosine, Petrol, Gas, Insecticides, 37  Chemicals for food pr eservation or storage, medicines for curing of certain ailment, radiological substanc e that are used for X-ray, etc.
- The Social Environment.
This covers interaction between and among people in the human environment.
In clear terms, it involves people’s lifestyle and association in the environment.
These include friendships, communication, nutrition, substance abuse, prostitution, arm- robbery and stealing, recreation, child-abuse, human trafficking, mode of dressing, nutrition, etc (Bulus, 2004).
Each aforementioned component of the environment could influence the health of individuals in one way or the other.
3.7 Parental Care The degree of concern which parents show to children counts much on the physical, mental, social and emotional aspects of their health.
There are many dimensions of parental care.
These include: - Provision of the basic needs of the children.
The basic needs for life include shelter, clothing, food and water.
These basic needs play vital role in the healthy growth and development of children.
The provision of these basic needs is an important aspect of the parental role which parents owe their children.
- Provision of medical/health care.
It is the responsibility of the parents to ensure that children are given adequate medical attention.
It requires parents to initiate actions or show concern over matters relating to child health.
- Provision for medical treatment.
It is the responsibility of parents to ensure that the right medical treatment is given to any child that requires it.
This involves consulting doctors and attending hospitals seeking for medical treatment.
-Provision for medical treatment.
Provision for the medical treatment of the children is an obligatory role of parents.
This involves initiating actions towards obtaining drugs, vaccines, health and counseling.
There are many health problems that are being faced by children which requires prompt medical treatment e.g.
malaria, chicken-pox, measles, small-pox, typhoid, cycle-cell anaemia, whopping cough, polio, worms etc.
- Health Education of the children.
Education of the children on basic health issues should be a shared responsibilit y between the home and school.
It is the responsibility of parents to educate children on simple health matters such as good table manners, good eating habits, safety at home, safety on the road, personal hygiene, dangers of substance abuse, etc.
- Provision of good toilets facilities.
38  It is duty of the paren ts to provide good toilet facilities for proper disposal of human wastes (faeces).
It i s not just the provision, but the sanitary aspects of the toilets should be ensured by the parents.
This will prevent children from being exposed to certain diseases.
- Provision for medical check-ups.
Parents are required to seek for children medical check-ups, health screening and health examination to detect possible hidden health problems for prompt medical intervention.
- Psychological care.
Parents owe their children psychological care at home.
This include love, affection, recognition, acceptability, praises when due, commendation, approval, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit you have learnt about the definitions and concepts of health.
You have also learnt about those factors that determine the health of individuals.
You also learnt about how these factors influence the health of individuals.
5.0 SUMM ARY In this unit you have learnt that the health of an individual is determined and influenced by: - Nutrition - Personal hygiene - Lifestyle - Socio-economic status - Heredity - Medical care - Environmental factors - Parental care - Educational background of the family 6.0 TUTOR-MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) 1.
Explain the term “health” to include its components.
2.
Identify and explain any 5 determinants of health 3.
Explain how socio-economic status and Nutrition influence the health of a child.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DING Adegoroye, A.
(1984).
Community Health Care.
Macmillam Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series.
Macmillam Publishers.
Bulus, W. Z.
(2004).
Lecture package on Environmental Health Education for Undergraduate Students, Department of Physical and Health Education, Federal College of Education, Zaria.
Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development (1995).
Nigeria and the rights of the child.
39  John, A.Y., Olawale, A.M. & Grace, O.S.
(2007).
The Abuse and the Society Royal People (Nig) Limited.
University of Ibadan.
Udoh, C. O.
(1999).
Fundamentals of Health Education.
Heinemann Semester Series Education.
Heinemann Education Books (Nigeria) PLC.
40  UNIT 2: AN OVERVIEW OF T HE GENER AL CHARACTER ISTICS OF CHILDREN CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Social Characteristics 3.2 Physical Characteristics 3.3 Mental Characteristics 3.4 Emotional Characteristics 3.5 An overview of the general needs of the young children 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUC TION Little children exhibit certain common characteristics in their early years.
These characteristics manifest from one growth and developmental stage to another.
These characteristics are classified under physical, mental, social and emotional.
It is important for teachers in nursery schools, day care systems and Child Development Centres to understand these characteristics.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to: - List the physical characteristics - List the mental characteristics - List the emotional characteristics - List the social characteristics - Explain the physical, mental, social and emotional needs of the children.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Physical Characteristics - Slow and steady growth - Highly flexible - More susceptible to respiratory and communicable diseases - Loss of milky teeth.
At the early childhood period the milky (temporal) teeth are replaced by the permanent teeth.
- Low recuperative power.
Children recover from sickness slowly.
- Poor level of physical fitness.
41  Physical fitness deals with one’s ability to perform a given physical work for a long period of time witho ut the onset of undue fatigue, and with the reserved energy to overcome emergency.
Children in their early years do not have the capacity to perform physical activity for a long period of time.
They get tired easily.
- Limited strength and endurance.
At the early years children are weak and as such, cannot endure hardship.
They lack perseverance and stamina.
This emanates from the weakness of the joints, bones and muscles.
- Highly agile.
Children in their early years are not strong.
This makes them more prone to injuries during play.
Their bones are very soft.
- Restlessness.
Children in their early years do not stay in one place for a long period of time, and as such, they do not have enough resting time.
- Poor eye–hand coordination.
The synchronization of eyes and hands is extremely poor.
The rate at which a child reacts to what he sees is slow.
Eg.
Late attempt to catch a ball that has been thrown to him.
When a ball is thrown to a child, he attempts catching it either when it has not reach him or when it has past him.
- Poor muscle coordination and control.
Their muscles in the early years are poorly coordinated.
Movements involve muscles contraction and synchronization.
This poor muscle coordination is as a result of poor development of the nervous system.
This makes control difficult in certain movements.
- Active in play.
Children are very active in their early years.
They are always in active play.
They enjoy playing both in school and at home.
- Small heart and lungs.
The heart and lungs are relatively smaller in size.
This is as a result of slow and steady development of the systems and organs.
- Fast heart rate.
The heart beats faster than that of the adults.
This is due to its smaller size.
- Postural problems.
Children easily develop postural problems such as Kyphorsis, Lodorsis and Scoliosis.
This may be as a result of prolong bad sitting or standing position.
- Slow brain development.
In the early childhood period the brain develop slowly and steadily.
This is responsible for gradual development in reasoning.
- Slow but steady facial development.
The eyes, nose and ears develop slowly and steadily.
42  - Bed-wetting.
At night, most childre n in their early years urinate on bed.
- Dirty appearance.
In the early years, most children appear dirty due to the way they play which involves lying, sitting and rolling on dirty grounds.
3.2 Social Characteristics - children in their early years tend to show no sex preference.
Both boys and girls play together without necessarily selecting who to play with.
- Self-centredness.
This has to do with self-ego.
Children in their early years always want to be first in whatever, they do.
They claim the ownership of parents, property and achievement, even if it is a group achievement.
Statements such as “I did it”, “It is mine”, are common among children.
- Sense of belongingness.
Children like to belong to groups.
They like playing in groups rather than in isolation.
Interaction with peers is common among children.
- Leadership and followership.
They are easily carried along with and by others.
At play, some lead while others follow.
- Exhibition of bad table manners.
This includes talking while eating, coughing at the dinning table.
- Stealing.
Most children in their early year steal at home and in school.
At home some of them indulge in stealing food, while in school, some steal things that belong to their classmates.
- Lying.
Most children in their early years tell lies against their classmates in an attempt to win favour from teachers, and at home to gain parental recognition.
- Thumb-sucking.
Early childhood period is the period during which a good number of children suck their thumb.
The degree of thumbs sucking varies from one child to the other.
- Limited in personal hygiene.
Children generally look dirty in their early childhood years.
Majority of them do not have the sense of personal cleanliness.
3.3 Emotional Characteristics - Children easily get annoyed.
This makes them fight easily.
- They easily get discourage when they failed to make achievement in the initial trials in doing something.
They give-up easily.
- Unlike the adolescents, children easily cry when reprimanded by both teachers and parents.
- Children like praises, acceptance and approval from parents and teachers.
They like praises over little success made by them in the classroom work, in domestic work at home and during play.
They like commendation.
43  - They easily get frig htened by the elder ones both at home, in school and at play.
- They exhibit sibblin gs jealousy.
This happens when a new born baby arrives in the family.
This is as a result of the feeling of not being given parental love and affection.
- They like recognition from teachers and other adults in their immediate environment.
Most children in their early years would want their presence to be noticed at, particularly those who are extroverts.
- Girls exhibit timidity (shyness) more than boys.
- The early childhood period is the period for imitation of teachers, parents, heros, film actors/actresses, sports stars and other adults who are regarded by children as models.
They imitate the ways parents, teachers and others behave.
This makes them learn through imitation.
- They lack endurance and perseverance to tackling challenges of life.
This makes them hate hardship.
- They like affectionate and love from parents.
They also like to be pampered by parents and adults.
3.4 Mental Characteristics -Children have short attention span.
They cannot withstand long hours of teaching.
Their period of concentration in teaching/learning situations is so short.
-Children learn through play, story-telling and dramatization.
-They are curios about many things within and outside the classroom.
Curiosity refers to the act of wanting to know.
-They like exploration.
This makes them exhibit destructive tendencies in an attempt to explore about situations and objects in the environment.
For example, children destroy their toys in an attempt to explore their components and how they function.
-They lack logical thinking over many situations.
This is the more reason why they adopt wrongful approaches in solving problems.
-They always raise philosophical questions.
These are questions which adults sometimes find it extremely difficult to provide right answers to.
For example, children ask their pregnant mothers of how the child got into their womb, who put the child into the womb, when the child will come out of the womb and how the child will come out.
They also ask questions on the nature of God and the universe.
They raise questions on who the father and mother of God are, and on when God was born, etc.
-They have limited ability to withstand complex academic work.
-Some of the children hate schooling after a few months of their enrollment; particularly if the school environment is unattractive to learnings etc.
-They hate failure in academic work.
3.5 The general needs of the children 44  -Children need good parental care.
Parents are required to pay close attention to their children in terms of meeting their health, social, psychological and emotional needs.
E.g.
love, affection, medical care, etc.
-They need adequate health care in terms of medical treatment, health screening, medical check-ups and health examination.
-Children are restless and active.
They play so much.
Therefore, they need to be provided with play facilities and equipment.
-Children are always involved in many dangerous play activities that expose them to certain risks.
In view of this, they need adequate supervision by teachers in school and adults at home.
-Children are more susceptible to all kinds of diseases (communicable and non- communicable), therefore, their classrooms need to be adequately cross ventilated through provision of good windows.
-Children need proper clothing to protect them from hash weather, particularly during winter.
-They need to be protected against cold weather, and injuries.
This could be achieved through supervision and inspection of their play facilities and equipment.
-There is need for the provision of healthy social and physical environment for the children.
Children like imitating others, therefore, the social interaction between children and others should be checked to be sure that they will not learn bad behaviours.
The physical environment such as play grounds should be made safe for participation in physical activities.
-Children need to be educated by both parents and teachers on desirable personal hygienic attitude and practices.
-Children play so much during which they sweat and get so much hydrated.
This makes them much thirsty.
Therefore, they need adequate supply of clean water both at home and in school.
-Children demonstrate certain bad eating habits e.g.
eating without washing hands, talking while eating, splashing soup on the dinning tables, etc.
In view of these, they need to be educated on bad and good eating habits.
-They need to be encouraged to keep repeating certain positive health attitudes and practices.
-Children need provision of safety and security at the home, on the road and in school, particularly on the play grounds.
This could be achieved through periodic inspection of their playgrounds and equipment to ensure they are safed for use.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt about the general characteristics which children exhibit in their early years of development.
These characteristics are categorized into physical, mental, social and emotional.
You have also learnt about their general needs for healthy growth and development.
45  5.0 SUMM ARY In this Unit you have learnt a bout the: - Children’s physical characteristics - Children’s mental characteristics - Children’s social characteristics - Children’s emotional characteristics - General needs of children 6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) (1) Identify and explain any five physical characteristics of young children (2) List any ten (10) social characteristics of young children (3) Discuss the mental characteristic of young children (4) State any ten (10) general needs of young children 7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTH ER REA DINGS Laoye, J.A.
and Ackland, J.W.
(1981).
Principles of Physical Education for Nigeria Teachers Colleges.
University Press Limited, Ibadan, Nigeria.
46  UNIT 3: PROVISION OF HEALT H SERVIC ES FOR SCHOOL CHILDREN CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concepts of health services 3.2 The scope of school health services 3.3 Components of school health services 3.4 The scope of health appraisal 3.5 The scope of health observation 3.6 The scope of screening tests 3.7 Areas of health counseling 3.8 The importance of school health services 3.9 Personnel involved in the school health services program 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUC TION The role of health services in the educational and healthy growth and development of the young children cannot be over-emphasized.
Therefore, both the school and the home are responsible for the provision of adequate and comprehensive health services for the children.
Apart from contributing to the healthy growth and development of the children, health services form an essential part of their educational experiences.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to explain the: - Concepts of health services - Components of health services - Importance of health service to young children - The role of school in providing health services for children - The role of the home in the provision of health services for children; etc.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Definitions and Concept s of School Health Services School health services constitute one of the components of school health program.
School health services is that part of the school health program to appraise, protect, maintain and promote the health of the pupils/students and the school personnel.
(Udoh, 1999) 47  3.2 The Scope of School Health Services -Health appraisal is a n evaluation of the current health status of the school children.
It is the process that seeks to determine the total health status of children through: (a) Parent, teacher and nurse observations.
(b) Screening tests for visual and auditory acuity.
(c) Physical fitness tests.
-Health counseling is the procedures that are carried out by doctors, nurses, counselors, teachers or other qualified personnel in order to interpret to pupils and parents the nature and significance of health problems.
-Emergency care of sickness & injury.
The school has the responsibility for giving immediate care in case of accident or sudden illnesses as well as notifying parents, for getting children home or to some other places of safety and for guiding parents, where necessary to sources of treatment.
-Health screening covers tests of vision, hearing and physical fitness of the school children.
It also involves testing the height and weight of the children.
-Medical examination.
This involves periodic examination of the school children through health appraisal.
It also involves referral examination which provides an opportunity for the doctor to check any reported cases of deviation from the normal health.
-Health inspection involves observation of the physical appearance of children.
This covers body cleanliness, finger-nails, hair, etc.
-Provision of drugs/vaccines.
It is the collaborative responsibility of the home and school to provide drugs for the treatment of certain illnesses or health problems affecting children.
Vaccines are also provided by the schools for the vaccination of children in prevention of certain health problems.
-Nutrition is the science of feeding.
It is the responsibility of the school to feed the children.
This constitutes part of the school health services.
-Anthropometric assessment is concerned with the assessment/measuring the height, weight and body composition of the school children.
This helps in determined the relationships between their height, weight and body composition.
-Health evaluation is the procedure that is carried out to determine healthy growth and development of the children.
-Dental examination is the procedure that aims taking care of the mouth and teeth of the children.
This procedure is carried out by a dentist.
-Ambulatory service.
It is the responsibility of the school to provide an ambulance for the conveyance of the school child who needs immediate proper medical attention.
This involves provision of the ambulance for the transportation of the victim of any health circumstance to either the hospital or home.
-Referral services.
There are health problems which the school may not be able to properly handle due to lack of qualified personnel, complexity of the problem or lack 48  of the facilities or e quipment.
In such cases, it becomes the responsibility of the school to make arrange ment for sending the affected child to another medical centre.
-Diagnostic examination.
This is the further procedure from the health appraisal.
Health appraisal procedures may reveal conditions that indicate the need for diagnostic examination ordinarily not in the health appraisal exercise.
For example, a child may be suspected of being anaemic, or of having tuberculosis needs further diagnostic examination for confirmation of his health problem.
-Teachers health observations.
Teachers occupy a very strategic position to observe the pupil’s physical and emotional wellbeing as well as his academic achievement.
This is because the school boy or girl spends more of his time with the classroom teacher than with any other adult except the parents.
The teacher sees the child on his “rainy day” as well as on his “sunny day”, witness his success and failures, observes his reactions and interactions with other children and is aware of any changes in the child’s behavior.
The scope of teachers observation is quite extensive.
The areas that are covered in teachers observation may include: (a) General appearance of the children.
(b) Eyes, ears, norse, throat, mouth, teeth, skin and scalps.
(c) Behaviour at play.
(d) General behavior.
(e) Health attitude and practices.
(f) Children’s complaints.
(g) School attendance.
-Provision of good sanitary conditions.
This includes provision of clean toilet and bath room facilities for school children.
School healthful living constitutes part of sanitary conditions.
-Immunization is the procedure taken by schools to prevent pupils from being affected by certain health problems e.g.
Polio, measles, tetanus, small pox, chicken pox, etc.
This takes the form of vaccination of the children.
-Provision of safety learning environment.
This involves all measures taken to ensure that learning environment is free from dangerous objects such as stones, sharp-pointed irons, nails, broken bottles, slippery grounds or floors, falling roofs or walls, etc.
All these conditions endanger the lives of school children.
-First aid treatment and emergency care.
It is the responsibility of the school to take immediate actions in the case of injuries or sudden illnesses that may affect a school child.
The immediate treatment given to an injured child before drawing the attention of the parent or before securing proper medical care is referred to as “first aid treatment”.
This treatment is administered to prevent the victim’s situation from being deteriorated.
-Provision of first aid box and its content.
Each school, under normal situation, should have a well equipped first aid box containing the following: 49  Adhesive comp resses.
Safety pints.
Sterile gauze.
Skin antiseptic.
Roll of sterile gauze.
Absorbent cotton.
Triangular bandages.
Applicator sticks.
Adhesive bandages.
Tongue depressors.
Scissors.
Red cross first aid Tourniquet.
Manual.
Splinter.
Record book.
Splints.
Iodine, etc.
-Provision of health facility and equipment.
Every school is required to have a health room or dispensary for emergency health care or first aid treatment.
This health room should contain well equipped first aid box, diagnostic beds and other essential materials.
This facility should be manned by health personnel such as nurses, doctors, dentists, etc.
3.3 Component s of the School Health Services The school health services listed above are categorized into the following components: -Health appraisal is the procedure that seeks to evaluate the current health status of the school children through medical examination, health diagnosis, and physical fitness tests.
-Health promotion/maintenance involves those procedures adopted to raise or improve the health status of individuals.
-Health protection/prevention are those procedures that seek to prevent the health status of an individual from negative fluctuation e.g.
Immunization, Vaccination etc.
-Curative measures are those procedures that are taken to help an individual overcome or recover from ill-health or an injury that is sustained.
3.4 The scope of health appraisal Health appraisal covers the following areas of the school child: -Teacher observations.
This has already been explained.
It involves observations of the pupil’s physical, mental, social and emotional wellbeing.
It is done for the purpose of detecting hidden health problems in the children.
Whatever health problem that is observed by the teacher is reported or referred to either parents or nurses for prompt action to arrest the situation.
-Screening tests.
This has also been explained earlier.
However, they include tests of vision, hearing, physical fitness, anthropometric assessment.
It is the preliminary assessments of the state of development and function of the various body organs.
The primary purpose of screening tests is to secure a better understanding of the pupils so as to help them attain greater physical effectiveness, and to increase their understanding of ways of living healthfully.
50  -Physical fitness tests are those procedures that measure pupils’ motor skills, muscle strength, muscle and heart endurance, joints flexibility, agility, power, and other health and performance – related factors.
There are a good number of a battery of tests that could be used for physical fitness evaluation.
These include Harvard or Cooper’s step-test, 12 minutes run/walk test (even though not appropriate for school (pupils), speed tests (50m & 100m run), chin-ups, press-ups, sit-and-reach tests, etc.
These tests are conducted by a physical education teacher.
-Anthropometric measurement is a screening test of a child’s healthy growth and development.
It involves measurements which provide information about growth including variations due to sex, age and individual growth patterns.
In this assessment, growth and development charts, measurement scales, or tensiometer are used.
-Studying of health records constitutes another aspect of health appraisal.
The health records contain vital information concerning individual’s past and present health status or health problems.
Knowi.ng the historical development of the child’s health is an important aspect of health appraisal.
-Medical examination is of two distinct types namely: Periodic medical examination and referral medical examination.
The first type involves periodic medical check- ups and diagnosis of the child.
The second type of medical examination provides an opportunity for the doctor to check any reported cases of deviation from the normal health.
-Dental examination is also another important aspect of health appraisal.
It is a programme that aims at helping children to appreciate the importance of having a clean mouth, free from disease and abnormalities for personal care through periodic dental examination.
A well formed set of teeth gives a good shape to the face and aids in speech.
Tooth problem can cause one of the greatest pains one can imagine.
It is better then to protect one from dental diseases which could lead not only to great pains, but also to other health complications.
3.5 The scope of health observations As earlier on stated, health observation constitutes another important aspect of health appraisal.
It is done for the purpose of detecting health problems in children for corrective measures and referral services.
Health observations cover areas such as general appearance, postural deviation, body cleanliness, eyes, ears, throat, mouth, teeth, skin and scalp and behavior at play.
Other areas of observation include general behavior (docile, seclusive drowsiness, aggression, depression, unhappiness, etc), health attitudes and practices, academic achievement and school attendance.
3.6 The scope of screening tests Screening tests covera good number of areas.
These tests also form part of the health appraisal which cover the preliminary assessments of the state of development and functions of the various vital systems and organs of the body.
Screening tests cover 51  measurement of heig ht and weight of the children, vision screening and hearing screening.
Hearing s creening involves the procedures taken to obtain information about the hearing ability of pupils and impairments.
In this case the ears of the children are subjected to screening.
Vision screening test is conducted to detect obvious eyes diseases which may be evidenced by swelling of the eye-lids, inflammation and redness of the eyes, discharges, unusual blinking of the eyes, etc.
3.7 Health Counselling This is another important aspect of school health services.
It is conducted immediately following the detection of any of physical, mental, social and emotional health problems.
Counseling services are not given to only children with health problems, but parents inclusive.
For example, parents may be counseled on the need to motivate children to attend school regularly and promptly.
They may also be counseled to provide children with proper nutrition and adequate parental care at home, and on appropriate ways or methods of handling certain social and emotional health problems of their children e.g.
stealing, lying, substance abuse (drugs, alcohol, smoking) and personal hygiene of the children.
3.8 The Importance of School Health Services - Appraisal of the health status of school children and personnel - Counselling pupils, teachers and parents - Preventing and controlling communicable diseases - Providing emergency care for injury or sudden sickness - Protecting and promoting health of the pupils and personnel - Identification and education of the handicapped children - Adjusting the individual school program to meet the needs of children with health problems - Encouraging the correct or remedial defects - Providing learning opportunities conducive for maintenance and promotion of individual and community health.
3.9 Personne l that are involved in the School Health Services Program Health services program is organized and implemented by a team of personnel from different areas of health.
These personnel collaboratively work as a team for the healthy growth and development of school children.
The team of these personnel include: -Health education teachers who are responsible for the teaching of health education as a subject in schools.
They educate the children on desirable health attitudes and practices.
-Physical educators contribute much to the school health services component.
A physical educator is in the position to impress on the children the importance of physical activity in the development of their physical fitness.
52  -Nurses provide liais on with medical personnel on the one hand and with the children, teachers, an d parents on the other.
They stimulate support for and give direction to all phases of the school health program.
-Physicians play a key role in the conduct of medical examinations, correction of remediable defects.
They are also responsible for the administration of first aid treatment in schools.
-Nutritionists serve as consultants who plan eating programs which are geared towards the needs of individual students.
They assist individual children who need special nutritional counseling.
-Physical therapists are concerned with the rehabilitation of the functions of the injured parts of the body.
During play children are bound to sustain one injury or the other.
-Speech therapists help to correct speech defects in children.
They meet with individual children that have speech defects and give them exercises and drills for their individual problems.
-Dentists conduct dental examinations, give or supervise oral prophylaxis, and advise the school on curriculum in dental hygiene.
They serve as dental consultants and are also responsible for first aid and emergency care.
-Psychologists help in detecting deviant behaviours from the normal in the school children.
-Podiatrists help in the study and care of the foot.
They serve as consultants on matters relating to foot problems.
-Pediastrists are concerned with the practice of caring for or treating injuries and illnesses that occur in the young physically active children and adolescents.
-Teachers play vital role in the observation and detection of health problems faced by school children.
Teachers’ observations in the school health services are as important as the role of any other school health service personnel.
-Orthopedists are responsible for treating injuries and disorders of the musculoskeletal systems.
-Neurologists are concerned with the treatment of the disorder of and injuries to the nervous system.
They serve as consultants on matters relating to head injuries or peripheral nerve injury.
-Internists are physicians who specialized in the practice of internal medicine.
They treat diseases of the internal organs by using measures other than surgery.
-Ophthalmologists are those physicians who manage and treat injuries to the eye.
They evaluate and fit patients with glasses or contact lens.
-Psychiatrists are responsible for diagnosis, treatment and prevention of mental illness.
They serve as consultants on matters relating to mental health problems.
(Buchr, 1979; Arnheim & Prentice, 2002) 4.0 CONCLUSION 53  In this Unit, you have learn t about the school health services which include definitions, components/scope, importanc e and the personnel that are involved.
5.0 SUMM ARY In this Unit, you have learnt that a comprehensive school health services program is of paramount importance to the life of the school children.
This program is tailored toward promoting, maintenance, preventing and protecting the health of school children.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGN MENT (TMA) 1.
Explain any five (5) importance of school health services.
2.
Explain the components of school health services.
3.
Explain the scope of screening tests.
4.
State any five (5) areas of health counseling.
5.
List and explain the duties of any five (5) personnel that are involved in the school health services program.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DINGS Adegoroye, A.
(1984).
Community Health Care.
Macmillam Tropical Nursing and Health Sciences Series.
Macmillam Publishers.
Arnheim, D.D.
and Prentice, W.E.
(2002).
Essentials of Athletic Training.
Fifth Edition.
Mc Graw Hill.
Bucher, C. A.
(1979).
Foundations of Physical Education.
Eighth Edition.
The C. V. Mosby Company.
St. Louis.
Toronto.
London.
Udoh, C. O.
(1999).
Fundamentals of Health Education.
Heinemann Semester Series Education.
Heinemann Education Books (Nigeria) PLC.
54  UNIT 4: WORLD DECLARAT ION ON THE RIGHTS OF CHILDREN CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concepts of “right” and “child rights” 3.2 Basic principles of children’s rights 3.3 Specific child rights in view 3.4.0 Roles of Government and Parents in promoting child rights 3.4.1 Right to Life 3.4.2 Freedom and Association 3.4.3 Right to Identity 3.4.4 Right to communication 3.4.5 Right to privacy 3.4.6 Right to leisure and recreation 3.4.7 Right to Education 3.4.8 Right to Good Health 3.4.9 Right to Freedom from Discrimination 3.4.10 The right to protection against exploitation and inhuman treatment 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNMENT (TMA) 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS.
1.0 INTRODUC TION In every nation all over the world, there are laws that grant every child certain freedom and legal entitlement across his survival or life, his health, his health care, his citizenship, his protection, and his education.
These laws are meant to ensure the survival and protection of every child, his health promotion, his healthy growth and development, his education as well as his deserved parental and societal care.
These laws are referred to as “The child’s rights”.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit you should be able to: 1.
Explain the meaning and concepts of “rights” and “child’s rights”.
2.
Mention and explain the child’s rights.
3.
Explain how each child’s right affects his life.
4.
Explain the importance of the child’s rights.
5.
Explain the roles of government and parents in the enforcement of the children’s rights.
(John, Olawale & Grace, 2007) 3.0 MAIN BODY 55  3.1 Concept s of “rights and child rights” A child is any huma n being who is below the age of 18 years.
A right is a natural due, a moral claim or a legal entitlement.
A child rights are his survival, development and participation.
(Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development, Abuja, 1995 and Abas, 2000) 3.2 Basic Princip les of Children’s Righ ts 1.
Every child has the right to life and be allowed to survive and develop.
2.
Every child has the right to express his opinions and freely communicates them on any issues subject to restriction under law.
3.
Every child is entitled to a name, family and nationality.
4.
Every child has freedom to any association or assembly as permitted by the law.
5.
Every child is entitled to protection from any act that interferes with his or her privacy, honour and reputation.
6.
Every child is entitled to adequate rest, recreation (leisure and play) according to his/her age and culture.
7.
Every child (male or female) is entitled to receive compulsory basic education and equal opportunity for higher education depending on individual ability.
8.
Every child must be protected from indecent and inhuman treatment through sexual exploitation, drug abuse, child labour, torture maltreatment and neglect.
9.
Every child is entitled to good health, protection from illness and proper medical attention for survival, personal growth and development.
10.
Every child has the right not to suffer any discrimination irrespective of ethnic, origin, birth color, sex, language, religion, political and social beliefs, status or disability.
3.3 Specific Child Righ ts in Brief 1.
Righ t to Life - A child has the right to life - A child has the right to survive - A child has the right to develop - A child has the right to participate actively in the promotion of his/her right.
2.
Freedo m of Associat ion - A child has the freedom of joining any association, be in relationship with other people or belong to any assembly as permitted by the law.
- No child should be separated from his/her family or parents except on the Authority of a competent court that such separation is in the best interest of the child.
3.
Righ t to identity -Every child has the right to a name 56  - Every child has the right to a family - Every child has the right to a nationality - Every child has the right to know his or her parents and be catered for.
4.
Righ t to Freedo m of com municat ion - Every child has the right to express his or her ideas, opinions and thoughts on any issue concerning his/her interest subject to restrictions under the law.
- Every child has the right to seek, receive and impart information and relation to children under the law.
5.
Righ t to privacy Every child has the right to be protected from any act that interferes with his/her privacy, honour and reputation in the homes, family and school.
Provided the parents or legal guardians shall have the right to exercise reasonable supervision over the conduct of their children.
6.
Righ t to Leisure and Recreat ion Every child is entitled to adequate rest, recreation (leisure and play) appropriate to his/her age and culture.
7.
Righ t to Educat ion Every child (male or female) is entitled to receive free and compulsory basic education and equal opportunity for higher education based on individual ability.
8.
Righ t to good Health Every child is entitled to enjoy good health, protection from diseases, and proper medical care for survival, personal growth and development.
No child should be deprived of his/her rights to health care services.
9.
Freedo m from Discriminat ion Every child has the right not to be discriminated.
No child should suffer discrimination irrespective of his/her ethnic, origin, birth, colour, sex, language, religion, or social beliefs, status or disability.
10.
Protection Against Exploitation and Inhuman T reatment Every child must be protected against all forms of exploitation, indecent or degrading treatment including child labour, abuse and torture, sexual exploitation, trafficking, abduction and drug abuse.
3.4.0 Roles of Government and Parents in promoting child rights 3.4.1 Righ t to Life Role of Government - Recognise the inherent right of the child to life.
- Develop policies and programs for child survival, protection and development.
57  - Protect, by law, the right and dignity of children from harmful traditional, social and religious practices that affect the life and growth of a child.
Role of the Parents - Giving the child good parental care e.g.
love, affection, feeding, clothing and proper upbringing.
- Provision of necessary protection through provision of medical attention and security from exploitation.
-Provision of good living conditions necessary for the physical, moral, emotional, social and mental growth of the child.
-Provision of adequate food, health education, housing and other necessities of life.
3.4.2 Freedom of Association Role of Government -Respect the freedom of children to belong to any lawful and peaceful association or assembly.
-Protect any child separated from his or her parents under the law.
Role of Parents -Create a conducive atmosphere for children to freely associate and relate with others in society.
-Encourage unified family structures that will sustain integration of children into individual and extended family units.
-Monitor the company of friends being kept by children to prevent negative Influences.
3.4.3 Righ t to Identity Role of Government -Enforcement of registration of all births -Preservation and protection of the identify of each child as required by the law.
Role of Parents -Registration of every child immediately after birth -Ensuring respect for the child by giving him/her a name and identity.
3.4.4 Righ t to Communicat ion Role of Government -Ensure that children are given the opportunity to form their ideas and opinions on issues of interest as approved by law and tradition.
-Giving children the opportunity to be heard either directly or through a representative in any judicial or administrative procedure.
Role of Parents 58  -Assist children in obt aining relevant information to their mental growth and development.
-Protect children from exposure to indecent films, pictures, books etc.
-Provide guidance for children in the exercise of this right in their best interest and that of the society.
-Give necessary direction for the enjoyment of these rights according to national laws.
-Encourage constant communication with children in all spheres of life.
3.4.5 Righ t to Privacy Role of Government -Enforcement of the law that protects children from arbitrary or unlawful interference or attacks.
-Investigate cases of unlawful invasion of privacy and arrange for redress according to the law.
Role of Parents -Respect the Rights of the child to privacy while exercising supervision over his/her conduct in general and monitoring the child to prevent anti-social behavior.
3.4.6 Righ ts to Leisure and Recreation Role of Government -Recognise the right of every child to engage in recreational activities appropriate to the age and culture of the child.
-Promote policies and programs that encourage the free and full Participation of children in recreational activities.
Roles of Parents -Encourage children to participate in recreational and cultural activities.
-Support recreational artistics and leisure activities for children.
-Provide facilities for children to enjoy these rights.
3.4.7 Righ t to Educat ion Role of Government -Make basic education compulsory and free for all children.
-Encourage the development of different forms of secondary education both general and vocational.
-Take measures to encourage regular school attendance.
-Provide educational and vocational information to guide children in schools.
-Make higher education accessible to all children, etc.
Role of Parents -Send children to approved schools at the appropriate ages and ensure they Complete their education.
-Complement school education with proper up-bringing, moral training and 59  positive traditional va lues.
-Ensure that girls who unfortunately become pregnant before completing their education have another opportunity to continue their education after birth.
-Encourage children to continue their education towards career objective.
3.4.8 Righ t to Good Health Role of Government -Improve existing curative and rehabilitative health care delivery system.
-Provide more facilities for treatment and medical rehabilitation in health care delivery.
-Implement measures to: (a) reduce infant and child death.
(b) provide primary health care to all children.
(c) provide regular medical checking for school children.
(d) promote family life education and provide family planning services.
(e) provide necessary health care services.
(f) provide necessary health care services for the expectant and nursing mothers.
(g) combat diseases and malnutrition.
(h) ensure provision of adequate nutrition and safe drinking water.
(i) abolish harmful traditional practices.
(j) provide Day – Care Centres.
(k) integrate basic health services into national health development plan.
(l) promote and encourage exclusive breast feeding.
(m) promote collaboration with international agencies and donor countries for assistance in support of child health – care services.
Role of Parents -Ensure that the child is given all necessary immunization.
-Ensure adequate medical check-up and medical attention to children to prevent disability and death.
-Giving children nutritious food and clean water.
-Practice family planning for the health of children and mothers.
-Avoid traditional practices which are harmful to the health of the child e.g.
tribal marks, female circumcision, etc.
-Ensure that the child is educated on health issues.
-Discourage abortion, prostitution and sexual promiscuity, etc.
3.4.9 Freedo m from Discriminat ion Role of Government 60  -Monitor the national environment to identify areas of discrimination concerning children.
-Develop policies to eliminate all forms discrimination relating to Children.
-Legislate against custom and practices that are discriminatory to the child on the basics of sex e.g.
depriving female children education, early marriage and female circumcision.
-provide educational, sport, recreational and medical facilities for both handicapped and normal children, etc.
Role of Parents - Promote equality and fair play in the treatment of male and female children.
- Be responsive to the peculiar needs of female children and educate both sexes on the danger of unwanted pregnancy.
- Adequate attention to the physically and mentally challenged children as much as to other children.
3.4.10 The Righ t to be protected against Exploitation and Inhuman Treatment Role of Government -On the child labour, government should enforce legislative and administrative measures regulating terms and conditions for admission into the labour markets.
-Mobilize public opinion against economic exploitation and child labour which interferes with the child’s physical, mental, moral and social development.
-On child abuse and torture, government should legislate against all forms of torture and human degrading treatment like physical or mental injury, neglect or maltreatment.
-Prohibit the use of children for rituals.
-Establishing the mechanism to monitor, investigate and report cases of violation of this right in society.
-On sexual exploitation,government should take legislative and administrative measures to: (a) protect children from sexual abuse and exploitation.
(b) Prohibit their use for prostitution.
(c) prevent their use in pornographic publication and trafficking, etc -On drug abuse, government protect children from the use and exposure to the illicit drugs.
-Legislate against the use of children in the production and trafficking of drugs and other dangerous chemical substances.
-On the sale and abduction of children, government prevent the sale and abduction in any form.
-Prohibit the use of children for all forms begging, etc.
61  Role of Parents -On child labour, paren ts should: (a) Understand their civic and social responsibilities regarding working children.
(b) Protect children and wards from child labour abuse especially hawking or street trading, etc.
-On child abuse and torture, parents should: (a) Ensure adequate protection of children from torture, inhuman treatment e.g.
physical or mental abuse, neglect, abandonment or maltreatment.
(b) Respect human dignity and child care in administering discipline.
-On sales, trafficking and abduction, parents should: (a) avoid trafficking children for cheap labour.
(b) desist from using children for alms begging.
(c) prevent all firms of trading in children and abduction.
(d) monitor and protect children from the abuses.
(Federal Ministry of Women Affairs & Social Development, Abuja, 1995).
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt about the world declaration on the rights of a child.
You have also learnt about the meaning and concepts of “right”, “child” and “child rights”.
In addition to the above, you have also learnt about the roles of the government and parents in the enforcement of child rights.
5.0SUMM ARY In this Unit, you have learnt that the child rights cut across the following: (a) Right to life (b) Freedom of Association (c) Human Dignity (d) Communication (e) Privacy (f) Leisure and Recreation (g) Education (h) Good Health (i) Freedom from Discrimination (j) Inhuman treatment and exploitation (k) Identity 6.0 TUTOR -MARKED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) 1.
Identify any five (5) child rights and explain the roles of government and parents in such rights.
2.
State the areas covered by the children’s rights.
3.
Explain the importance of child rights to the child and society.
4.
Explain the relevance of child rights to his/her: (a) Health 62  (b) Education (c) Communicati on, and (d) Discrimination.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DING Abas, A.
(2000).
An Appraisal of the convention on the rights of the child.
A paper presented at the advocacy/sensitization meeting on the rights of the Handicapped and Destitute Children.
Held at the Ministry of Women Affairs, Youth and Social Development, Kaduna State, Nigeria.
Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development, Abuja (1995).
Nigeria and the Rights of the Child.
John, A.Y., Olawale, A.m. & Grace, O.S.
(2007).
The Abused and the Society Published by Royal People (Nig.)
Ltd. University of Ibadan.
Olakanmi, O.
(2007).
Handbook on Human Rights.
First Edition.
LawLords Publications.
63  UNIT 5: WORLD DECLAR AT ION ON CHILD ABUSE CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Concepts of “child abuse” 3.2 Forms of child abuse 3.3 Causes of child abuse 3.4 Dangers of child abuse 3.5 The effects of child abuse on his health, education, survival, growth and development 3.6 Intervention measures on child abuse 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS.
1.0 INTRODUC TION In this Unit, you will learn about the meaning, concepts and the treatments that constitute abuse to the children.
You will also learn about the forms of child abuse, causes of child abuse and the effects of abuse on the children and society at large.
In addition to the above, you will be introduced to the various intervention (control and preventive) measures of child abuse.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: - Explain the meaning and concepts of child abuse.
- List and explain the forms of child abuse.
- Explain the causes of child abuse.
- Discuss the intervention measures of child abuse.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Child abuse refers to a violation of any child right.
This could be in a form of administering inhuman treatment of a child, inflicting physical injury on a child, neglecting certain aspects of the child life.
Any maltreatment of a child that is detrimental or harmful to his/her physical, mental, social and moral health.
Any maltreatment that produces negative effects on the child life (survival), health, education, physical and mental growth and development constitutes child abuse.
(John, Olawale & Grace, 2007).
3.2 Forms of Child Abuse The following constitute child abuse as provided by John, Olawale & Grace (2007): 1.
Child labour and child misuse.
64  2.
Child sale or traff icking.
3.
Sexual exploitatio n of the child.
This includes sexual harassment, rape, etc.
4.
Child marriage.
5.
Discrimination against children.
6.
Neglecting children.
7.
Abortion.
8.
Depriving children the freedom of association with others.
9.
Depriving the child from his/her right to life.
10.
Depriving the child the right to identity.
11.
Depriving the child from the right to education.
12.
Denial of the child the right to good health.
13.
Depriving the child from the right to leisure and recreation.
14.
Exposing the child to conditions that are harmful to his physical and mental growth and development.
15.
Denial of a child good feeding.
16.
Depriving child medical attention.
17.
Using a child for hawking, alms, begging, etc 3.3 Causes of Child Abuse According to John, Olawale & Grace (2007), causes of child abuse include the following: - Poverty/Economic factors - Religious factors - Cultural factors - Ignorance - Greediness - Psychological factors such as anger, depression, aggression, frustration, hatred, etc.
- Disrespect to human dignity.
3.4.0 Dangers of Negative Effects of Child Abuse to the Child and Societ y 3.4.1 Effects on the child - Infant or child death - Poor healthy growth and development - Poor mental, social and physical development - Exposure to all kinds of diseases - School drop-outs - Bad postural development - Stealing/arm-robbery - Juvenile-Delinquency - Prostitution - Child marriage - Unwanted pregnancy 65  - Aggressive tendenc y - Inferiority complex - Substance abuse - Social and emotional maladjustment, etc.
3.4.2 Dangers of Child Abuse to Society - High rate of crime - Social and economic unstability - Political and religious crisis - Insecurity - High incidence of HIV/AIDS and other STI’s diseases - Increased rate of violence.
(Abas, 2000) 3.5 Intervention Measures by Government and Parents The intervention measures by government and parents as provided by the Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development, Abuja (1995) include the following: (a) By Government -Development of policies and programs for child survival, protection and development -Protecting the right and dignity of the children by law from harmful traditional, social and religious practices that negatively affect the life and healthy growth of the children -Preservation and protection of the identity of each child as required by law -Enforcement of the law that protects children from arbitrary or unlawful interference or attacks -Promote policies and programs that encourage the free and full participation of children in leisure and recreational activities -Recognize the right of the children to engage in recreational activities -Make basic education compulsory and free for all children -Takes measures to encourage regular school attendance -Improve existing curative and rehabilitative health care delivery system -Provision of more facilities of treatment and medical rehabilitation in health care delivery -Implement measures to reduce infant and child death -Provision of necessary health services for children -Provision of family life education and family planning services, etc.
(b) By Parents -Good parental care 66  -Necessary pro tection through provision of medical attention and security explo itation -Provision of good living conditions -Provision of adequate food, health education and other necessities of life -Monitoring the company of friends being kept by the children -Protect children from exposure to indecent films, pictures, books, etc.
-Respecting the rights of the child to privacy while exercising supervision over his/her conduct -Encouraging children to participate in recreational and cultural activities -Provide facilities and equipment for children to enjoy leisure and recreational activities -Send children to approved schools at the appropriate ages and ensure the completion of their education -Ensuring proper up-bringing, moral training and positive traditional values in the children -Ensuring that children are given all necessary immunization -Ensuring adequate medical check-up -Giving children medical attention -Providing children with nutritious food and clean water -Promote equality and fair play in the treatment of male and female children -Responsive to the peculiar needs of the children, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt about the collaborative roles of the government and parents in the intervention measures for the protection and promotion of the rights of a child.
You have also learnt about the forms of child abuse and the intervention measures by government and parents.
5.0 SUMM ARY In this Unit, you have learnt about: -Definitions and concepts of child abuse -Causes of child abuse in society -Forms of child abuse -Dangers/effects of abuse on the child and society at large -The intervention measures by government and parents.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) (1) Identify and explain five (5) causes of child abuse in Nigeria (2) Explain the effects of abuse on the child and the society at large (3) Discuss any five (5) intervention measures in preventing and controlling child abuse in Nigeria.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DINGS 67  Abas, A.
(2000).
An Apprais al of the convention on the rights of the child.
A paper presented at the advo cacy/sensitization meeting on the rights of the Handicapped and Destitute Children.
Held at the Ministry of Women Affairs, Youth and Social Development, Kaduna State, Nigeria.
Federal Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development, Abuja (1995).
Nigeria and the Rights of the Child.
John, A.Y., Olawale, A.m. & Grace, O.S.
(2007).
The Abused and the Society Published by Royal People (Nig.)
Ltd. University of Ibadan.
MODULE 3 INTERV ENTION MEASURES ON EARLY CHILDHOOD HEALTH PROB LEM S INTRODUC TION UNIT 1: Intervention measures by the United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) UNIT 2: Intervention measures by the United States Agencies for International Development (USAID) on childhood health problems UNIT 3: Roles/Intervention measures by the World Health Organization (WHO) on childhood health problems UNIT 4 & 5 Roles/Intervention measures by the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) UNIT 1: INTERVENTION MEASURES BY THE UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONA L CHILDREN ’S EMERGENCY FUND (UNICEF) ON EARLY CHILDHOOD HEALTH PROBLEMS CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Supportive intervention measures to combat children health problems 68  3.2 Protective interventio n measures 3.3 Control intervention measures 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.0 INTRODUC TION The United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) is one of the international organizations that has played, and is still playing many vital roles as intervention measures on the numerous early childhood health problems in the developing nations.
These intervention measures could be either in the areas of management, control, protection, promotion, prevention or supportive roles.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (1) Identify certain early childhood health problems which UNICEF has played vital roles in combating them in the affected nations of the world.
(2) Explain the intervention measures that were carried out by the UNICEF in combating certain childhood health problems in particular nations of the world.
(3) Classify the intervention measures of the UNICEF into control, protective, preventive and supportive roles.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Suppor tive intervention measures to combat childhood health problems -Conducting up-to-date substantial research work on what will help to give children the best start in life, to survive and thrive, especially in emergency and to go to school.
-Supporting the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in developing countries.
-Program to support child survival and development.
-Programs to support the realization of the MDG 4 – reducing child mortality.
-Program toward helping children to survive and have a healthy productive future.
-Advocates for, and gives financial and technical support to national and community- based education for healthy growth and development of children.
-Sharing advocacy, social mobilization, and research work in a supporting role to help other agencies provide emergency obstetrics.
-Providing vaccines for children in developing countries and providing technical support on the complicated process of delivering them.
-Delivers other life – saving intervention measures like fresh water, food and basic medical supplies to children in an emergency declared situation.
69  -Improving children’ s developmental readiness for school, especially for excluded children and among disadvantaged groups, via community-based childhood and health initiatives.
-Creating child – friendly environment for learning through supporting water, sanitation, and hygiene improvement in schools.
-UNICEF works in collaboration with many nations, non-profit organization and non-governmental organizations to organize gender – sensitive prevention education, skills and service campaigns to educate the general public on HIV/AIDS which brings poverty and social devastation along with death of the children.
-UNCEF also works via advocacy and community outreach to help governments, communities and families support children who are orphaned by HIV/AIDS.
-Embarking on supportive programs that help prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS.
Such programs include the provision of antiretroviral drugs for women and children, etc.
3.2 Protective Intervention Measures by UNICEF to combat Childhood Health Problems in Developing Nations -Advocacy of child’s rights to basic quality of life.
-Comprehensive child health care program, including antenatal period before birth.
-Immunization to protect children from malaria.
-Provision of treated mosquito bed-nets to protect children from mosquito bites.
-Health program which includes antenatal care of pregnant women and neonatal care in the first four (4) weeks after birth.
-UNICEF provides vaccines for the protection of children from diseases such as measles, polio, diphtheria and tuberculosis.
-Vaccination program which includes supplements of vitamin ‘A’ and micronutrients that further boost immunity and helps prevent malnutrition – related disorders.
-UNICEF helps in protecting children’s right to basic education.
-For the purpose of child protection, in support of the Millennium Summit Declaration, Section 6 – protecting the vulnerable, UNICEF advances protective environments to help prevent and respond to violence and exploitation.
3.3 Control Intervention Measures -UNICEF works in partnership with other international organizations such as WHO, FAO, USAID and IRCS in controlling health problems faced by children in some nations.
-Contributing effectively to reducing poverty, through advocacy and partnerships that creates sustained investment in children’s survival, development and protection.
-Embarks on malaria control program.
-Controlling and treating malaria and respiratory diseases affecting children.
Embarks on programs for eradicating guinea worm and preventing anaemia.
70  -Partnership along wit h WHO, UNICEF supports local programs that improve access to basic water and s anitary, which are in turn, vital for health, development and education initiatives.
-UNICEF, working through advocacy and its local offices worldwide, helps strengthen the resources of schools, communities and families to care for marginalized children.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt about the various preventive, protective, control and supportive intervention measures taking by the UNICEF on health problems affective children in the developing nations of the world.
5.0 SUMM ARY In this Unit, you have learnt that the role of UNICEF in combating childhood health problems in developing nations cannot be over-emphasized.
Such roles include provision of drugs and vaccines, immunization, controlling of diseases affecting children, embarking on programs to support the lives of children, preventive protective programs.
Other roles include advocacy of child rights to life and survival, education, nutrition, freedom of self- expression and health; etc.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) (1) State any 5 intervention measures taken by the UNICEF to protect children in nations of the world.
(2) List any 5 roles of the UNICEF in controlling health problems affecting children in the developing nations of the world.
(3) Explain any 5 measures taking by the UNICEF to protect and prevent certain health problems from occurring.
7.0 REFER EBCES/FURTH ER READING UNICEF Division of Communication 3 UN Plaza, New York, NY 10017 USA.
71  UNIT 2: INTERVENTION MEASURES BY THE UNITED STATES AGENC IES FOR INTERNATIONA L DEVELOPMENT (USAID) ON CHILDHOOD HEALTH PROB LEM S CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Situations that attracts Humanitarian assistance 3.2 Roles of USAID 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.0 INTRODUC TION The role of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) in combating the negative effects of the political, religious and economic crisis on the lives of children all over the world cannot be over-emphasized.
Political, religious and economic crisis produce negative impact on the health of the children in all nations of the world.
Social conflicts between groups of people within and outside nations of the world are capable of leading to wars in which children are at the receiving ends.
Conflicts and wars are threats to peace, security, freedom and opportunity.
During wars, children in the affected groups or nations suffer serious hunger, psychological trauma, which in turn, affect their healthy growth and development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to: (1) Explain the effects of political, religious and economic crisis on the health of children.
(2) Explain the root causes of crisis in human society.
(3) Explain the intervention measures by the USAID in combating political, religious, economic, man-made and natural disasters that have negative effects on the child health.
(4) List any 5 roles of the USAID.
(5) Explain the role of USAID in the promotion of peace and security in the nations of the world.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 Situations that attract Humanit arian Assistance -During political and religious wars.
-During economic crisis/economic meltdown.
72  -During man-made o r natural disasters e.g.
earth-quakes, flood, fire-outbreak, plane crash, industrial accide nts, etc.
3.2 Roles of USAID -Humanitarian assistance to the victims of man-made and natural disasters.
-Humanitarian assistance to the victims of political and religious wars.
-Conflicts resolution.
-Reinforcing democracy.
-Encourages improvements in population and health.
-Identifying the motivations or root causes of conflicts in human society.
-Mitigation and management of conflicts in human society.
-Promoting economic growth.
-Promoting freedom, security and opportunity for mankind.
-Restores infrastructure and protects environment.
--Responding to emergency situations.
-Conducting conflicts – related researches.
-Prevention of conflicts in human society.
-Careful and creative integration of conflicts management agencies.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt that political, religious and economic crisis have adverse negative effects on the health of children.
You have also learnt about different situations that attract the intervention of the USAID in the human society.
5.0 SUMM ARY In this unit, you have learnt the roles of USAID centre on humanitarian assistance to victims of political, religious and economic crisis.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) (1) Identify and explain the situations that attract humanitarian assistance in any human society.
(2) Enumerate any 5 root causes of conflicts/wars in the human society.
(3) Discuss the roles of USAID in mitigating and management of conflicts in society.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DING The USAID Africa Region Humanitarian Response Website http:/iWWW.Usaid.
gov/ regions/afr/humresp.htm/.
73  UNIT 3: ROLES OF WORL D HEALTH ORGANI ZATION (WHO) CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 General Roles of WHO 3.2 Specific Roles of WHO 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.0 INTRODUC TION The World Health Organization (WHO) is the highest organization that coordinates health programs all over the world.
This international health organization works in collaboration with other international health organizations such as the UNICEF, USAID, FAO and IRCS in combating health problems affecting people all over the world.
The World Health Organization plays vital preventive, promotive, control and supportive health roles in developing countries.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to explain the specific and general roles of WHO.
3.0 MAIN BODY 3.1 General Roles of WHO The general roles of WHO as provided by Toynbee (1995) and Udoh (1999), include the following: -Advocates for continued political support in all endemic countries to sustain and scale – up the program.
-Promotes the simple and cost-effective intervention methodology of deworming and assist in critical activities, such as, baseline assessment and purchase of deworming drugs.
-Provides appropriate technical and operational guidelines.
-Assists in development of training/advocacy materials and in capacity building.
-Maintains and expands collaboration with donors and facilitates coordination and partnerships.
-Working towards structural changes that are pre-requisites for meaningful and lasting improvements in the health of people all over the world.
-Making important contributions to world health, especially for those in greatest need.
74  -Promoting the idealis tic goal of health for all.
-Embarking on a co mprehensive and effective primary health care system as an approach for meeting the health needs of all people, especially those with the greatest need through participatory and equity building action, etc.
3.2 Specific Roles of WHO -Provision of health facilities and equipment.
-Provision of drugs.
-Health campaigns on certain health issues affecting people.
-Training of health workers.
-Conducting health-related researches.
-Meeting the nutritional needs of children in the world.
-Promoting health standards in developing countries.
-Collaborates with other international health agencies in giving humanitarian assistance to the victims of disastrous circumstances.
-Prevention and control of HIV/AIDS.
-Provision of quality antenatal, neonatal and maternal health care services.
-Supporting primary health care services in the world.
-Providing vaccines and immunization of children to protect them from certain health threats.
-Assessment of health situations across nations; etc.
(Toynbee in UNICEF, 1995 & Udon, 1999) 4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt about the roles of WHO as intervention measures on healt h matters affecting people all over the world.
You have learnt that the roles of WHO could be classified into general and specific.
5.0 SUMM ARY The intervention roles of WHO are comprehensive – curative, promotive, preventive, control, supportive and protective.
These cut across provision of material and human resources, researches, assessing health programs, education of the public on health matters, etc.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) 1.
Explain the general roles of WHO in combating health problems affecting nations of the world.
2.
Identify and explain any 5 specific roles of WHO.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DING Amold Toynbee, quoted in UNICEF’s 1995.
The State of the World’s Children Report (P.54).
75  Udoh, C.O.
et’al (1999).
Fund amentals of Health Education.
Heinemann Educational Books ( Nigeria) PLC.
76  UNITS 4 & 5: ROLES OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL ORGANI ZATION (FAO) CONTENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN BODY 4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING 1.0 INTRODUC TION Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) is another international organization that works collaboratively with other organizations such as WHO, USAID, UNICEF and IRCS in combating nutritional-related health problems affecting nations of the world.
This organization deals specifically with matters relating agricultural and food problems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this Unit, you should be able to explain the role of FAO in handling agricultural and food related problems all over the world.
You should also be able to list the contributions of FAO to the development of agriculture in different nations as well as in food production to meet the nutritional needs of people.
3.0 MAIN BODY The Roles of FAO -Provision of technical assistance and policy advice to member Governments, as may be required, through providing the services of FAO technical officers and international and national consultants.
-Organizing capacity building activities in all fields related to food security and to rural and of agricultural development, including forestry and fisheries.
-Organizes technical meetings and experts consultations to review agricultural issues of importance to a given region.
-Works closely with UN system organizations to promote the attainment of the MDGs in member countries.
-Undertakes in-depth sector and sub-sector assessments to identify the main constraints hampering agricultural development in certain regions.
-Acts as executing agency for the implementation of rural and agricultural development projects funding by national governments or by bi-lateral and/or multilateral funding agencies.
77  -Acts as specialized advisor y body to member Governments to advice on the feasibility of development projects and t o assess their potential economic, social and environmental impacts.
-Assists member Governments in establishing regional networks for exchanging information and expertise and for strengthening technical co-operation.
-Produce technical publications providing up-to-date information on technology in agriculture, forestry and fisheries, for use by agricultural practioners and by government and non-governmental organizations, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this Unit, you have learnt about the role of FAO in promoting agriculture and food production for people all over the world.
It plays vital roles in disseminating agricultural and food related-information to the member nations.
You have learnt that one of its major functions is on ensuring food security in the nations of the world.
In addition to the above roles, it helps nations to overcome different agricultural and food problems being faced.
5.0 SUMM ARY FAO makes great contributions towards meeting the nutritional needs of children in the developing nations for their healthy growth and development.
6.0 TUTOR -MARK ED ASSIGNM ENT (TMA) (1) Explain the role of FAO in relation to the nutritional requirement of nations.
(2) Discuss any 5 roles of FAO in combating agricultural and food problems in nations of the world.
7.0 REFER ENCES/ FURTHER REA DING http:// WWW.
Fao.
Org/World/Regional/RNE/ aboutu/Functi/functi en.
htm.
http:// WWW.
Fao.
Org/Sd/W pdirect/WPdoe 007.
78
