NoneECE 232 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE ECE232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Course Developer Dr. (Mrs.) I.C.
Maduabum Federal College of Education (Technical) Umuneze - Anambra State Course Writers Dr. (Mrs.) I.C.
Maduabum Federal College of Education (Technical) Umuneze - Anambra State Dr. Osuji National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor Dr. (Mrs.) Elizabeth Omotunde Egbochuku University of Benin Benin-City Edo State Course Co-ordinator Dr. Osuji National Open University of Nigeria iiECE 232 COURSE GUIDE NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria 2008 Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-941-4 All Rights Reserved iiiECE 232 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction............................................................................ 1 Course Aims.......................................................................... 1 Course Objectives.................................................................. 2 Working through this Course................................................ 2 Course Materials................................................................... 3 Study Units ......................................................................... 3 Textbooks and References.................................................... 3 Assignment File.................................................................... 3 Section I.1Presentation Schedule……………………….…………….. 4 Section I.2Assessment............................................................. .............. 4 Tutor-Marked Assignment................................................... 4 Final Examination and Grading........................................... 4 Course Marking Scheme...................................................... 5 Section I.3How to Get the Best from the Course.................................. 5 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials.......................................... 6 Section I.4Summary................................................................ .............. 7 ivIntroduction ECE 232: Observation, Recording and Assessment in Early Childhood Education is a one semester, two credit unit course available for all students undertaking the B.A.
(Ed) programme of the National Open University of Nigeria NOUN in Early Childhood Education.
The course consists of 14 units which involve basic techniques of Observation, Recording and Assessment in Early Childhood Education.
These include definition/objectives of Early Childhood Education, Observation in Early Childhood Education, Observational Schedule, Types of Observational Schedule, Systematic Observation Instrument, Recording Devices, Abuses of Recording Devices, Assessment in Early Childhood Education, Continuous Assessment in Early Childhood Education and Consolidation.
The material has been developed to suit students with Nigerian background by using examples which are related to the local environment.
There are no compulsory prerequisites for this course, except that you may have taken the introductory courses on Early Childhood Education.
You may wish to note that the course is designed for practical teaching in Early Childhood Education.
Therefore, experience in the handling of small children will be an added value in this course.
It may interest you to note that there are regular tutorial classes organised at the centres.
You are advised to attend these classes.
Details and locations of these tutorials will be made available to you at your centre.
What you will learn in this course ECE 232: Observation, Recording and Assessment in Early Childhood Education has an overall aim of introducing you to the study of different devices that can be used.
Early Childhood Education in itself is very important not only as a source of mental, physical and social enrichment for the child, but also as a basis for parental education in the proper understanding of the developmental needs of children.
Observation, Recording and Assessment here focuses on those techniques of teaching that are attuned to the natural tendencies of Children.
You will be given sufficient grounding to appreciate the need to teach and take adequate ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION care of children.
These will provide you with the necessary basis for further studies and research into Early Childhood Education.
Course Aims The aim of this course can be summarised as to provide you with an understanding and appreciation of the basic techniques of observation, recording and assessment employed at the Early Childhood Education level.
This will be achieved by introducing you to the different techniques which are applicable to and which suit Early Childhood Education.
- Explaining to you how to apply these devices in the teaching of Early Childhood Education and giving you an appreciation of the care of children.
Course Objectives There are overall objectives set out in the course in order to achieve the aims above.
In addition, each unit has specific objectives.
These are always included at the beginning of a unit.
You are advised to read them before you start working through the unit.
You may wish to refer to them as you read through the unit and/ or at one end of the unit to ascertain the level of your progress, and to make sure that you have done what you are required to do in the unit.
The wider objectives are given below.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: 1) Define Early Childhood Education.
2) Identify and explain the objectives of Early Childhood Education.
3) define Observation, Recording and Assessment in Early Childhood Education 4) List and Explain these Devices.
5) Discuss the Advantages of these Devices 6) Discuss the Disadvantages of these Devices 7) Apply these Devices in Early Childhood Education.
Section I.5Working through this Course In order to complete this course successfully, you are required to teach the study units, read the reference books and any other materials provided by one NOUN.
You will also be required to iiECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION undertake a teaching practice exercise where you will need to apply your knowledge of these devices before the end of your programme.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises.
These will help you to check your progress as you read.
There are some tutor- marked assignments too.
These are for you to do and submit at scheduled intervals.
At the end of the course you are required to take an examination on the course.
The course should take you about 15 weeks in to complete.
This implies that each unit should be components of the course and what you have to do and how to allocate time to the units in order to complete the course successfully on time are given later.
Course Materials The major components of this course are: 1) The course guide 2) The course material in units 3) Reference books 4) The assignment file.
NOUN will provide these materials except the reference books on registration.
These materials will provide you with all you need to pass this course.
But you are free to make references to other books and libraries.
Study Units There are 14 study units in this course.
These are; Definition of Early Childhood Education, Objectives of Early Childhood Education, Observational Schedule, Observation in Early Childhood Education, Types of Observational Schedule continue, Systematic Observation Instrument, Recording Devices, Abuses of Recording Devices, Assessment in Early Childhood Education.
Continuous Assessment in Early Childhood Education and consolidation.
Each study unit consists of a one week work.
It includes the contents, Introduction, specific objectives, the main content, activities, conclusion, summary, the tutor-marked assignments and reference books.
The activities and self test questions are based on the review of materials you have read so far, with a view to reinforcing your understanding of the material.
iiiECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION These self-assessment exercises together with the tutor-marked assignments will assist you to achieve the stated objectives of the units in this course.
Textbooks and References There are no compulsory set books.
You are free to consult any textbook on observation, recording and assessment instruments.
Again, the course material is enough to help you succeed in this course.
Assignment File The files will be given to you on registration for this course.
Remember to submit your assignments on schedule.
The marks you obtain from these assignments will count towards the final mark you obtain for the course.
Further information on the assignments will be given to you by your tutorial facilitator at your study centre.
You are required to submit six.
Out of these, four will be graded to form part of your overall grade in this course.
Presentation schedule Presentation Schedule These schedules will be given to you by your tutorial facilitator.
These will include dates for the completion and submission of tutor-marked assignments and dates for tutorial sessions.
Remember that you are required to submit all your assignments by the due dates.
Try to keep to the schedules.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
These are the tutor-marked assignments and the final semester examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are required to draw from your knowledge and techniques gathered from the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadline given to you in the presentation schedule.
At the end of the semester, you will need to sit for a final written examination of about three hours duration.
Tutor-Marked Assignment ivECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION You are expected to submit six tutor-marked assignments on the whole.
The best four out of these six will be used for your assessment, although you are encouraged to submit the six TMAs.
The tutor-marked assignments will count for 30 per cent of your total score in this course.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your course material.
However, it is desirable that at this degree level in Education, you should demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the course.
Try to submit your assignments before the due date.
If for any reason, you cannot submit on time, contact your tutor before the due date, to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for this course will be of three hour duration.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the types of self tests, activities and TMAs.
Revise and review the course before examination.
The examination will cover all parts of the course.
It will have a value of 70 per cent of the overall marks.
Course Marking Scheme The actual marking is broken down as shown below: Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 6 Six assignments, best three of the mark of the six 10% Each = 40% Final Examination 60% of Overall Marks Total 100% How to Get Most from this Course The course material, otherwise called self-learning material is used to replace the lecturer in distance education.
It is specially designed for you to read and work through at a time, place and pace that suit you best.
Like the lecturer, the study units tell you vECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION when to read or consult other reference books or when to do your self-assessment exercises.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The introduction, the objectives, the main body, conclusion and summary.
Self-tests are interspersed throughout the units and answers are also given.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the units and prepare you for the assignments and the final examination.
You should therefore, do each self-test as you come to it in the study unit.
The following are practical strategies to help you work through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or post the question to the course coordinator.
E.g., ECE 232, NOUN HQ, V.I., Lagos or through our web-www.
NOUN.edu.ng.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, do not hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course Guide thoroughly.
2.
Organise a study schedule.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information and details of your tutorials and dates should be gathered together and you should decide on how to write them down so as to help you remember them.
3.
Create your own study schedule and do everything you can to stick to it.
Note that students fail because they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for you.
4.
For every unit, read the introduction and the objectives first.
5.
Assemble all the study materials before you start.
6.
Read and work through the units serially as the contents of the units have been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
7.
Always keep in touch with the study centre so as to get up to date information about the course.
viECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 8.
Always try to keep to the schedule of dates for the submission of assignments.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each unit to ensure that you have really achieved them.
If you are not sure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
10.If you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When you get back the assignment, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the assignment and the assignment form.
If you have any doubts, questions or problems, do not fail to consult your tutor as soon as possible.
11.When you have completed the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself to achieve the unit objectives listed at the beginning of each unit and the course objectives.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are tutorial sessions provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these materials.
You will also be given the name and the phone number of your tutor as soon as you are registered in this course.
The tutor is there to mark and make comments on your assignments and to keep a close watch on your progress and on any problem you may encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
Your tutor will mark and give them back to you as soon as possible.
Do not waste time to contact your tutor for necessary help, if you do not understand any part of the study units or if you have problem with the activities and exercises or with the tutor’s comments, You should endeavor to attend the tutorials, as that is the only opportunity to have a face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions with instant answers.
To gain maximally from the tutorials, prepare a question list or problem list before attending them.
You will learn and benefit a lot from participating in the discussions.
viiECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Summary This course, ECE 232 gives you devices for observation, recording and assessment which are applicable to the Early Childhood Education.
After you have completed this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of these devices and how to apply them in the Early Childhood Education.
You will be in a position to answer these types of questions.
a.
What is Early Childhood Education?
b.
What are devices used in Early Childhood Education?
c. What is observation in Early Childhood Education?
d. What is recording in Early Childhood Education?
e. What is Assessment in Early Childhood Education?
There are so many other questions which you can answer.
We wish you success as you work hard to achieve it.
Good Luck!
viiiECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MAIN COURSE Course Code ECE 232 Course Title Observation, Recording and Assessment in Early Childhood Education Course Developer Dr. (Mrs.) I.C.
Maduabum Federal College of Education (Technical) Umuneze - Anambra State Course Writers Dr. (Mrs.) I.C.
Maduabum Federal College of Education (Technical) Umuneze - Anambra State Dr. Osuji National Open University of Nigeria Course Editor Dr. (Mrs.) Elizabeth Omotunde Egbochuku University of Benin Benin-City Edo State Course Co-ordinator Dr. Osuji National Open University of Nigeria NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ixECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kanu Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria 2008 Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-941-4 All Rights Reserved Printed by: xECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ……………………………………………….......... 1 Unit 1 Definition and Objectives of Early Childhood Education ………………………… 1 Unit 2 Observation in Early Childhood Education ….. 7 Unit 3 Observational Schedule ……………………… 15 Unit 4 Types of Observation Schedule ……………… 23 Module 2 ……………………………………………..…….. 29 Unit 1 Subjects to be used in Observation in Early Childhood Education Nursery 1 (3 years old)... 29 Unit 2 Subjects to be used in Observation in Early Childhood Education 4 years old ….….. 35 Unit 3 Subjects to be used in Observation in Early Childhood Education 5-Year Old …………….
43 Unit 4 Recording in Early Childhood Education …….
51 Module 3 ………………………………………………........ 60 Unit 1 Sample of Recording Devices in Early Childhood Education ………………………… 60 Unit 2 Abuses of Recording Devices at Pre-School … 71 Unit 3 Assessment in Early Childhood Education ….. 75 Unit 4 Assessment in Early Childhood Education Contd.
………………………………………… 83 Unit 5 Continuous Assessment in Early Childhood Education …………………………………….. 89 Unit 6 Consolidation ………………………………… 95 xiNoneECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MODULE 1 Unit 1 Definition and Objectives of Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Observation in Early Childhood Education Unit 3 Observational Schedule Unit 4 Types of Observation Schedule UNIT 1 DEFINITION AND OBJECTIVES OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Terminology 3.2 Objectives of Early Childhood Education 3.3 Early Childhood Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Early childhood education has been neglected for a very longtime in Nigeria.
Yet, it is universally acknowledged that between three and five are the potential period of intellectual development in the child (Bruner, 1960).
It is during these years that the child begins to develop intellectually.
Any neglect made at that stage is most likely to have a permanent effect on the child.
It must therefore, be appreciated that the shape and direction of the future Nigerian society depends significantly on the type of educational foundation laid for the present generation of children.
Perhaps, it is in realisation of this that the Federal Government of Nigeria stated clearly the purpose and direction of pre-primary education in Nigeria in the National Policy on Education (NPE) published in 1977 and revised in 1981, 1998 and 2004, respectively.
Currently in Nigeria, there is an awareness of the role of nursery education in the development of children among many concerned educators and parents as well as the government.
People are disturbed about the uncontrolled proliferation of nursery education in Nigeria.
1ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Others are concerned about the quality and quantity of education offered at this level.
It is strongly felt that serious steps ought to be taken to provide relevant educational programmes of quality that will be appropriate for school children between the ages of three and six thought out the federation of Nigeria.
The National Policy on Education has left the provision of pre-school education to private and voluntary enterprises.
However, most state governments have decided to regulate and control the operation of pre- primary education as well as ensure that the staff of pre-schools are adequately trained and that essential equipment are provided.
This is intended to ensure that schools that are established are well run; that teachers are qualified and academic infrastructure is provided.
The Federal Government, through the Nigeria Educational Research Council (NERC) provided guidelines for running pre-primary school education (NERC, 1987).
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define early childhood education • identify the objectives of early childhood education • explain and discuss the objectives of early childhood education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Early Childhood Education Early childhood Education is used here interchangeable with nursery education or pre-school.
According to the National Policy on Education (2004), early childhood education is the education given in an educational institution to children prior to their entering the primary school.
It includes, the crèche, the nursery and the kindergarten.
Pre- school is the first formal education in an educational institution given to children aged three to five years plus.
The pre-school has been found to be quite crucial for the intellectual development of the child.
It is also very useful to the development of the child’s physical, emotional, social and intellectual well-being.
Having looked at the definition of early childhood education, let us now consider the objectives/purposes of early childhood education.
2ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2 Objectives/Purposes of Early Childhood Education The objectives of pre-primary educations include: a. Effecting a smooth transition from the home to the school b.
Preparing the child for the primary level of education c. Providing adequate care and supervision for the children while their parents are at work (or farms, markets, offices, in the child etc) d. Inculcating social norms e. Inculcating in the child the spirit of enquiry and creativity through the exploration of nature and the local environment, playing with toys, engaging in artistic and musical activities, etc.
; f. Teaching cooperation and team spirit g. Teaching the rudiments of numbers, letters, colours, shapes, forms.
etc through play h. Teaching good habits, especially good health habits; 3.3 Early Childhood Education in Nigeria 3.3.1 Early Childhood Education will Inculcate in the Child a Spirit of Enquiry and Creativity through the Exploration of Nature and the Local Environment, Playing with Toys, Artistic and Musical Activities Explanation: the child should be able to: i. talk about things/events happening at home, in school/ community ii.
observe/talk about nature e.g.
plants, animals, the weather iii.
listen to and reproduce stories, rhymes/songs iv.
make up stories, say rhymes / sing songs v. draw, paint.
3.3.2 Early Childhood Education will Effect a Smooth Transition from Home to School and Provide Adequate Care and Supervision for the Children while Their Parents are at Work Explanation: the child should be able to: i. be separated cheerfully from parents and / or adult who might lead him to school ii.
participate in and enjoy school activities; and 3ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION iii.
respond happily to greetings from his teachers and peers and also initiate such greetings.
3.3.3 Early Childhood Education will help the Child Adjust to Social Norms Explanation: the child should be able to: i. use the appropriate greetings; ii.
use language effectively as a social tool for relating to others; iii.
use the appropriate words when making requests e.g.
“May I”, “Can I?”, “Please”, “Thank you”.
iv.
show respect to others; and v. work and play cooperatively with others.
3.3.4 Early Childhood Education Will Teach Good Habits Especially Good Health Explanation: the child should be able to: a. take good care of his / her body; b. observe good health habits such as covering the mouth when sneezing, coughing or yawning; washing the hands after using the toilet, and also after returning from the farm or market; c. keep his/her surroundings clean d. demonstrate appropriate manners during meals.
3.3.5 Early Childhood Education Will Teach the Child the Basic Speaking Skills Explanation: the child should be able to: i. express himself/herself well ii.
recite rhymes, re-tell stories, make up their own stories, answer questions; iii.
sort materials / objects; iv.
identify the letters of alphabets A to Z; and v. use writing tools / materials correctly.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is early childhood education?
2.
State three objectives of early childhood education 3.
Explain them.
4ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION You will agree with me that the objectives of this unit call for innovation and creativity on your part.
This will assist you to create a stimulating learning-environment for the nursery child.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that early childhood education is the education given in an educational institution to children aged three to five plus prior to their entering the primary school.
A child is helpless at birth and as a result has a number of developmental needs which are provided through pre-school education.
This period is crucial and facilitates learning at a later stage.
The purposes of pre-primary education include effecting a smooth transition from the home to the school, preparing the child for the primary level of education, providing adequate care and supervision for the children while their parents are at work, teaching the rudiments of numbers, letters, colours, shapes, forms etc.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
It is the education given to children in an educational institution between the age of 3 to 5 plus.
Three objectives of early childhood education are: a. Effecting a smooth transition from the home to the school.
b.
Preparing the child for the primary level of education.
c. Teaching the rudiments of numbers, letters, colours, shapes, forms etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain Early Childhood Education 2.
State two objectives of Early childhood Education 3.
Write short Notes on any of the objectives.
5ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bruner, J.S.
(1960).
The Process of Education, New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Inc. Esomonu, N.P.
(2005).
Pre-Primary/Primary Education: Fundamental and Operational Method, Awka; MarPat Education Research and Publishers.
Maduabum, C.I.
(2005).
Early Childhood Education Methods.
Module written for National Open University of Nigeria.
National Policy on Education Section (Federal Republic of Nigeria) (2004).
Yaba: NERDC Press.
NERC (1987).
Curriculum Guidelines for Nigeria Pre-primary (Nursery) Schools, Ibadan: Evans Brothers (Nigeria Publishers) Limited.
6ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 2 OBSERVATION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Observation 3.2 Characteristics of Observation 3.3 Observation Plan 3.3.1 Who Should Observe?
3.3.2 What Should Be Observed?
3.3.3 Why Should Observations Be Made?
3.3.4 Where Should the Observation Setting Be?
3.3.5 When Should Observations Be Made?
3.4 Types of Observational Tools 3.4.1 Checklist 3.4.2 Identification Procedure 3.5 Subjects to be Observed 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Non-cognitive behaviours are difficult to evaluate using paper and pencil tests.
For example, behaviours like work habits, interaction with peers, psychomotor activities, etc cannot be evaluated easily and objectively by means of a paper and pencil test.
Such behaviours are appropriately evaluated through observations of persons exhibiting the behaviour.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define observation • identify the characteristics of observation • explain the observation plan • discuss observational tools.
8ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Observation You learnt observation briefly in the introduction.
Now let us go into details on observation.
Observation has been defined as the act of looking out for and recording the presence or absence of rebel and non-rebel behaviours of a person or group of persons.
Odoemelam (2004) states that observation entails careful watching of pupils’ behaviours in their natural settings.
Certain aspects of observation as she rightly notes should be noted.
They include the setting, the observer, the occasion, the attributes and the instruments.
These aspects of observation should be done systematically.
Attention is paid to specific kinds of behaviours by the observer who uses appropriate tools to observe the behaviours and to count and measure their frequencies, duration and intensity.
The observer takes the following steps in carrying out the observation effectively.
• Selection of the behaviour that will be observed is made.
For example, aggressive or anti-social behaviours.
• Definition of the behaviours, in behavioral terms, is made.
• Avoidance of variations in scoring.
• Quantified observations through counting of number of times the child exhibits the particular behaviour.
• Quantified behaviours are recorded through developed systematic codes for the categories of behaviour.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define observation 2. Who should observe?
3.
What should be observed?
3.2Characteristics of Observation For effective teaching and learning in our schools, observational data are indispensable.
For this reason, a good observation according to Onucha (1993) should have the following characteristics: a) One or more observers are placed in an observation setting at a specified time and for a prescribed length of time.
9ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION b) Observers are guided by some instructions and ground rules on the use of the observational tool.
c) Observers are not usually associated with the programme or research so as to avoid biased recording of observed behaviours.
3.3Observation Plan For efficiency in teaching and learning, there is for needs an effective teacher to rely on a well-organized lesson plan.
If a teacher interacts with students without a lesson plan, he is most likely to deviate from the set objectives or spend more time than envisaged on some aspects.
A plan is vital in observation techniques in order to collect useful and interpretable data.
An observational plan provides information on the following areas: 3.3.1 Who Should Observe?
An observer is a person trained to look out for the occurrence or absence of a behaviour.
He could be a teacher, a parent, a student, a researcher or some other person outside the school system.
The basic conditions are that the observer must possess a good knowledge of the behaviour of interest the instrument he would use and the procedure for recording his observations.
There are two types of observers according to Okpala (1993), namely, a Participant observer and a non-participant observer.
A participant observer is one who fits in and participates actively as a member of the group he is observing.
For example, a kindergarten teacher wants to observe her pupils play with toys that are not common in their homes.
The teacher will pretend to be a member of the class as he plays with some of the toys along with the children but they do not know that they are being observed.
They therefore, tend to open up and demonstrate behaviours that are characteristics of persons playing with a new set of toys.
The use of participant observer is time consuming since the observer performs three duties: participating, observing and recording.
The task is mentally and physically demanding.
Participant observer may be biased in his observation and recording as a member of the group.
On the other hand, non-participant observer is one who is seen as a non– member of the group and does not play active role in the group’s activity.
For example, during rhyme recitation in a live classroom, pupils will not like to exhibit their normal behaviour because they are being watched by a group of pupils and parents.
10ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3.2 What Should Be Observed?
Information here is focused on the products and the process of arriving at solutions.
Products are the outcomes of pupils’ activities.
An observer of pupils’ product will be interested in the quality, quantity and usability of the product.
Process implies procedures pupils use or follow in reaching a solution.
For example, a child who wants to mould an object is expected to follow several steps and perform some activities in order to produce the said object.
3.3.3 Why Should Observations Be Made?
Yoloye (1977) summarised situations in which observational data could be useful as in: i. measuring classroom process variables ii.
measuring attainment of programme objectives iii.
measuring programme implementation iv.
identifying difficulties in programme use v. identifying changes introduced by teachers.
3.3.4 Where Should the Observation Setting Be?
Observations can be made in three different environments, namely.
i.
Natural setting This includes the classroom, home of the child, play ground, school garden, library or laboratory.
ii.
Contrived Setting This refers to an environment which is designed or created by an observer to appear natural whereas it is really controlled by the observer.
iii.
Controlled Setting In a controlled environment for observation, the observer limits behaviours of the person being observed to those relevant to his needs and interests.
11ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3.5 When Should Observations Be Made?
Observation commences when the observer has a clear understanding of the behaviour to look out for and has mastered the recording procedures.
Recording and time interval within which the expected behaviour is observed for occurrence or otherwise depends on the observation system.
Generally, the presence or observation of behaviour are observed for a few seconds to one minute and recorded.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Why should observations be made?
2.
Where should the setting be?
3.
When should somebody observe?
3.4Types of Observational Tools Observational tools are instruments used for collecting data while observation is going on.
There are three basic types of observation instruments employed for research and evaluation.
They are checklist, rating scales and anecdotal records.
In this unit we shall discuss checklist.
3.4.1 Checklist Checklist is a list of characteristic behaviours or action relating to one’s personality traits and performance which the teacher checks off (by putting a tick against the statement).
The number of ticks is compared with the total number of items to show whether the performance is high or low frequency.
Checklists are used for the measurement of pupils’ cognitive, affective and psychomotor behaviours.
Below is a sample checklist for a Hearing Impaired.
Response Description of Behaviour Yes No Not sure /characteristics 1 Has a running ear 2 Complains of headaches 3 Has a ringing or buzzing sound in the ear.
4 Has a feeling of fullness or heaviness in the ear.
5 Has swollen glands 6 Wears a hearing aid 7 Has problems in maintaining balance.
12ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 8 Sits in or near the front of class 9 Cocks the ear to hear better 10 Makes request and responses 11 Tends to lip and speech read.
12 Makes incorrect response to questions 13 Has a tendency to shout or speak too low 14 Has a dull or flat voice 15 Feels frustrated because of inability to communicate 16 Exhibits some withdrawal symptoms 17 Achieves below potential academically.
Source: B.O.
Ikpanya: Exceptional Children and Youth: Introduction to Special Education.
Pp.
13 column.
In scoring, a check carries one point if a child scores 10 “Yes” points or over.
There is the need to observe the child more closely for a reliable referral.
3.4.2 Identification Procedure The checklist is intended to expose the teachers to some identification skills based on symptoms and characteristics associated with hearing problem.
Not only teachers should see children but parents also.
Besides, other professionals should also be able to observe and detect some hearing problems during the pre-school years.
Therefore, it would be a rewarding exercise for parents to check hearing responses in their children during infancy and early childhood to supplement the checklist.
Conrad (1979) lists activities parents may perform to look for signs of heaving problems in their children.
They are: i. shaking of rattles in the direction of the ear.
ii.
setting and turning on alarm clocks.
iii.
manipulation of toys with sound signals.
iv.
dropping of objects of various sizes, shapes and texture.
v. speaking in a low tone or whisper.
vi.
speaking to the child when you are backing him / her or the child is backing you.
Conrad (1979).
4.0 CONCLUSION 13ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION In this unit you we have learnt that children can be observed in different ways.
14ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY Observation entails careful watching of pupils’ behaviors in their natural setting.
Facts of observation are the setting, the observer, the occasion, the attributes and the instruments.
Characteristics of observation plan is explained, and some observational tools is discussed.
A sample checklist for hearing impaired presented.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Observation is defined as careful watching of students’ behaviours in their natural settings by the teacher, parents, students, researchers, or a person outside the school system.
Things to observe are products/process.
Process implies procedures pupils use in reading for a solution.
Products are the outcomes of pupils’ activities.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Situations in which observational data could be useful are itemised as follows: 1) measuring classroom process variables.
2) measuring attainment of programme objectives.
3) measuring programme implementation.
4) identifying difficulties in programme use.
5) identifying changes introduced by teachers.
The setting could be in a natural setting, contrived setting or controlled setting.
Natural setting includes classroom, home, playground, school garden, library/laboratory.
Contrived setting includes environment created by an observer to appear natural to the person being observed.
Controlled setting is an environment that is controlled for observation.
The observer limits behaviours of the person being observed to those relevant to his needs/interests.
An observer should have a clear understanding of the behaviours to look out for and master the recording procedures.
15ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is observation?
2.
Identify four characteristics of observation.
3.
What is observation plan?
4.
List and discuss three observational tools.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Conrad, R. (1979).
The Deaf School Child, London: Harpers Raw.
Okpala, N.P, Onocha, C.O, and Oyedeji (1993).
.Measurement and Evaluation in Education, Ibadan: Stirling Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ltd. Odoemelam, A. L. (2004).
Contemporary Issues in 21st Century Guidance and Counselling: The Nigerian Perspective, Okigwe: Kalevi – Nedu Publishers.
16ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 3 OBSERVATIONAL SCHEDULE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Anecdotal Records 3.2 Uses of Anecdotal Records 3.3 Characteristics of Anecdotal Records 3.4 Guidelines for Preparing and Using Anecdotal Records 3.5 Advantages of Anecdotal Records 3.6 Limitations of Anecdotal Records 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION An observational schedule is an instrument with which events that are directly observed as they occur, are recorded and the information is analysed for the purpose of decision-making.
Okpala et al (1993) points out that observational schedules could be of two types, namely, anecdotal records and systematic observation instrument.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to do the following: • define anecdotal records • state uses of anecdotal records • explain and discuss preparation of anecdotal records • indicate limitations of anecdotal records • state the advantages of anecdotal records.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Anecdotal Records Cartwright et al.
(1974) defines anecdotal records as an observational system which gives brief account of the events on behaviours at specific times.
It is qualitative in nature thereby describing or narrating the scene using the most appropriate words.
In other words, the scene comes alive to the reader.
A good anecdotal record describes the setting clearly to 17ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION give meaning to the record.
Such recordings should be accurate.
Teachers, parents, potential employers and project evaluators could find anecdotal information very useful.
Maduabum (1996) explains that anecdotal records refer to informal reports of a teacher’s observations of behaviour that the teacher considers typical of the individual described.
They are said to be informal in the sense that there is usually no premeditation of observing the individual.
For example, a teacher may observe that a particular child usually helps other children with arithmetic problems.
Another teacher may observe that a particular child always withdraws from other pupils during physical exercises.
The behaviours, whether positive or negative, are objectively reported as they occur without any interpretations by the observers.
For instance: Article I.
Illustration A Name: Peter Abel Date 6/8/2007 Class: Private Time 12.30pm Observer: Adaobi Okeke Setting: Lunch break Incident Okonkwo was leaning on the desk.
His teacher asked him to sit up and read.
Okonkwo said, “I am not well.” Interpretation This is the third consecutive reading lesson that Obi gives excuse for not reading.
Maybe he has a problem.
A major advantage of an Anecdotal record is that it provides information about a child’s behaviour that may be of assistance to the teacher in developing a better understanding of the growth and development of the child.
Onocha and Okpala (1995) maintain that a good anecdotal record should possess the following qualities: a) The specific event or behaviour should be significant to the growth and development of the pupils to be observed.
b) The record should provide a factual description of specific behaviours when it occurs and circumstances under which the behaviours occur.
c) The interpretation of the behaviour and recommendations (if any) should be done separately from the behaviour description.
18ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION What do we record with regard to an anecdotal records?
Anecdotal records are used to record spontaneous behaviours or events.
No direction as to what to be observed is given to the observer.
Depending on the purpose to be served, observer decides the time to observe the person.
For example, a child is having problem interacting with his mates.
This calls for observation of the child when he is supposed to be interacting with others like playtime, lunch break and group discussions in class.
Over a period of one or two months, the observer has recorded a number of incidents to study the behaviour patterns which will reveal whether a problem exists or not.
Based on this, future action will be taken.
3.2 Uses of Anecdotal Records The information is used for guidance and counselling, directing children to the areas where they will perform better and studying special children to mention a few.
Anecdotal records give us qualitative information but it is time-consuming in preparation as well as interpretation SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is observational schedule?
2.
Mention two types of observational schedule.
3.
Write short notes on the types of observational schedule.
3.3 Characteristics of Anecdotal Records A good anecdotal record should possess the following characteristics: a) It should be a factual description of a specific event, when the event occurred and conditions under which it occurred.
b) The specific incident or event should be significant to the growth and development of the child observed.
c) Interpretation of events and recommendations should be separated from behaviour descriptions.
d) An anecdotal record should contain the record of a single event.
It should not contain explanation or judgment on the event observed.
Article II.
Illustration B Name- Gbenga Collins Class- Nursery 2 Time- 2nd period Date- 7/11/2006 19ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION School- Ivory Foundation Nursery/Primary Academy, Lokoja.
Observer- Mrs. Hanna Usman.
Article III.
Incident Collins is usually enthusiastic in classwork.
On this day, the class teacher gave the pupils two problems on counting/recognition of numbers.
Collins got one problem wrong.
The teacher provided the correct solution and asked the pupils to copy into their notebooks.
Collins did not take down the correction.
He pretended to be working.
At the end of the class, the teacher requested the pupils to submit their notebooks for checking.
He observed that Collins did not submit.
The teacher asked him to explain.
He refused.
Interpretation Two days later, Collins told the teacher that he wrote Attunes (meaning correction in Yoruba) on the chalkboard.
As non-indigene in a private school where English is the medium of instruction, he was irritated and felt that the only way to register his protest was refusal to do his work.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Identify three characteristics of an anecdotal record.
2.
List two qualities of an anecdotal record 3.
Mention three uses of anecdotal record.
4.
What do we record with anecdotal records?
3.4 Guidelines for Preparing and Using Anecdotal Records Alkin (1970) identifies the following guidelines for the useful preparation and effective use of anecdotal records.
a.
The observed behaviours, whether positive or negative.
b.
The observer should separate evaluations or interpretations from factual descriptions.
c. The event should be recorded as soon as it occurs to prevent forgetting important aspects.
d. Observers should be trained and equipped with skills to identify, observe and write comprehensive anecdotes.
e. The record should give sufficient description of the event in order to provide a better understanding of the event.
f. Observers should record and keep several anecdotes on each child to facilitate an objective description of a child’s typical behaviour.
3.5 Advantages of Anecdotal Records 20ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION According to Murphy (1976), an evaluation tool has the following advantages: a) It is a flexible tool for data collection.
b) It directs the observer’s interest and attention to a single child.
c) It is useful for observing children who cannot write or communicate easily.
d) It provides a functional description of a child’s behaviour which can be used in monitoring the growth and development of the child.
e) It provides cumulative record of a child’s growth and development when collected over time.
f) It helps a teacher to produce a through description of a child’s behaviour.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Four guidelines for preparing/using Anecdotal records are (a) --------------------- (b) --------------------- (c) ----------------------- (d) --------------------- 2.
List three advantages of Anecdotal records.
3.6 Limitations of Anecdotal Records Scuffle Bean, et al (1972) notes the following limitations of an anecdotal record: a) The information given is less reliable in comparision with other observational instruments.
This is because it does not yield quantitative result.
b) An anecdotal record does not reveal causes of a behaviour; rather it provides a vivid description of an event.
c) Observers tend to include evaluations and interpretations of behaviours instead of providing a factual description of events as they occur.
d) It is not reliable because there is tendency for the biases of the observer to influence the selection and recording of events.
e) It is difficult to obtain an adequate measure of a child’s behaviour using anecdotal record since human behaviour is time-dependent.
21ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Write short notes on the following terms: 1.
Observers 2.
Verbal description of event 3.
Reliable information.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you learnt that observational schedules are instruments designed for analyzing information for decision-making.
Anecdotal records is one of the instruments.
Various aspects of the records have been discussed including the guidelines for preparing/using anecdotal records.
The advantages of the instrument are outlined while their limitations are highlighted.
5.0 SUMMARY The importance of anecdotal records in teaching a pre-school child cannot be overestimated.
Though painstaking it gives a good observational interpretation of a child’s behavioural pattern and reasons for such behaviour.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Observational schedule is an instrument with which events that are recorded and the information is analyzed for the purpose of decision – making.
2.
Two types of observational schedule are Anecdotal records and systematic observation 3.
Answers to this question are provided on the body of the work.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Identify characteristics of Anecdotal records as contained in the body of the work.
2.
List two qualities of Anecdotal records as contained in the body of the work 3.
Describe three uses of Anecdotal records as contained in the body of the work.
22ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Four guidelines for preparing/ using anecdotal records are: 1.
Observers should be prepared to record all observed behaviours whether positive or negative.
2.
Try and separate evaluations from factual descriptions.
3.
Record event as quickly as possible to avoid forgetting important aspects.
4.
Observer should be trained/ equipped with the skills to identify, observe and write comprehensively on a child’s Anecdotal.
Three advantages of Anecdotal records are detailed on pages 33, 34.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Short Notes a.
Observers are persons trained to look out for the occurrence or absence of a behaviour.
He could be a teacher, a parent, a student, a researcher or another person outside the school system.
b. Verbal Description of event.
Oral description of behaviour.
In this case behaviour of a pre-school child could be described orally.
c. Reliable information implies information that can be trusted; information that is real or genuine.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify three guidelines for effective preparation of anecdotal records in a per-school.
2.
State three advantages of anecdotal records in pre-school.
3.
What are the pitfalls?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Cartwright, C.A.and G.P.Cartwight (1974).
Developing Observational Skills, New York: Mc-Gray Hill.
Maduabum, M.A (1996).
Handbook for Effective Continuous Assessment, Owerri: Versatile Publishers.
Onocha C.O and Okpala P.N (1993).
Measurement and Evaluation in Education, Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers (Nig) Ltd. 23ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Alkin M.C.
(1970).
Product for Improving Educational Evaluation, Evaluation comment, Vol.
2, No.3, P.I.
Murphy E. (1976).
An Introduction to Modern Psychology, New York: Harcourt Brace.
Stufflebeam, B.
(1971).
Educational Evaluation and Decision-Making in Education, Hasca 111: Peacock.
24ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 4 OBSERVATIONAL SCHEDULE 2: SYSTEMATIC OBSERVATION INSTRUMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1Terminology 3.2 Types of Systematic Observation Instrument 3.3 Uses of Systematic Observation Instrument 3.4 Advantages of Systematic Observation Instrument 3.5 Disadvantages of Systematic Observation Instrument 3.6 Guidelines for Developing Systematic Observation Instrument 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Whenever you encounter an experience, you tend to observe it systematically.
You observe the food you eat: does it taste good or bad?
You observe films you watch, books you read and people you meet.
You observe styles of dresses, a football team’s performance and the teachers at pre-school.
You have determined criteria or standards for each category: food, films, books, friends and you judge each experience by its particular standard.
As teachers, we are constantly involved in observation.
We observe our pupils’ progress and we observe the effectiveness of our teaching.
In this unit, you will learn various aspects of systematic observation instrument at pre-school level.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to: • define systematic observation instrument • identify two types of systematic instrument • list the uses of systematic observation instrument • outline the advantages of systematic observation instrument • mention the demerits of systematic observation instrument • state guidelines for developing systematic observation instrument.
25ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Systematic Observation Instrument This concept has been defined in different ways by distinguished scholars.
Maduabum (1996) sees it as the technique in which predetermined behaviours are observed in natural or simulated settings and recorded in an organised manner.
Lewy (1997) refers to systematic observation as the use of techniques in which predetermined behaviours are observed and recorded, using predetermined schedules in an organised manner.
3.2 Types of Systematic Observation Instruments (a) Sign system (b) Category system.
These methods are highly structured and objective ones for collecting evaluation data through observations.
3.2.1 Sign System The observational tool consists of behaviourally defined events, traits or activities arranged in a column.
Beside this is another column in which the observer records the occurrence of the events.
If any event occurs, it is recorded using a sign on the appropriate recording column.
The system according to Medinnus (1976) provides a static picture of classroom activities.
It does not allow an observer to record the frequency of occurrence of an event.
Sample of Sign System Classroom Interaction Sheet Date: 1/11/2006.
School: City Nursery/Primary School Owerri.
Class: Nursery 2.
Time: 10 am.
Teacher: Mr. Ojiakor.
Behaviour Category Specific Behaviour Tally of Behaviour Pupils work Writing, drawing observing Pupils’ group work Manipulating writing Teacher prompting Questioning, learning demonstrating, aiding the slow learner Others 26ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2.2 Category System In this system, observations are made for a few seconds to one minute.
The observer categorises the observed behaviour and records the behaviour in the sequence of occurrence as it occurs.
It provides the frequency of occurrence and time during which the behaviour occurs.
This system provides a moving picture of the classroom interaction during the observation period.
This keeps the observer busy.
Sample of Category System Date: 1/11/2006.
School City Nursery/Primary School Owerri.
Class: Nursery 2.
Time: 10 am.
Teacher: Mrs. Peters.
Time Behaviour category 1 Pupils’ Work 2 Pupils’ group work 3 Teacher prompting learning 4 Others Source: Okpala et.
al (1993) Measurement and evaluation in education.
3.3 Uses of Systematic Observation Instrument Systematic observation instruments are used to: a) determine the frequency of behaviours that occur.
b) record the presence or absence of some predetermined behaviours within a given period of observation.
c) identify innovations introduced by teachers during instruction.
d) detect unanticipated classroom interactions.
e) measure the attainment of programme objectives.
f) determine the sequence of behavoiurs as they occur within the period of observation.
3.4 Advantages of Systematic Observation Instrument Some of the advantages, according to Anidon, et al (1967) are a) It provides records of the observer’s actual behaviour.
b) It provides objective data.
c) It is suitable for observing persons who experience difficulties in verbal communication.
d) It requires minimum coding time.
e) It makes the observer a recorder, rather than an evaluator.
f) It eliminates the anxiety associated with achievement tests.
27ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Identify two types of systematic observation instrument.
2.
Mention three uses of systematic observation instrument.
3.5 Disadvantages of Systematic Observation Instrument The disadvantages of using this instrument are: a) It is time-consuming and difficult.
b) The presence of the observer could prevent persons being observed from demonstrating their true behaviours.
c) The training of observer is expensive and rigorous.
d) Observers may miss-out critical behaviours while recording.
e) Observation is expensive in terms of man-hours involved and use of hard and soft wares.
3.6 Guidelines for Developing Systematic Observation Instrument The following guidelines are used in developing systematic observation instruments a) selection and training of observers b) establishing the reliability c) decision on the recording process d) identification and listing of possible ground rules e) editing and validating the instrument.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
List three pitfalls of systematic observation instrument.
2.
Mention four guidelines for effective use of systematic observation instruments.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt that systematic observation instruments are difficult to develop; it is for this reason that their use is limited in regular classrooms.
Teachers and researchers should consult experts in observational techniques before embarking on classroom observation.
28ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY This unit discusses the concept of systematic observation instruments.
It looks at the types of systematic observation instruments.
Its merits and demerits are stated.
Guidelines for developing systematic observation instruments are also highlighted.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Two types of systematic observation instruments are sign system and category system.
2.
Three uses of systematic observation instruments are: 1.
It is used to detect unanticipated classroom interaction.
2.
It is used to identify innovations introduced by teachers during instruction.
3.
It is used to measure attainment of programme objectives.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
It is time-consuming and difficult to carry out.
The training of observers is expensive and rigorous.
Information obtained might be invalid or unreliable because of observer bias.
2.
Guidelines for Developing Systematic observation instruments: these include: a) Selection and training of observers.
b) Editing and validating the instruments.
c) Establishing the reliability.
d) Identification and listing possible ground rules.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Outline the demerits/merits of systematic observation instruments.
2.
List four uses of systematic observation instrument.
3.
Describe two types of systematic observation instrument.
4.
State three guidelines for developing systematic observation instruments.
29ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Amidon E.J and John B. Hough (1967).
Interaction Analysis: Theory, Research and Application (edited) Reading: Addison-Wesley Pub.
Arich, Lewy (1977).
Handwork of curriculum evaluation.
(Ed) Paris: Unesco Longman Inc. Maduabum, M.A (1996).
HandBook for Effective Continuous Assessment.
Owerri: Versatile Publishers.
Medinnus, G.R (1976).
Child Study and Observation Guide.
New York: John Wiley and Son Inc. Okpala, P.N and Onuocha, C.O (1993).
Measurement and Evaluation in Education.
Ibadan: Stiling-Hordon Publishers (Nig) Ltd. 30ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MODULE 2 Unit 1 Subjects to be used in Observation in Early Childhood Education: Nursery 1 (3 years old) Unit 2 Subjects to be used in Observation in Early Childhood Education (4 years old) Unit 3 Subjects to be used in Observation in Early Childhood Education (5-Year Old) Unit 4 Recording in Early Childhood Education UNIT 1 SUBJECTS TO BE USED IN OBSERVATION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION: NURSERY 1 (3 YEARS OLD) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Subjects to be used during Observation Education 3.1.1 Creative Arts 3.1.2 Social Norms 3.1.3 Physical and Health Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION You will learn various subjects the pre-school teachers can observe about the three-year old.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to teach the child how to • scribble, draw, paint, and shade objects with crayons and charcoal • take part in creative activities such as singing, dancing and simple drama • obey simple instructions, respects others, interact with peers dress and groom himself • exchange playing materials with others • develop gross motor skills 31ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • demonstrate good health habits.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Subjects to Be Used During Observation The following subjects are to be used for observation: a.
Creative Arts b.
Social Norms c. Physical and Health Education.
3.1.1 Creative Arts An observation Sheet for creative Arts Name of child –Adaobi Okeke Observer – Mr Okolo.
Class – Nursery 1 Instruction- Please tick ((cid:214) ) in the appropriate column.
Items observed Creative Arts Always Some Never Not time observed 1 The child is able to scribble 2 The child is able to draw 3 The child is able to paint 4 The child is able to dance to a variety of music 5 The child is able to sing some songs.
Comments: Programmes/Activities: Scribbling, drawing, painting, shacking objects, singing, dancing and simple drama.
Teaching Aids: Paints, crayons, chalk, pencils, tables, brushes, songs and music.
Teachings Methods: The teacher should shade first before allowing them to shade with chalks, pencil and crayons.
The teacher composes a song for the pupils to sing and dance to.
32ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.1.2 Social Norms Teaching Materials The materials needed for this exercise are: Games, storybooks, puzzles, poetry books, real objects, pictures of household articles, variety of playing materials.
Programmes/Activities • Learning social habits such as correct greetings, respects for others, obeying simple instructions.
• Toilet habits: washing hands after toilet.
• Dressing habits – tuck in shirts and put on sandals • Interaction with peer groups – chatting, playing football, dancing, singing together.
Teaching Methods • correct greetings should be taught through play • children should be taught words for the right ages • children should be taught the correct toilet habits • children should be taught to play together and share things in common when necessary.
A Sample Observation sheet S/N Social Norms Always Sometime Never Not observed 1 The child is able to obey simple instructions.
2 The child is able to interact with others 3 The child is able to play with others in groups.
The child is able to exchange playing materials with others 4 The child is able to exchange playing materials with others Comments ……………………………………………………………… 33ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Design activities you will use to observe motor skills in a pre-school child.
3.1.3 Physical and Health Education Programmes/Activities • Use of outdoor play equipment to develop gross motor skills, e.g.
running, jumping, climbing, skipping, hopping, swinging, sliding, rolling and playing with tyres, riding bicycles, playing with hoops, crawling through tunnels.
• Use games – local games or organised games.
• Use of music/dance for free body movement, e.g.
clapping to music, moving to rhythm, dancing to songs/music.
• Good health habits, e.g.
washing hands before and after eating; using a handkerchief to cover the nose and mouth when sneezing/ coughing; proper use of toilet; washing fruits before eating, avoiding under-ripe, over-ripe fruits and rotten foods.
Teaching Methods • Organize various children’s games/dances.
• Use songs, rhymes/jingles to encourage good health habits.
• Health practitioners should be arranged to visit the school and talk to the children.
Teaching Materials • Swings, tyres, tunnels, balls, slides, beanbags for gross motor skills /fine motor skills.
• Songs, jingles/ rhymes that teach good health/ safety habits.
• Health charts.
• Filmstrips, slides, video cassettes that motivate children to observe good health habits.
• Wash hand basins, a washroom, soap etc.
34ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION A Sample Observation Sheet Physical and Health Education S/N Always some Never Not times observed 1.
The child is able to take part in some physical exercises 2.
The child is able to sing some health songs 3.
The child is able to take part in simple games Comments------------------------------------------------------------------------- SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Outline various activities you will use to observe good health habits in a 3-year old child.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have observed some activities you can display in creative arts and also scribble, paint, draw, shade objects, sing and dance.
In social norms as well, pupils learn to interact with peers, respect others, obey simple instructions, play with others in a group, learn to dress themselves.
Physical/Health education teaches some physical activities, good health habits, health songs /rhymes.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about programmes/activities, teaching methods, teaching materials used in observation, using the following subjects- creative arts, physical / health education and social norms for a 3-year old pre- school child.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1 & 2 Answers to self-Assessment 1 & 2 are contained on pages 49, 50, 51.
35ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Write short notes on: creative arts, social norms and physical education, health education.
2.
List teaching materials you will use in teaching social norms in a pre-school.
3.
Discuss activities one can employ to teach physical education in year 3.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS NERC (1987).
Curriculum Guidelines for Nigerian Pre-primary (Nursery) schools.
Nigerian Educational Research Council (1987).
Ibadan: Evans Brothers limited.
36ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 2 SUBJECTS TO BE USED IN OBSERVATION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION: 4 YEARS OLD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Subjects to be used in Observation in Early Childhood Education 3.1.1 Mathematical Skills 3.1.2 Teaching Methods 3.2 Language and Communication Skills 3.2.1 Language and Communication Skills 3.3 Mathematical Skills 3.4 Scientific and Reflective Thinking 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, the following subjects would be observed.
They are language and communication skills, mathematical skills, scientific and reflective thinking in 4-year old.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, pupils should be able to: • count to 50 • identify number symbols from 1 to 20 • do simple addition using the number symbols 1 to 5.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Subjects to be used in Observation in Early Childhood Education List of subjects in year 4 to be used during observation.
Language / Communication skills, Mathematical skills, Scientific and Reflective Thinking.
37ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SAMPLE A An observation sheet for mathematical skill Name of child: Uzokwe Obi.
Observer = Peter Ekeh Class: Nursery 2 Introduction: Please tick () the appropriate column.
4 year old 3.1.1 Mathematical Skills S/N Always Some Never Not times observed 1.
The child is able to count up to 50 2.
The child is able to identify number symbols from 1 to 20.
3.
The child is able to do simple addition using the number symbols 1 to 5.
Comments ------------------------------------------------------------------------- Programmes/ Activities • Counting up to 50.
• Identifying number symbols from 1 to 20 • Comparison of lengths/ heights eg length of teacher’s table, height of children in the class.
• Comparison of volume through measuring of sand, water, sawdust etc.
• Simple addition using the number symbols 1 to 50.
3.1.2 Teaching Methods • Provide objects for counting from 1 to 20 eg sticks, bottle tops, seeds, desks, toys.
• Provide objects to match numbers with objects from 1 to 20.
• Teach heights /lengths using the teacher’s table and the heights of the children.
• Use simple measuring scales to compare weights of various objects.
• Teaching children with small denominations of the Nigerian currency.
• Teach simple addition using the number symbols 1 to 5.
38ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Teaching Materials - Sticks, bottle tops, stones, seeds, desks, chairs, tables, pencils, books, cups, saucers, spoons, forks, toys, boys, girls.
- Measuring tape.
- Picture- matching cards showing one-to-one correspondence.
- Buckets, cups, bowls, calabashes, water, sand, sawdust.
Comments 3.2Language and Communication Skills OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, pupils should be able to: • tell stories; • identify pictures of objects; • associate pictures with words; and • write their names or write short words Sample C An observation sheet for language/ communication skills.
3.2.1 Language and Communication Skills S/N Always Some Never Not time observed 1.
The child is able to tell simple stories 2.
The child is able to associate pictures with words 3.
The child is able to write his /her own name 4.
The child is able to write some words.
Comments - - -------------------------------------------------------------------- Programmes/Activities • Listening skills e.g.
listening to music, stories and rhymes.
• Listening to various sounds/ identifying them.
39ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Speaking Skills • talking about the home • engaging in conversations with teachers /peers, • identifying pictures of objects, e.g.
chair, table, basket.
• telling stories.
• repeating rhymes, jingles / songs.
• describing pictures Reading Skills • Matching pictures and words.
• Word building • Identifying one’s own name.
• Playing with picture games, jigsaw puzzles, picture/shape matching, reciting the alphabet.
Writing Skills • Controlling writing tools.
• Left-to-right orientation.
• Top-to-bottom orientation.
• Forming writing patterns, e.g.
strokes, curves.
Teaching Methods Listening Skills - provide materials that will produce sounds children can listen to e.g.
drums, pots tins, wooden gongs, bottles etc.
- provide equipment that can send out sounds for the children to listen to e.g.
radio, tape recorder.
- encourage them to play various listening games.
- take them round the school compound to listen to and identify various sounds.
Speaking Skills - Daily story telling should be part of the class activity.
- Children should be taught to recite poems, rhymes /jingles.
- Children should talk about the birth of a baby, a birthday party, a naming ceremony, a visit to a place of interest, village festival etc.
40ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Reading Skills - Help the child to develop a left – to –right and a top –to –bottom orientation.
- Prepare an alphabet picture frieze, and books with captions as shown in the illustration.
Sample of an alphabet frieze Cup Bag Apple Aa Bb Cc Teacher should prepare language games/play them with the children as shown in the following illustration: The child matches the word cup in the left column to the same word placed among other words in the right column.
- Teacher should prepare work sheets children can use in word building.
It Am Cup Or Cup Writing Skills - Demonstrate how to hold the writing tool and the correct sitting posture when writing - Teacher should observe them when they are writing or drawing - Provide opportunities for children to write their names.
Teaching Aids Crayons, pencils, paper, chalk, charcoal, sand, blackboard.
- Activity: Books/workbooks- encouraging left-to-right/top to- bottom orientation should be used.
- Children’s library should be created.
- Charts, diagrams, pictures, objects, old books, poster, calendars should be collected for illustration.
41ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3Scientific and Reflective Thinking OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, pupils should be able to: • demonstrate the awareness of plants, birds, animals, insects, weather, water, fish.
Sample D AN OBSERVATION SHEET FOR SCIENTIFIC AND REFLECTIVE THINKING Scientific and Reflective Thinking S/N Always Some Never Not time observe 1.
The child is able to demonstrate the awareness of animals, plants, bird, insect, fish, weather.
Comments ------------------------------------------------------------------------- PROGRAMMES /ACTIVITIES (1) Plants: e.g.
seeds, flowers, leaves, fruits.
(2) Land animals: e.g.
goat, sheep, cat, rabbit, dog, lizard etc.
(3) Water animals: e.g.
snail, tortoise, fish, crayfish, crocodile, hippopotamus etc.
(3) Birds: hen, pigeon, ostrich, vulture, eagle, turkey, duck.
(4) Insects: mosquito, termites, cockroach, housefly, tse-tsefly, anthill, butterfly etc.
(5) Weather: hot and cold (6) Water sources: rain, well, flood, sea, tap, bore hole.
(7) Uses of water: drinking, cooking, washing, bathing, building, planting.
42ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Teaching Methods - demonstrate to children how to plant flowers and seeds.
- observe the animals, plants, birds, insects and fish within the school compound.
- collect pictures of animals, plants, birds and insects / fish.
- discuss sources/ uses of water.
- discuss changes in weather with the children.
Teaching Materials - use the school compound - have a nature corner for nature study.
- science corner with specimens of animals, birds, insects, fish etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Identify three animals that live on land.
2.
Identify four insects you know.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What are the three sources of water?
2.
What are three uses of water?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Design three programmes you can use as a scientific experiment for pre-school 4-year olds.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt some skills in mathematic, language / communication and science.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit discussed mathematical skills, its methods, programmes /activities and the teaching materials.
In addition, language / communication skills were pinpointed with their teaching materials, activities /programmes and methods.
Scientific and reflective thinking methods/ activities and materials were also highlighted.
43ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify three activities under language and communication skills.
2.
State four methods you can use to teach mathematical skills to a 4–year old.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Gray, P.A.
(1981).
Tropical Nursery School Institute of Education, University of Ibadan: Nursery Education.
Durojaiye, M.O.A (1983).A New Introduction to Educational Psychology of the Child, Ibadan: Evans Brothers Ltd. Curriculum Guidelines for Nigerian Pre-primary (Nursery) Schools.
Nigerian Educational Research Council, Ibadan: Evans Brothers Limited.
44ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 3 SUBJECTS TO BE USED IN OBSERVATION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 5-YEAR OLD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 List of Subjects to be used 3.2 Creative Art 3.3 Social Norms 3.4 Physical and Health Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 8, the following subjects will be considered for 5-year old children.
Creative arts, social norms, physical/health education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, the children should be able to: • make collages; • construct things with local materials; • design picture books; • take active part in drama; and • sing songs and dance to music.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 List of Subjects to be used Creative Arts (a) programmes /activities (b) making things like paper-beads, boats, kites, fans etc (c) drawing pictures (d) painting /printing 45ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION (e) making collages with different materials: beads, seeds, buttons, bottle tops, pictures, thread.
(f) designing picture books.
(g) weaving brooms, mats and baskets from local materials (h) constructing things from blocks, plastic, sticks, straw, boxes, cartons, empty packets.
(i) singing songs.
(j) learning dancing styles.
Teaching Methods - teach children how to print with fingers, old toothbrush, leaf, yam, bananas, stems, feathers.
- teach children how to weave using palm leaves, banana leaves, paper, string, strips of cardboard, barks of palm leaves.
- teach children various local songs and dances.
- organize school arts exhibitions for children.
- organize school simple plays.
Teaching Materials - design patterns/pictures using beads, beans, rice, sand, cowries shells, eggs shells, stone, paint, glue etc - provide simple instruments for music and dance like drums, tambourines, gongs - collect clothes, plates spoons, shoes, handbag, jewelry drums, dramatic play.
- provide paint, crayons, paper, pencil, chalk, charcoal for drawing, colouring and painting.
- provide building block, cartons, boxes, bamboo, raffia, straw for construction.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Activities for teaching creative arts for 5-years old are: (a) - - - - - - - (b) - - - - - - - (c) - -- - - - - (d) - - - - - - 2.
Identify two teaching methods in creative arts.
A Sample Observation Sheet Name of child - - - - - - -- - -- - -- - observer - -- - ---- -- - - class - --- -- - Instruction: Please tick (  ) in the appropriate column.
46ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Creative Arts S /N Always Some Never Not times observed 1.
The child is able to make collages 2.
The child is able to construct things 3.
The child is able to make his own pictures 4.
The child is able to take part in dramas 5.
The child is able to sing/dance Comment……………………………………………………………… 3.3 Social Norms OBJECTIVES • talk about his neighbourhood.
(brothers, sisters, friends, well- wishers) etc; • talk about some ceremonies/festivals in his locality like new yam festival, burial ceremony, wedding birthday, send-off party;.
• develop basic moral behaviour; • sing the national anthem, say the national pledge; and • recognize the national flag.
ACTIVITIES/PROGRAMMES a) knowing things in the neighbourhood - church, mosque, postal agency, market, hospital.
b) Knowing workers in the neighbourhood – doctor, farmer, policeman, nurse, teacher, food-seller, carpenter, tailor, c) knowing types of transportation in the neighbourhood d) developing moral behaviour (virtues) – telling the truth, honesty, sharing love, endurance hardwork etc.
e) knowing the National Pledge and National Anthem.
f) learning about people from other towns, villages, states, countries in respect of their customs, food, manner of dressing, language, appearance.
47ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Teaching Methods • name the types of occupation found in the neigbbourhood.
• draw, paint/model things in the neighbourhood • dramatise scenes in the neighbourhood.
• make models of places visited • use stories/songs to explain various customs/festivals.
• teach them how to recite the pledge, and sing the national anthem Teaching Aids - charts, posters, pictures, photographs, paints crayons.
- plays, stories, rhymes, folktales, poems, can be used to teach cultural values.
- display of national anthem, the pledge, flag.
- invite people to talk about themselves.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Write names of workers you know.
2.
Recite the national pledge.
3.
Sing the national anthem.
Sample of observation sheet in social norms for 5-year old children.
Social Norms S /N Always Some Never Not times observ ed 1.
The child is able to recite the pledge.
2.
The child is able to identify types of transportation e.g.
car, bus, lorry.
3.
The child is able to talk about some ceremonies/ festivals.
4.
The child is able to sing the national anthem.
5.
The child is able to recognise the flag.
48ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 6.
The child is able to identify some places/things in the church, road, market, some workers e.g.
nurse, tailor.
3.4 Physical and Health Education OBJECTIVES • Take part in sports; • Help keep the surroundings clean; • Observe safety rules; Activities • Use sports equipment, e.g.
football/skipping rope.
• Take care of surroundings, e.g.
tidying up surroundings, proper disposal of litter, decorating the classroom with pictures.
• Observing safety rules, e.g.
playing safely with all apparatus, materials/toys.
Avoid playing with dangerous items e.g.
knives, blades, broken bottles, guns.
Avoid putting dangerous things into the eyes, nose, ears, mouth.
Avoid taking medicine unless given by adults; avoid dangerous appliances, avoid playing with fire.
• Observe road safety rules, e.g.
• Walk safely on the road • Not playing on the road • Observe good health habits • Inspect children’s nails, teeth, body daily Teaching Methods • Organize children in groups for local games/sports activities • Teach them the importance of cleanliness of the environment • Teach them how to keep their surroundings clean.
For example, sweeping, dusting the classroom, using the dustbin properly.
• Teach them some safety rules at home/school • Provide necessary materials one can use to foster good health habits and also for keeping the school surroundings clean.
For example dustbins, brooms, water, toilet rolls, waste paper baskets.
Teaching Materials 49ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Brooms, duster, dustbin, dustpan, football, hoops, skipping rope etc pictures, charts, showing good health habits, home school safety rules, Sample Observation Sheet Physical and Health Education S /N Always Some Never Not times observed 1.
The child is able to take part in simple games 2.
The child is able to tidy up his surroundings 3.
The child is able to dispose litter properly SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
State four safety rules.
2.
Identify five teaching materials one can employ to teach physical/ health education.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you have learnt three subjects a pre-school teacher can use to observe his pupils that are 5-year old.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit, carefully looked at creative arts, social norms and physical and health education as subjects one can utilize for effective observation of children aged 5years old.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Answers to this question are contained on the body of the work 2.
Two teaching methods in creative arts are: a.
Teach children how to print with fingers, feathers, old toothbrush, leaf, yams etc b.
Teach children how to weave using palm leaves, paper, strips of cardboard, banana leaves etc.
50ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Name of workers are: policeman, doctor, farmer, food seller, tailor, car painter 2.
Recite the National pledge – I pledge to Nigeria my country, to be faithful, loyal and honest, to serve Nigeria with all my strength, to defend her unity and uphold honour and glory.
So help me God.
3.
Arise oh compatriots/ Nigeria’s calls obey/ To serve our father land/ With love and strength and faith.
The labours of our heroes past shall never be in vain/ To serve with heart and might one nation bound in freedom, peace and unity.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Four Safety Rules are: • Avoid playing with dangerous items, eg knives, blades, guns, broken bottles.
• Avoid playing with fire • Avoid dangerous electrical appliances like pressing iron, boiler etc • Avoid putting dangerous things into the eyes, nose, ears or mouth.
2.
Five Teaching Materials for Physical/Health Education are: - Pictures/charts showing home/school safety rules.
- Posters can be used to illustrate road safety rules - Brooms, duster, dustbin, dustpan etc - Pictures/charts showing good health habits - Football, skipping rope, hoops, balls.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify five teaching materials a pre-school teacher can use to teach creative arts to a 5-year old.
2.
Identify four materials that can help foster good health habits 3.
State the National Pledge 4.
State the National Anthem 51ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bakare, C. G. M (1970).
Study Habits Inventory, Ibadan: Institute of Education, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Cronbach, L.J.
(1970).
Essentials of Psychological Testing (3rd) ed.
New York: Harper & Tow.
Denga, D.I.
(1980).
Occupational Interest Survey, Jos: Department of Education, University of Jos, Nigeria Marshal, J.C. and Hales, L.W.
(1971).
Classroom Test Construction: Ontario: Addison – Wesley Publishing Company.
52ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 4 RECORDING IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Recording in Early Childhood Education 3.2 Types of Recording 3.2.1 Records Kept By a Pre-School Headmaster/ Headmistress 3.2.2 Records Kept by the Pre-School Teacher 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every organization thrives by the practice of recording in order to improve succeeding operations.
The daily, weekly, monthly and yearly activities of the management of pre-school demand proper recording for the purpose of better management.
This is why the records we are about to discuss are called statutory.
Simply explained, these are compulsory records that have always been entered in the educational policy documents as required.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define recording • list and explain types of recording • state the importance of records.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Recording in Early Childhood Education Record per se has been defined by many scholars from different perspectives Farrant (1990) defines record as a written statement about a happening.
The Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary views recording as a process or act of writing down and storing information for official purposes.
53ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2 Types of Recording There are two types of recording.
They are records kept by pre-school headteacher/headmistress and those kept by the teacher.
3.2.1 Records Kept By a Pre-School Headmaster/ Headmistress a) The Admission Book (Register) This is a very vital record.
All admissions of new pupils are recorded.
The admission book shows the name of the child, age, sex, height, weight, class on admission, date of admission, date of withdrawal, class attained on withdrawal.
Through the admission book, the headteacher can know the catchment areas the school is serving and whether or not some areas are not sending their children to the school.
Also from such information, the headteacher will be able to assist or render help and service to the community.
b) Log book According to Farrant (1990), a log book can one day become an important historical account for the school.
It is the duty of the headteacher to make this book available in his school.
It is in this book that the main events or the main happenings in the school are recorded, e.g.
performance in sports or academic activities.
c) The Punishment Book This book is kept to record cases of punishment given to children and to ensure that the procedure for punishing any child has been followed.
This book helps to protect the child from being punished unnecessarily by the teacher.
This record shows the type of problem behaviour that is common in the school.
With such information, the headteacher can take the necessary steps to solve the problem.
d) The Visitors’ Book Names of visitors to the school are recorded in this book e) The Transfer Book 54ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION School children are for one reason or another transferred from one school to another.
The transfer of a child can come up at anytime during the school year.
It is good that transfers are recorded and a transfer certificate issued to the child or his parents/guardians.
The headteacher ensures that he/she signs the transfer certificate.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 In what two ways is the admission book useful in a pre-school?
f) The School Timetable A timetable should be prepared for the whole school.
A master timetable covers all the activities of the school.
It is kept in the office of the headmaster.
Teachers make their own timetable for teaching.
The aim of the timetable is to regulate the school activities.
The beginning and closure of the school should be indicated for the day.
Experienced teachers should be allowed to prepare the school time table since it is a difficult task.
The following points should be considered when preparing a timetable: • Outline the school subjects class by class.
• Determine the number of periods for each subject • Make the timetable to show the class, subject, period, classrooms and teacher • Make the timetable in such a way that each teacher is free at least for one or two periods everyday.
• Ensure that the timetable is followed strictly.
g) The Stock Book It is used to record the school equipment, books and other articles bought for the school.
These materials are sent to the store-keeper to record them in the stockbook.
They are of two types of stock book, namely, Consumable stock and Non-consumable stock.
Consumable Stock: This covers such items as chalk, stationery, disinfectants.
These items are used or consumed always and have to be replaced from time to time.
Non-Consumable Stock: This covers such items such as furniture, farm tools, games equipment, audio-visual materials.
55ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION The stock book helps the headmaster to know what materials are available in the school, when supplies are running out and also know what to request for.
h) Education Law Book Education law is made to backup the existence of any school.
A copy of the education law book is kept in the pre-school premises.
When the need arises, it should be used.
i) Syllabuses/Schemes of Work The syllabuses/schemes of work should be kept in school for teachers’ use.
The schemes of work are divided into units.
j) School Cash Book Cash book is important in any pre-school.
This is because a lot of money comes into the school or is spent for the school.
The school gets money from the school fees, levies, sales of crafts or farm products, government subvention or donations from wealthy individuals/organizations.
The cashbook should record monies that come in as well as monies that go out (Onwuegbu, 1979).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What four things should you bear in mind when drawing up a school timetable?
2.
Give two reasons why the pre-school head should record events in the following: a) Cash book b) Stock book 3.2.2 Records Kept by the Pre-School Teacher Some of these records had earlier been mentioned in the main body of the work.
They include: i.
The Attendance Register It is a class teacher’s duty to keep his/her record of the presence or absence of all the pupils in a particular class on daily, weekly or termly basis.
In some pre-schools, it is kept twice daily, i.e., in the morning and in the afternoon.
Poor attendance to school by a child can be as a result of poor health or influence of bad friends or some other reasons.
If the teacher is able to 56ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION trace the cause, he will then be in a better position to advise the parents on what they can do to solve the problem.
In recording attendance of pupils, the class teacher is expected to observe the following DON’TS: • Do not send a child away for lateness and mark “absent” for the child.
• not to mark present for a child who is absent.
• Do not fail to mark the register on the opening day after long or short holidays even if less than 10 per cent of the class is present.
• Do not expose the attendance register to oil or grease, termites and scribbles by infants.
Attendance book serves many purposes.
According to Irondi (2002), they include: • It helps the teacher to trace the attendance record of any child that is considered backward, as irregular attendance can lead to that.
• It helps the teacher to see at a glance which parents he should visit in order to discuss the problem of poor attendance of their children.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 State two uses of attendance book.
ii.
Report Cards Report cards should be prepared by the teacher at the end of each term and given to the pupils who will in turn take them to their parents.
The report card should indicate the performance of the child in each subject with comments as to how the child has performed.
From this, parents will know how the child has performed and whether or not the child is likely to obtain promotion to the next class at the end of the school year.
The report card should provide space for the games master, housemaster and others to record their views of the child’s development.
The class teacher as well as the housemaster and games master should keep brief notes about each child during the term which can be referred to at the end of the term for accurate information as to the child’s performance.
iii.
Lesson Notebook 57ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Before a teacher goes in to teach a class, he has to prepare his lesson in this notebook.
It is a book that contains the daily preparation of the teacher for the different subjects to be covered and the activities to be carried out for each day.
It serves as an aid to the teacher because it reminds him of important points.
A good lesson note contains information such as the topic, date, time of the day, duration of the lesson, age, sex and class, objectives, previous knowledge, introduction, presentation, conclusion, children’s activities, including assignment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Write short notes on (a) Report card (b) Lesson notebook.
iv.
Continuous Assessment Record Book Continuous assessment is an attempt to test and examine the child on a regular basis instead of a single examination to be given at the end of the term or the school year.
The child can be assessed after teaching a course unit as many times as possible.
Each time the child is assessed, the teacher records the result.
Continuous assessment record book provides a lot of reliable information about a child.
This is because it gives a picture of the child’s performance over a long period.
The information provided will help the teacher to know the child that has a problem and needs his attention.
The assessment can be in the form of tests, simple examinations, assignment, quizzes, etc.
v. Record Work Book This book is for the class teacher to record what he has taught to the pupils during the week.
Onwuegbu (1979) notes that the record workbook will help the teacher to know the area covered as well as area not covered.
If a new teacher comes, he can check to know what to teach,from the record work book.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 What are the uses of Record work book?
Subject Records of Work A chart can be made showing the different stages the teacher hopes to teach during the term and a tick is given when a child has mastered the stage.
58ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION The recognition and understanding of numbers to 20 would be learnt and practised often as an introduction.
Later in the lesson, the children may be able to recognize numbers before they can undertake activities that are written before them on the board.
The number of times the children practise does not matter at all as the sooner the children recognize and understand the written figures, the better.
An Example of a Mathematics Chart Names of Addition Subtraction Addition & Recognition of Addition Subtraction children to 10 from 10 subtraction numbers to 20 to 20 to 20 mixed to 10 Mary √ √ √ √ Joseph √ Grace √ √ √ √ Pius √ √ √ √ √ Peter √ √ √ etc Records of Time Tables 2x 3x 4x 5x 6x 7x Stella √ √ √ √ √ √ John √ √ √ √ Samuel √ √ √ Obi √ √ √ Ada √ √ √ Record of Reading Groups The record of reading groups is best kept in a record book with a page for each group.
The teacher will continue in this way for as many groups as he has.
Only the pages which the teacher actually hears the group read will be put in the record book.
Sometimes, the teacher will let the children read a page to the teacher and the next time the teacher hears the children he will ask questions to see if they have understood what they read If a record is kept in this way, the teacher knows exactly which page they have reached and how often he has heard each group read in the month.
GROUP I Okon May Book I Pages 27 28 30 31 Airia 32 34 35 36 37 39 38 40 Sule June 42 43 44 book 11 3 5 6 Amadu etc 59ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION GROUP II Rita May Book I Pages 18 20 21 22 23 Pius 24 26 27 28 30 31 32 Theresa June 33 35 36 39 40 41 Peter 4.0 CONCLUSION You have learnt about those records needed in a pre-school for the day- to-day running of the school activities.
Other records were outlined but not yet discussed.
You have also learnt about recording done by the pre-school teacher.
The types of recording done by a class teacher are the attendance book, continuous assessment record book, the report cards, the lesson note and the record of work book.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about the importance of each record.
These records include the admission book (register), log book, visitors’ book, transfer certificate, stock book, cashbook, syllabuses, schemes of work, and education law book.
These are the main records.
In this unit too, you have learnt some of the ways in which these records can be useful to the class teacher.
For example, the attendance register shows which child comes to school regularly and which child does not.
You have also learnt the differences between recording done by the class teacher and the school head teacher.
An example of records of the children’s progress.
A record book (with dates of observations, weekly or monthly).
A child’s name is written at the top of each page and anything special that the teacher notices about the child is written underneath.
For example, Mary is the 3rd child in a family of six children, she missed school for eight weeks in January and February due to illness.
She is very good at reading and needlework.
She is weak at maths and needs special help but she tries very hard.
She is a friendly and helpful child.
(Note made on 6 March, 2006).
If the headteaacher or an inspector wants to know about Mary, it is all written down and these records can be a great help to the next teacher.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 60ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Admission Book is useful in a pre-school because it is used to record names of pupils admitted, the number of pupils admitted every year and the total number of enrolment for the whole school.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Four things to bear in mind when drawing up a school timetable.
a) Outline the school subjects class by class.
b) Determine the number of periods for each subject.
c) Follow the timetable strictly.
d) Make the timetable show the class, subject, period, classrooms and teacher.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Uses of Attendance Book (Register) a. Pupil’s day-to-day activities are monitored.
b.
It is used to check the child’s problem and advice is given to the parent.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Answers to these questions are in the body of the work.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Answers to these questions are in the body of the work.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define recording.
2.
List and briefly explain any two types of recording.
3.
Identify examples of each type mentioned.
4.
List and explain the types of records a class teacher should keep.
5.
State three importance of these records.
6.
Differentiate between recording by the class teacher and those that are recorded by the head teacher.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Fagbulu, A.M. (1978).
Administrative Practice for Teachers, London: Cox & Whyman Ltd. 61ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Farrant, J.S.
(1990).
Principles and Practice of Education (2nd) ed.
Singapore: Longman Publishers.
Margaret.
(1978).
School Methods with Younger Children: A Hand book for Teachers in Africa.
(4th Ed.)
London: Evans Brother Limited.
Onwuegbu, O.T.
(1979).
Discover Teaching, Roma: Linograf S.P.A. MODULE 3 Unit 1 Recording Devices in Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Abuses of Recording Devices at Pre-School Unit 3 Assessment in Early Childhood Education Unit 4 Assessment in Early Childhood Education Contd.
Unit 5 Continuous Assessment in Early Childhood Education Unit 6 Consolidation UNIT 1 RECORDING DEVICES IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Recording Devices in Early Childhood Education 3.2 Samples of Devices of Recording in a Nursery School 3.2.1 Nursery I School Report (Specimen) 3-Year Old 3.2.2 Nursery II School Report (Specimen) 4 Year Old 3.2.3 Kindergarten/Transitional Class School Report (Specimen) 5-Year Old 3.2.4 Personal Data About a Child 3.2.5 A Sample of Transcript for Nursery School 3.2.6 Affective and Psychomotor Termly Report 3.2.7 Transcript for Nursery School Child (Age Six Years) 3.2.8 Continuous Assessment Record Book for Subjects (Cumulative Record Card) 3.2.9 Overall Annual Report for a Nursery School 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION 62ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION In this unit, you will see different patterns or devices of recording at pre- school.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define recording device • design some sample devices of recording at pre-school.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Recording Devices In Early Childhood Education Recording Device in a nutshell simply means recording instrument.
3.2 Samples of Devices of Recording in a Nursery School Samples of the following recording devices have been reproduced for different levels of pre-school classes.
3.2.1 Nursery I School Report (Specimen) 3-Year Old Iykeson School 4, Ojukwu Road, Okigwe, Imo-State Term ………………….. Ending ………….………………… Name ………………………….
Class…………….. Age………… Maximum Attendance ------ Time Present -------- Time Absent ------- No.
in Class --------- Subjects Teacher’s Remarks Numbers Counting Recognition Writing Letters Reading Recognition Writing Spoken English Nursery Rhymes Social norms/Moral Instruction 63ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Physical/Health Education Elementary Science Creative Activities Class Teacher’s Remark………………………………………….……… …………………………………………………………………………… …………………………………………………………………………… Signature ………………………………………………………………… Headmaster’s/Mistress’ Remarks ……………………………………… …………………………………………………………………………… …………………………………………………………………………… Signature ………………………………………………………………… Next Term Begins on ……………… and Ends on ……………………..
Source: Adopted from Curriculum Guidelines for Pre-primary Schools (Nursery) in Nigeria.
(NERC) Ibadan.
(1987).
3.2.2 Nursery II School Report (Specimen) 4 Year Old Iykeson School 4, Ojukwu Street, Okigwe, Imo State.
Term …………………………….
Ending…………………..…… Name……………………..... Class …………………….. Age ………...
Maximum Attendance ……………….... Time Present………………….
Time Absent …………………… Subject Maximum Marks Teachers Marks Obtained Remarks Numbers Counting Recognition Addition Picture Reading/Rhymes Word recognition Word building Social norms/Moral Instruction Physical/Health Education Elementary Science Creative Activities Total 64ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION ……………..….
Percentage ……….…..
Position ……….. No.
on Roll Class Teacher’s Remarks ……………………………………………….
Signature ………………………………………………………………… Next term begins on ………And ends on………………………………….. 3.2.3 Kindergarten/Transitional Class School Report (Specimen) 5-Year Old Iykeson School 4 ,Ojukwu Street, Okigwe, Imo state.
Term …………………………….. Ending ……………………… Name ……………………..….. Class …………………….. Age……… Maximum Attendance ……………….
Time Present….……………….
Time Absent …………………… Subject Obtainable Maximum Marks Teachers Marks Obtained Remarks Mathematics English Grammar Comprehension Composition Poetry Reading Writing Social Norms/Moral Instruction Physical/Health Education Elementary science Creative activities Total ……………...
Percentage ………..…..
Position ………….. No.
on Roll Class Teacher’s Remarks ……………………………………………….. Signature ………………………………………………………………… Headmaster’s/Mistress’ Remarks……………………………………… 65ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Signature ………………………………………………………………… 66ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2.4 Personal Data about a Child IYKESON NURSERY SCHOOL 4,Ojukwu Street, Okigwe,Imo State.
Name of Child --------------------------------------------------------------------- Date of Birth ----------------------------------------------------------------------- Nationality ------------------------------------------------------------------------- Sex of Pupil: Male ---------------- Female --------------------------------------- Name of Father or Guardian ---------------------------------------------------- Father’s or Guardian’s Occupation--------------------------------------------- Father’s or Guardian’s Contact Address----------------------------------------- Father’s or Guardian’s Tel.
No.
----------------- Office -------------------- Residential Address Name of Mother or Guardian ---------------------------------------------------- Mother’s or Guardian’s Occupation---------------------------------------------- Mother’s or Guardian’s Contact Address Mother’s or Guardian’s Tel.
No.
--------------- Office ----------------------- Residential Address Position of Child in the Family 1st Child Last Child Others: State position in the family……………………………………… 67ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2.5 A Sample of Transcript for Nursery School THE TRANSCRIPT Name……………………………….………… Sex …………………… School ………………………………………Nationality …….………… Class Completed ……………………………………………....………… Father’s /Guardian’s Name ……………………………………………… Age……………… Father’s Occupation….…………………… Date of Entry …….
Father’s/Guardian’s Permanent Address …………..
Date of Leaving………………………………………………………….. Mother’s Name………….
Reason for Leaving …………….. Mother’s Occupation ………..……… Language Spoken at Home……… English Language Any other foreign language: Specify…….
Nigerian language (3) Igbo Yoruba Hausa Others: Specify ……… Physical Information Speech Development: Average Slow Sight: Total Blindness Partial Blindness Clear Vision Needs Aid Specify …………………………………………………………...……… Any Other Handicap……………………………………………………... Family Doctor’s Name (If any)………………………………...………..
Address ……………………………………………………………..…… Tel.
No ……………………………………………………………..…….
Parent’s Signature …………………………………….…...……………..
Date ……………………………………………………………………… Source: Adopted From Curriculum Guidelines for Nigerian Pre-primary (Nursery) Schools (NERC), Ibadan.
Published by Evans Brothers (Nigeria Publishers) Limited (1987).
68ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2.6 Affective and Psychomotor Termly Report IKESON NURSERY SCHOOL Affective and Psychomotor Termly Report of a Child BEHAVIOUR/OVERALL RATINGS Rating Behaviour Activities 5 4 3 2 1 Activities Self-control Politeness Honesty Neatness Punctuality (Attendance at Class) Carrying out Assignment Participation in School Activities Hand Writing Public Speaking Handling Tools Drawing/Painting Crafts Games Key 5 = Excellent 4 = Good 2 = Poor 3 = Fair 1 = Very poor Source: Adopted from Federal Ministry of Education (1979) Handbook on Continuous Assessment; Lagos.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Critically design a report card showing subjects taught in nursery for 5-year old.
2.
Design a transcript for nursery 1 child.
69ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2.7 Transcript for Nursery School Child (Age Six Years) Cognitive Affective and Psychomotor Scores Overall Behaviour/ Overall Ratings Activities Yearly Summaries Grade Remarks Self control 5 4 3 2 1 Subject I II III IV V V Politeness 20-- 20-- 20-- 20-- 20-- 20-- Grammar Honesty Comprehension Neatness Poetry/Rhymes Punctuality Reading Attendance at Class Writing Carrying out Assignment Social Norms Participation in School Activities Moral Instruction Hand Writing Physical/Health Public Education Speaking Elementary Handling Tools Science Creative Drawing/Painti Activities ng Singing Craft Counting of Games Numbers Recognition of Numbers Signature ………………Date………….
Key: 5 = Excellent 4 Good 3 Fair 2 Poor 1 V.Poor 70ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2.8 Continuous Assessment Record Book for Subjects (Cumulative Record Card) Name of Pupil ….……………………………………………………….
Sex……………………………………………………………………… Cognitive Assessment Record Yearly Summaries Overall Subject s I II III IV V V Gra Remarks 20-- 20-- 20-- 20-- 20-- 20-- de Grammar Comprehension Poetry/Rhymes Reading Writing Social Norms Moral instruction Physical/Health Education Elementary Science Creative Activities Singing Counting of Numbers Recognition of Numbers Headmasters’/Mistress’ Comment …………………………………………….. Signature …………………………………… Date …………………………… 71ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2.9 Overall Annual Report for a Nursery School Cognitive Affective and Psychomotor Scores 1st Term overall 2nd Term Overall 3rd Term overall Annual Summary Behaviour and Annual Ratings Activities Subjects Obtainable Obtained Highest in class owest in Class Class Average Position Obtainable Obtained Highest in class west in Class s Class Average Position Obtainable Obtained Highest in class owest in Class Class Average Position Obtainable Obtained Highest in class owest in Class Class Average Position Remarks Self control 5 4 3 2 1 L o L L L Grammar Politeness Composition Honesty Comprehension Neatness Poetry Punctuality Reading Attendance at Class Writing Carrying out Assignments Social/Norms Participation in School Activities Moral Instruction Hand Writing Physical/Health Public Speaking Education Elementary Science Handling of Tools Creative Activities Drawing/ Painting Craft/Games Source: Adopted from Federal Ministry of Education (1979) Handbook on Continuous Assessment.
KEY 5 =Excellent; 4 =Good: 3 =Fair: 2 = Poor: 1 = V.Poor.
72ECE 232 OBSERVATION, RECORDING AND ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, various samples of recording devices were considered.
They are: cumulative record card, nursery school transcript and over all annual report for a nursery school.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt how various records are kept in our pre- school for future use.
We identified progress report card as the most important recording device in pre-school.
Some of the progress reports done in schools include cumulative report cards, annual reports of cognitive performance, affective and psychomotor behaviour and nursery school transcript.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Design a pre- school annual report of cognitive, affective and psychomotor behaviour/ activities.
2.
Choose a particular class of nursery school and construct an instrument for recording the progress of activities of a child.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Federal Ministry of Education (1979) Handbook on Continuous Assessment, Lagos.
73NoneECE 232 MODULE 1 UNIT 2 ABUSES OF RECORDING DEVICES AT PRE-SCHOOL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Abuses of Recording Devices at Pre-School 3.1.1 Storage Problem 3.1.2 Poor Supervision by Headmasters or Supervisors 3.1.3 Giving False Information 3.1.4 Non-Availability of Records 3.1.5 Ignorance on the Part of the Headmaster/Teachers 3.2 Ways of Avoiding the Abuses of School Records 3.3 Importance of Pre-School Records 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In Module 2 unit 5 and Module 3 unit 1, you learnt about different types of pre-school records.
You also learnt about devices of recording at pre- school level.
Different samples of recording devices were designed.
In this unit, you will learn about the abuses and ways to avoid the abuses.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list and explain some of the ways in which pre-school records can be abused • state the right ways to keep pre-school records • state the importance of pre-school records.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Abuses of Recording Devices at Pre-School There are many ways pre-school records can be abused by teachers.
They are as follows: 1ECE 232 MODULE 1 3.1.1 Storage Problem Where records are available but are not properly kept due to lack of storage facilities, it poses a problem.
Sometimes, the facilities may be there but the teacher or the headmaster may be careless in the way and manner these records are kept: they may be kept in a manner that makes it difficult to trace any record easily.
3.1.2 Poor Supervision by Headmasters or Supervisors According to farrant (1990), some headmasters do not keep records because no one goes round to supervise them or see how the teachers go about their duty.
In the same manner, some teachers may not keep records because their headmaster does not care to supervise them.
Everybody is left to do what he feels like doing and so no teacher cares to keep any record.
3.1.3 Giving False Information Adeyemo (1977) records that the keeping of records can be abused through false information.
The false information may come as a result of not recording information regularly.
The false information may also arise as a result of filing in or recording what is not true.
3.1.4 Non-Availability of Records It simply means that the records are not just there, i.e.
they are not available.
Since they are not there, it therefore, means that one cannot keep what is not available.
There are schools that cannot produce a single record of any type when asked to do so.
Even the lesson notes which every teacher should prepare everyday and which should guide his teaching can hardly be found in some schools.
3.1.5 Ignorance on the Part of the Headmaster /Teachers Some teachers and headmasters are not even aware of the importance of proper record keeping in the school or how to even keep those records.
Since they do not know the importance of the school records they therefore do not see the need of keeping them.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State and explain two ways of abusing pre-school records.
2ECE 232 MODULE 1 3.2 Ways of Avoiding the Abuses of School Records Adeyemo (1977) notes that for school records not to be abused, the headteacher/teacher must observe the following: (a) Information must be recorded regularly and promptly (b) The headteacher should ensure that records, which will help in the smooth running of the school, are made available always.
(c) Records must be reliable and realistic.
Records must therefore not be exaggerated (d) Records must be used at the appropriate time for useful purpose.
(e) Teachers/Headteachers should know the importance of school records 3.3 The Importance of Pre-School Records The importance of pre-school records cannot be over emphasized.
Pre- school records serve the following purposes: (1) Pre-school records can provide information for the poses of educational planning.
(2) They provide information to parents through continuous assessment record book as well as the report cards.
(3) They serve as sources of information for different people who are concerned and are interested in the school.
When they read through such records, they get to know more about the school.
(4) School records can be used to assess the progress of the school.
For example, the admission book shows the number of children admitted each year, and the number of visitors to the school because of the interest they have in it.
The logbook contains important happenings in the school.
All these and other records can give information which will show whether the school is progressing or not.
(5) School records can also be used as reference materials for both the teachers, supervisors and the community.
The record book justifies and shows how much the teacher has actually taught every week.
The cashbook shows how the finances are spent, etc.
4.0 CONCLUSION You learnt that records are abused when they are improperly kept.
You also learnt about some of the ways in which records can be abused which include poor storage, ignorance, poor supervision, giving false or incomplete information.
You also learnt the importance of school records which is to ensure the smooth running of the school.
3ECE 232 MODULE 1 5.0 SUMMARY In unit 12, you learnt about some ways of avoiding the abuses of pre- school records such as making the recording complete with honest information etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define abuse of records.
2.
In what four ways can you avoid the abuse of pre-school records?
3.
Mention four importance of recording in a pre-school?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyemo P.O.
(1977).
Principles and Practice of Education (Revised Edition), Ado-Ekiti: Omolayo Press.
Farrant, J.S.
(1990).
Principle and Practice of Education (2nd) ed.
Singapore: Longman Publishers Ltd. 4ECE 232 MODULE 1 UNIT 3 ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Assessment in Early Childhood Education 3.2 Terminology of Assessment 3.2.1 Sample A 3.2.2 Sample B 3.2.3 Sample C 3.2.4 Sample D 3.2.5 Sample E 3.2.6 Sample F 3.2.7 Sample G 3.2.8 Sample H 3.3 Subjects that Aid Assessment in Early Childhood Education 3.4 Assessment Techniques in Early Childhood 1.0Conclusion 2.0Summary 3.0Tutor-Marked Assignment 4.0References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In this unit, you will learn assessment at pre-school level.
Assessment is an integral part of the teaching-learning process.
The essence of assessment is to assess the totality of the learner in the teaching learning setting.
Assessment focuses on the cognitive, teaching personal and assistance, the interactions between teacher/pupils, pupils/materials, pupils/ pupils, teachers/ materials, etc.
When assessment is implemented from this framework, it ensures a positive change in behaviour, improvement in learning and improvement in the entire school system.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define assessment • State subjects to be used for assessment • State techniques of assessment at early childhood education.
5ECE 232 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Assessment in Early Childhood Education To assess means to make a judgment about the nature of quality of somebody or something.
Assessment refers to the process of judging or performing an opinion about something.
It could be in the form of written or oral tests or examinations.
3.2 Subjects that Aid Assessment at Early Childhood Education The following subjects have been recommended by the Committee on Curriculum Guides for Nursery Schools in Nigeria published by NERC (1987).
They are: a) Nursery English b) Nursery Mathematics c) Hand Writing d) Nursery Rhymes e) Social Norms/Moral Instruction f) Physical/Health Education g) Creative activities h) Elementary Science Each subject to be used should have its own programme/activities.
For example, in teaching nursery English, these are the activities: a) Recognition of colours b) Recognition of letters of the alphabets c) Chanting of English alphabets d) Recognition of small letters e) Recognition of capital letters f) Reading of small letters g) Reading of capital letters h) Names of simple colours/commands i) Responding to simple commands j) Letter reading k) Reading of three letter words l) Reading of three letters in some words m) Completing the missing letter in some words n) Using jumbled letters to form word We are going to look at some of them briefly for meaningful teaching/learning to take place.
6ECE 232 MODULE 1 3.2.1 Sample A Colour Recognition.
(Awoniyi 1987).
3.2.2 Sample B White Red Black Blue Green Yellow Brown Chanting of English alphabets A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 3.2.3 Sample C Recognition of small letters a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z 3.2.4 Sample D Names of simple shapes Circle Square Triangle Rectangle 3.2.5 Sample E Responding to simple commands Sit down Stand up Jump up Clap your hands Dance with your legs 7ECE 232 MODULE 1 3.2.6 Sample F Reading of three letter words cup cat rat egg axe ant cap bat bag fan bed box boy car dog dun hut hen key jug mat man 3.2.7 Sample G Completing the missing letter in some words E.g.
-ap (n,a,c) be- (n,d,c) m-t (r,a,b) 3.2.8 Sample H Using jumbled letters to form words E.g.
epn – pen tac – cat anm – man nat – ant uth – hut, gdo– dog worra – arrow.
All these activities are mixed up.
Some of the activities are meant for Nursery 3-year olds, 4-year olds and 5-year olds.
3.4 Test as an Assessment Technique in Early Childhood We are going to use tests in assessing them at all levels of pre-school.
Lets us now carefully define test.
Test refers to a set of questions or exercises given to pupils after they might have been taught to measure what they learnt from a teaching session.
For assessing cognitive abilities, test is the only instrument commonly used by the classroom teacher.
Test must be valid and reliable.
Tests are of various types such as objective tests, essays, multiple-choice, yes/no, fill in the blank space.
The most commonly used in pre-schools are, oral tests, yes/no, fill in the missing word.
Method of test construction: a) Determine the purpose of the test: Is the test for placement, diagnostic or formative purpose?
8ECE 232 MODULE 1 b) Determine the format of the test: Is it paper or pencil test, oral test or fill in the missing words?
etc.
c) Determine the number of items to be contained in the test: For Yes/No the items are few.
d) Draw a table of specification: A table of specification is a table indicating the topics covered and the objective being measured.
Let us construct a test in English.
The major topics in English nursery 1, 2, 3, syllabuses are recognition of alphabets (RA) small letters (Sl) capital (CL) letters, shapes (S) and columns, etc.
By looking at the number of sub-topics, it could be stated thus: RA = 10 items SL = 12 items CL = 12 items S = 8 items C = 8 items Total = 50 Topic Knowledge Comprehension Application Total No.
of items No.
of items No.
of items RA 3 3 4 10 SL 3 4 5 12 CL 3 4 5 12 S 2 2 3 8 C 3 2 3 8 Total 14 15 21 50 The following table is a table of specification for English test From the table, it is clear that all the topics have been tested covering knowledge, comprehension and application.
Let us consider the general guidelines recommended by Gronlund (1984) for constructing tests.
They are as follows: a) Test each item by writing an ideal answer to it.
b) Indicate an appropriate time limit.
c) Avoid tricky questions.
d) There should be one and only one correct answer.
e) Randomly position the correct answers.
f) Avoid clues to the correct answers.
g) Prepare comprehensive instructions for each test.
9ECE 232 MODULE 1 Uses of Tests Tests can be used for a number of situations in the teaching learning process.
Storey (1970) considers the following as the most common uses of test in assessment of pre-school pupils 1) Tests are used for placement purpose.
We pre test pupils to find out if they possess the basic knowledge required for the next lesson.
2) Tests are also used for formative purposes.
Formative testing enables a teacher to re-enforce successful teaching strategies and discourage those practices that impede learning.
3) Tests are used for diagnostic purposes.
Diagnostic test enables the teacher to identify learning errors among his/her pupils.
4) Tests are used for summative purposes.
At the end of a course or programme, we give tests to certify that the course or the programme has been successfully or unsuccessful fully completed.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define test.
2.
Identify four uses of test to a pre-school teacher.
Written tests/oral test will be used here.
Paper/pencil tests to assess their level of experience with the new topic.
Questions for Nursery 3 (Ages 5years) 1.
Identify the six basic colours 2. colour correctly in the spaces provided (a) (b) (c) (d) red yellow blue green 3.
Identify small letters in these spaces provided (Aa), (Dd), (Zz), (e E,) (y z,) (Z y) 10ECE 232 MODULE 1 Write Yes/No in the space provided (a) is a simple shape (b) Sleeping, dancing, eating are simple commands (c) Ant, bag, cat, dog, egg, fan are three letter words (d) Complete the missing letter in some words (c,a,b) m-t, - ap (n,a,c) be – (n,d,c) (e) Use the following letters to form words gdo –, uth –, anm –, tac-, epn –, nat –.
(f) The teacher should score them 50% for test, 50% for examination which gives 100% over all.
Note: If the pupils are able to solve these questions correctly, then you can say that they have been assessed in English.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you learnt definition of assessment, subjects one can employ in assessment programmes/activities for assessing the nursery 1,2,3 pupils.
Assessment procedure/techniques were discussed too.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit sees test as an important session in the teaching – learning process.
There are several types of tests that serve different purposes.
We have a written test called paper/pencil test.
It is used to assess their level of experience with the new topic.
Each teacher should use these types of tests in assessing his/her pupils.
We use tests for placement, formative, diagnostic and for summative purposes.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Test a set of questions or exercise given to pupils after they might have been taught to measure what they learn from a teaching session.
Four uses of test are: 1) for placement purpose 2) for formative purpose 3) for diagnostic purpose 4) for summative purpose 11ECE 232 MODULE 1 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define assessment.
2.
What are the subjects to be assessed at pre-school level?
3.
Identify four techniques of assessment at early childhood education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS A.S. Hornby (2000).
Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary of Current English, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maduewesi,Ebele, Bola Ala, Adedeji Awoniyi and Afum, Baba (1987).
Evans Mathematics Book for Nursery Schools, Ibadan: Evans Brothers ( Nigeria Publishers) Limited.
Gronlund, N.E (1981).
Measurement and Evaluation in Teaching, New York: Macmillan Publishing Co. Inc. Storey, A.G. (1970).
The Measurement of Classroom Learning, Chicago: The Dimensions in Educational Series.
12ECE 232 MODULE 1 UNIT 4 ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTD.
CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Scoring 3.2 Techniques of Scoring 3.3 Techniques of Marking Tests 3.4 Subjects that Aid Assessment 3.4.1 Nursery Mathematics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit 3, of this module, you learnt about tests, types of test, test construction, uses of tests and some exercises for assessment in Nursery 3 English.
In unit 4, of this module you are going to learn about techniques of scoring/ grading of tests with mathematics as a subject using some assessment exercise for Nursery 5.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the techniques for scoring a test • explain the techniques of marking a test • do some mathematical exercises in nursery 5.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT Nursery Mathematics 3.1 Scoring Scoring has been defined in two ways, namely, global scoring and analytic scoring.
By global scoring we mean a method of scoring an essay test such that marks are awarded to the questions after reading all the response.
Analytic scoring is a method of scoring an essay test paragraph by paragraph.
13ECE 232 MODULE 1 3.2 Techniques of Scoring According to Jowith-Harold (1960), there are many ways to score tests; depending on the type of test and the number of test items as well as the purpose of the test.
For essay test, the scoring procedure could be the global approach or the analytic approach.
Global technique of the scoring an essay involves the reading of the entire answers to a question and then the general impression is converted into a numerical score and then awarded.
Such procedure is not good enough because the teachers might forget some important point mentioned at the beginning of a presentation.
On the other hand, with analytic scoring technique a teacher scores a multiple choice question as contained on a marking scheme.
That is to say a teacher assigns marks to each important point made by a candidate.
For objective tests, the scoring is highly objective so that you only need to provide the solution and anybody else can mark the items.
For many of the objective tests, scoring can be made by a machine such as a computer.
Sometimes, can examiner can prepare special answer sheet so that the correct responses can be out to form a stencil of correct solutions.
By matching the stencil with the student’s answer sheet, the scoring could be done with ease.
3.3 Techniques of Marking Tests In the pre-school, tests are marked out of hundred marks.
For formative assessment marks are assigned to pupils’ performance by 50 percent.
For institutional marking, Gronlund (1986) prescribes the following scoring pattern: a. for marks 70% and above, letter grade A is awarded b. for marks between 60-69%, letter grade B is awarded c. for marks between 50-59%,, letter grade of C is awarded d. for marks between 45-49%, letter grade of D is awarded e. for marks between 40-44%, letter grade of E is awarded f. for marks between 0-39%, letter grade of F is awarded In another system of marking pupil’s performance, the following is the common practice.
Marks Description Letter Grade 70 and above Distinction A 60 – 69 Credit B 50-59 Merit C 40-49 Pass D less that 39 Fail F 14ECE 232 MODULE 1 Grades are for specific purposes.
At pre-school level, grades are used to specify the attainment of certain standards.
They are used to indicate the learning potential of a child.
In this case, the grades are used for admission purpose.
Many attempts are made to modify our traditional marking system with little or no success.
Some experts have suggested certain letter grades such as H for honour, S for satisfactory and U for unsatisfactory.
There is also a two category marking schemes.
The system of marking performance involves either pass or fail, satisfactory or unsatisfactory.
The system does not include grades for performance.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is scoring?
2.
Mention two types of scoring system.
3.
What type of scoring system do you prefer and why?
3.4 Subjects That Aid Assessment 3.4.1 Nursery Mathematics PROGRAMMES/ ACTIVITIES i.
Counting of numbers up to 50. ii.
Identification of number symbols from 1 to 20 using sticks, bottle tops stones, seeds, desks, children toys etc.
iii.
Weighing of objects, e.g.
stones, books, garden eggs.
iv.
Comparison of volume through measuring of sand, water, sawdust etc.
v. Comparison of lengths/heights, e.g.
length of teacher’s table, height of children in the class.
vi.
Simple addition using the number symbols 1 to 5.
Having looked at the activities; let us now consider few of them.
SAMPLE A Counting of numbers up to 50 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 2 6 2 7 2 8 2 9 3 0 3 1 3 2 3 3 3 4 3 5 3 6 3 7 3 8 3 9 15ECE 232 MODULE 1 4 0 4 1 4 2 4 3 4 4 4 5 4 6 4 7 4 8 4 9 5 0 SAMPLE B Identification of number symbols.
1: One 2: two 3: three 4: four 5: five 6: six 7: seven 8: eight 9: nine 10: ten 11: eleven 12: twelve 13: thirteen 14: fourteen 15: fifteen 16: sixteen 17: seventeen 18: eighteen 19: nineteen 20: twenty.
SAMPLE C Simple addition using the number symbols 1-5 = 4 = 3 = 4 1-5 1-5 1 = 2 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Count numbers 1-20.
Write the numbers in the spaces provided.
Fill in the missing numbers in the spaces provided.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 16ECE 232 MODULE 1 Identify Figures with Words FIGURES WORDS 1 One 2 Two 3 Three 4 Four 5 Five 6 Six 7 Seven 8 Eight 9 Nine 10 Ten Match the Correct Figures/Words FIGURES WORDS 1 Four 2 Eight 3 Ten 4 Six 5 Nine 6 Seven 7 One 8 Three 9 Five 10 Two If the pupils are able to solve these sample mathematical problems, you can now say that assessment has taken place.
17ECE 232 MODULE 1 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit enables you to know something about scoring/making techniques.
Scoring and grading of tests are very important assignments for a teacher.
If a test is well planned, the scoring will be very easy for the teacher.
5.0 SUMMARY Scoring and marking of test is a difficult assignment for a teacher.
When the objectives of the lesson are formulated in behavioural terms, it makes both the scoring and grading of test very easy and less subjective.
Teachers should use analytic scoring procedure so that a test is scored paragraph by paragraph.
The institutional marking is one that assigns letter grades to each score or interval of scores.
The letter grades are used to indicate the level of attainment or mastery of a stated objective.
The letter grades are used for admission purposes and certification.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Scoring system means the system of assigning marks or point grades some body gets for correct answers in a test.
2.
Two types of scoring system are (a) global and (b) analytical scoring systems.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 I prefer analytic scoring system.
This is because test is scored paragraph by paragraph.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify two types of scoring system.
2.
List three purposes which letter grades serve.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Jowith, Harold (1960).Suggested Methods for the African School, London: Longman.
Groulund, N.E.
(1986).
Measurement and Evaluation in Teaching, New York: Publishing Co. Maduewesi,E; Bola Ala; Adedeji A.& Afum Baba (1987).
Mathematics Book for Nursery Schools Book 3 for Ages 5, Evans Brothers (Nigerian Publisher) Ltd. 18ECE 232 MODULE 1 UNIT 5 CONTINUOUS ASSESSMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Continuous Assessment 3.2 Characteristics of Continuous Assessment 3.2.1 Systematic 3.2.2 Cumulative 3.2.3 Comprehensive 3.2.4 Guidance – Oriented 3.3 Rationale for Continuous Assessment 3.4 Improving the Quality of Continuous Assessment 3.4.1 Sample A Handwriting for Nursery 1 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION One major innovation or reform in our educational system is the introduction of continuous assessment as an important component of assessment.
With the approval of the National Policy on Education by the Federal Government in 1977, the continuous assessment became part and parcel of assessment in our school system.
The National Policy on Education (1981) prescribed that educational assessment and evaluation will be liberalised by basing them in whole or in part on continuous assessment of the progress of the individual (Para.
7.7) In this unit, you will learn what continuous assessment is all about.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define the concept of continuous assessment • Identify characteristics of continuous assessment • State rationale for continuous assessment in our schools • List ways of improving the quality of continuous assessment.
19ECE 232 MODULE 1 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Continuous Assessment The term continuous assessment has been defined in many ways.
Denga (1987) defines it as a method of determining the final grade for a given period of time through a series of periodic assessments comprising test and non-test measures.
These periodic assessments are given at predetermined intervals and aim at gathering data on children regarding their academic achievements, vocational interests and personal social problems.
The Federal Ministry of Education Handbook FME (1985) defines it as: “a mechanism whereby the final grading of a student in the cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains of behaviour takes account in a systematic way of all his performance during a given period of schooling”.
It can be deduced from the two definitions that continuous assessment takes account of the test and non-test measures and involves all the three domains of human behaviour that is, the cognitive, affective and psychomotor.
3.2 Characteristics of Continuous Assessment Having considered the concept of continuous assessment from different perspectives, let us examine the characteristic of continuous assessment.
In a nutshell, continuous assessment is characterised by the following (Denga, 1987, Maduabum, 1995): (a) It is systematic (b) It is cumulative (c) It is comprehensive (d) It is guidance-oriented 3.2.1 Systematic Continuous assessment is systematic in the sense that it is well planned indicating how many times it is to be conducted and at what intervals of time.
A minimum of three assignments or tests is required per school subject.
3.2.2 Cumulative It is cumulative in that it conveys the performance of the past and present.
20ECE 232 MODULE 1 3.2.3 Comprehensive Continuous assessment is comprehensive in the sense that it takes into consideration the assessment of all behaviours in terms of cognitive performance, interest and attitudes (affective) and physical (psychomotor) skills.
3.2.4 Guidance – Oriented It is guidance-oriented in the sense that continuous assessment records should lead a teacher to counsel his pupils on their potentiality and for career awareness.
3.3 Rationale for Continuous Assessment The rationale for continuous assessment is obvious and cannot be over emphasised.
They include the following: (a) Teachers should be involved in the final grading of their pupils since assessment is an integral part of teaching.
(b) Continuous assessment provides a basis for career guidance of pupils.
(c) Continuous assessment provides a basis for assessing the effectiveness of teaching methods.
(d) Continuous assessment provides valid and reliable assessment of pupils since it is conducted throughout the school period.
What do we Assess?
It is meaningless to talk about continuous assessment without pointing out what to assess.
Human traits are to be assessed.
They constitute the subject mater for continuous assessment.
They include; intelligence, aptitude, interests, attitude achievements, personality.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define the term continuous assessment.
2.
Assessment techniques have been treated in our units in the context of pre-school education.
We had earlier mentioned that what is the assessment here written or oral tests will be used.
Fill in the missing words can as well be used.
3.4 Improving the Quality of Continuous Assessment Teachers should use oral test, which involves verbal communication between the examiner and the examinee.
21ECE 232 MODULE 1 Teachers should also use performance test which involves the measure of motor or manual responses of an examinee who is expected to manipulate some concrete materials.
Teachers should include achievement test which is a test concerned with what a person has learnt to do.
This type of test is tied to particular school subjects.
It may be teacher made or standardized.
A teacher-made test is constructed locally.
It could be valid and reliable.
A standardized test has a table of norms.
It is a valid and reliable test.
Teachers should be aware of factors that are irrelevant to the continuous assessment, e.g.
socio-economic background of a pupil.
Teachers should also include observational techniques in their continuous assessment.
Having looked at continuous assessment at some detail, let us consider a subject that will be used for assessing the pupils.
3.4.1 Sample a Handwriting for Nursery 1 Objectives By the end of these activities, pupils should be able to: • Write zig-zag lines.
• Write curved strokes.
• Demonstrate free handwriting/drawing • Write vertical and horizontal stroke • Write slant strokes.
Programmes/Activities • Free handwriting/drawing • Writing vertical and horizontal stroke • Writing slant strokes.
• Writing curved strokes.
• Writing zig-zag lines Teaching Methods • Use fat crayons • Hold the child’s hand as he draws.
• Provide sand trays • Provide slates • Provide drawing books 22ECE 232 MODULE 1 • Let them draw on sand • Spread them out • Do not correct them • Praise them lavishly Examples 1.
Freehand writing/drawing 2.
Writing of vertical and horizontal strokes 3.
Writing of slanting strokes 4.
Writing of curved strokes 5.
Writing of zig-zags lines Assessment Procedure Write these lines down in your writing book.
If the child in the pre-school is able to write all these inside the writing book, the teacher can now say that assessment has been taken place.
23ECE 232 MODULE 1 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you learnt that continuous assessment is a process whereby the final grading of a child in cognitive, affective and psychomotor domains takes cognisance of his/her day-to-day performance through out the schooling period.
5.0 SUMMARY Unit 5 explains that continuous assessment should be reliable and effectively implemented.
The four major characteristics of continuous assessment were identified as systematic, comprehensive, cumulative and guidance oriented.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Continuous Assessment has been defined by Denga (1987) as a method of determining the final grade for a given period of time through a series of periodic assessments comprising test and non- test measures.
2.
According to Federal Government (1985), continuous assessment is seen as a method of finding out what the child has gained from learning activities in terms of knowledge, thinking and reasoning, character development and industry.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the term continuous assessment 2.
Describe the major characteristics of continuous assessment.
3.
List the rationale for incorporating continuous assessment into the school system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS National Policy on Education (Revised) (2001).
Denga, D.I.
(1987).
Educational Measurement, Ccontinuous Assessment and Psychological Testing.
University of Calabar Printing Press.
Maduabum, M.A.
(1992).
Handbook on Continuous Assessment, 134 Owerri: Versatile Press.
The Federal Ministry of Education (1980).
Handbook on Continuous Assessment, Lagos: NERC Press.
24ECE 232 MODULE 1 UNIT 6 CONSOLIDATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Observation in Early Childhood Education 3.2 Recording in Early Childhood Education 3.3 Assessments in Early Childhood Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit brings together the series of lectures you have had on observation, recording and assessment in early childhood education.
This unit is meant to give a summary of the main areas treated in the module and to expose you further to more activities.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define observation • state different types of observational tools • define recording • state types of recording/recording device • define assessment • state ways of assessing a pre-school child.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Observation In Early Childhood Education Observation entails careful watching of pupils’ behaviours largely in their natural settings.
Observation is the art of looking out for and recording the presence or absence of verbal and non-verbal behaviour of a person or group of persons.
Tools for observation are checklist, rating scales and anecdotal records.
25ECE 232 MODULE 1 3.2 Recording in Early Childhood Education Recording is a process of writing down and storing information for official purposes.
Types of recoding are: records kept by pre-school headmaster and records kept by pre-school teacher.
Records kept by pre-school headmaster are the admission book, logbook, stock book, punishment book, transfer book, school time table cash book, syllabuses, education law book.
Records kept by pre-school teacher are attendance book, continuous Assessment record book, report cards, lesson notebooks, record of work book.
Recording devices are report card, transcript, continuous assessment record book, personal information data.
3.3 Assessments in Early Childhood Education Assessment is the process of judging or forming an opinion about something.
It could be in the form of written or oral tests or examinations.
Ways of assessing a pre-school child are oral test, written (paper-pencil) tests, examination, fill in the missing words or gaps etc; continuous assessment.
Tests, whether written or oral, are series of questions or exercises meant to measure knowledge or special abilities.
The teacher uses a lot of tests in the teaching-learning process to measure what he has taught.
There are different types of tests such as multiple choice, Yes/No, fill in the missing words, etc.
In setting a test, the teacher should bear certain factors in mind, such as the purpose of the test; whether it is for placement; the format of the test; whether multiple-choice; the number of test items as well as drawing up a table of specification.
Tests can be used in a number of situations in the teaching-learning process.
This may include using them for placement, formative and summation purposes.
Continuous assessment is a way of evaluating children’s performance from time to time.
It involves finding out what the child has gained from learning activities in terms of knowledge, thinking, reasoning, character development and industry.
The techniques of assessing include tests, assignments, observations, etc.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What is continuous Assessment?
2.
Tests are used for – and – and - - 26ECE 232 MODULE 1 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, you learnt about observation, recording and assessment in pre-school in a nutshell.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has given a picture of what modules 1, 2 and 3 are all about.
This unit has touched on observation and its types, recording and its types.
It also distinguished between records kept by the teacher and those kept by the headmaster.
This unit has also looked at continuous assessment as a form of assessment device.
It has touched on tests and their types.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Continuous assessment is a way of evaluating children’s performance from time to time.
It involves finding out what the child has gained from learning activities in terms of knowledge, thinking, reasoning, character development and industry.
2.
Tests are used for placements formative and summative purposes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Three types of records kept by the head master are: (a) ----------------------- (b) -------------------- (c) ---------------------- 2.
Four types of records kept by the class teacher are (a) ---------------- (b) --------------- (c) ---------------- (d) ------------- 3.
Tests are used for (a) ---------------- (b) ---------------- (c) --------------- (d) ------------- 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adeyemo, D.O (1977).
Principles and Practice of Education (Revised Edition).
Ado-Ekiti: Omolayo Press.
Farrant, J.S.
(1990).
Principles and Practice of Education (2nd Ed.)
Singapore: Longman Publishers Ltd. Fagbulu, A.M. (1978).
Administrative Practice of Teachers, London: Cox & Wyman Ltd. Onwuegbu, O.T.
(1979).
Discover Teaching, Roma: Longoraf, S.P.
A.
27
