 NNNAAATTTIIIOOONNNAAALLL OOOPPPEEENNN UUUNNNIIIVVVEEERRRSSSIIITTTYYY OOOFFF NNNIIIGGGEEERRRIIIAAA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: ECE 421 CCCOOOUUURRRSSSEEE TTTIIITTTLLLEEE::: HHHEEEAAALLLTTTHHH AAANNNDDD FFFAAAMMMIIILLLYYY LLLIIIFFFEEE EEEDDDUUUCCCAAATTT IIIOOONNN i COURSE GUIDE Course Code: ECE 421 Course Title: HEALTH AND FAMILY LIFE EDUCATION Course Developer: Dr. U.C.E Nnabueze Faculty of Education Enugu State University of Science & Technology, Enugu Course Writer: Dr. U.C.E Nnabueze Faculty of Education Enugu State University of Science & Technology, Enugu Course Editor: Professor Nebath Tanglang National Open University of Nigeria Study Centre, Gombe STAFF IN CHARGE Dr. D N Ofoha School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator: Mrs. H. I. Johnson School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos ii  COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS: 1.0 INTRODUCTION 2.0 OBJECTIVES 3.0 MAIN CONTENTS 3.1 Course aim and objectives 3.2 Course Materials and structure 3.2.1 Course Guide 3.2.2 How to get the most from the course 3.3 Course delivery 3.3.1 Facilitation 3.3.2 Tutorials  3.3.3 Counseling 3.4 Assessment 3.4.1 Self Assessment Exercises 3.4.2 Tutor-Marked Assignments 3.4.3 Final Examination 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary  iii 1.0 Introduction 21: Health and Family Life Education Welcome to ECE 4 which is a two credit Uni t Course.
There are fifteen study units in this course.
This guide is one of the several resource tools available to you, to help you successfully complete this course and ultimately your programme.
In this guide, you will find very useful information about this course: course aim and objectives, what the course is all about.
It also offers you guidelines on how to plan your time of study; your tutor- marked assignments.
I wish you all the best in your learning experience and successful comp letion of this course.
2.0 Objectives On completion of this unit, you will be able to: (cid:1) Explain the aim and objectives of this course (cid:1) Outline the structure and content of this course (cid:1) Provide a summary of what this course is al l about (cid:1) Explain briefly what is required of you in relation to the self assessment exercises and Tutor -Marked Assignments.
(cid:1) State what is required of you to be eligible to sit for this course examination at the end of the semest er.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Course Aim and Objectives The course aim for ECE 421 Health and Family Life Education is to help you understand the concept of health, lifestyle in relation to family life education issues.
4 es for ECE 421: Health and Family Life The course objectiv ou to check your learning of this course Education should help y as you go along.
Meanw hile there are objectives to achieve in each unit of this course (made up of 15 units).
You should read them before studying each unit.
On completion of this course you should b e able to: (cid:1) Explain the concept of health (cid:1) Explain the concept of wellness (cid:1) Explain the concept of lifestyle (cid:1) Name various determinants of health (cid:1) Describe some models and theories of health pr omotion.
(cid:1) Explain the institution of the family (cid:1) Describe how the family is the core of early childhood education.
(cid:1) Describe the concepts of marriage and divorce.
(cid:1) Examine the influence of social change on the family institution (cid:1) Identify various adolescent issues.
(cid:1) Identity the various socio-health family issues.
(cid:1) Name and discuss various chi ldhood diseases/illnesses.
(cid:1) Identify various stressors as they affect families.
(cid:1) List and explain some family lifestyle issues.
(cid:1) Identify and explain social issues bearing on the family.
3.2 Course Materials and Structure 5 ill introduce you to the course mat erial This course guide w effectively and show you how to get the most out of this course material.
3.2.1 Course Guide Study Units The units contained in this course reading materia l are: (cid:1) Concept of health (cid:1) Concept of wellness (cid:1) Concept of lifestyle (cid:1) Determinants of health (cid:1) Models and theories of health promotion (cid:1) Institution of the family (cid:1) Family: The core of early childhood education.
(cid:1) Marriage and divorce  (cid:1) Family and social change (cid:1) Adolescents issues (cid:1) Socio-health family issues (cid:1) Childhood illnesses (cid:1) Family and stress (cid:1) Family lifestyle issues (cid:1) Social issues bearing on the family Course Summary Module 1 introduces you to the field of health.
Module 2 examines the family institution, marriage, divorce, social change and adolescent issues.
Module 3 deals with social- 6 the family.
There are fifteen units in health issues bearing on  this course, course guide exclusive.
Each study unit consists of one week’s work and sh ould take you around 3 hours on the average to complete but let me quickly warn, that some units may take more than 3 hours, while others may take less.
Each unit as you will observe includes specific objectives, guidance for study, reading material and self assessment exercises.
Together with tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives for the individual study units and the course in general.
Course Overview (Study Plan) Units Title of Study Unit Weeks/ Assignm ent Activity Course Guide 2 Course Guide Form Module 1 Concept of Health 1 Meaning of health 2 Assignment 2 Meaning of wellness 3 Assignment 3 Meaning of lifestyle 4 Assignment 4 Health determinants 5 Assignment 5 Models & Theories of 6 TMA 1 to be Health submitted Module 2 Institution of Family 1 Concept of family 7 Assignment 2 Families: The core of early 8 Assignment childhood education 3 Marriage and divorce 9 Assignment 4 Family and social change 10 Assignment 5 Adolescents issues 11 TMA 2 to be submitted Module 3 Socio-Health Family Issues 1 Child health 12 Assignment 2 Childhood illness 13 Assignment 3 Family and stress 14 Assignment 4 Family lifestyle issues 15 Assignment 7 5 Socio-family is sues 16 TMA 3 to be  submitted Revision 17 Examination 18 Total 18 * Now use this overview to plan your personal timetable.
References Action Health Incorporated (2000).
Family Relationships.
Growing Up 8 (3) 3-6.
Akinsola, H.A.
(1993).
A – Z of community Health and Social Medicine in Medical and Nursing Practice.
Ibadan: 3.am Communications.
Beattie, A.
(1993).
The Changing Boundaries of Health.
In Beattie A, Gott.
M, Jones L and Siddel M (Eds).
Health and Well being: A reader.
London: Macmillian.
Essa, E.L, (1999).
Introduction to Early Childhood Education.
Washington: Delmer Publishers.
Insel P.M., Roth W.T, Rollins L.M, Peterson R.A, and Stone T, (1991).
Core Concepts of Health.
California: Mayfield Publishing Company.
Okoye P.U.
(2000).
Harmful Widowhood Practices in Anambra State.
Enugu: Nucik Publishers.
Owie, I.
(2003).
Adding years to your life: An invitation from Queen Hygiah.
Inaugural Lecture series 68.
University of Benin.
August th 282003.
8 n (WHO) (2006).
Health.
World Health Organizatio http:/www.who.i nt./about/overview/en> Further Reading Assimeng.
M, (2006).
Understanding Society.
An introduction to Sociology for African Students.
Accra: Woeli Publishing Serivices.
Brown, C.K, and Thakur A.P.
(1997).
Rural Sociology.
A West African Reader I Kingship, Marriage and the Family.
Accra: Ghana Universities Press.
Corbin, C.B, Lindsey R, Welk G.J, Corbin W.R. (2002).
Concepts of Fitness and Wellness.
Boston: McGraw Hill.
Getchell B, Pippin R, and Varnes J (1991).
Health.
Boston: Mifflin Company.
Glanz K., Lewis F.M., and Rinner B.K.
(1997).
Health Behaviour and Education.
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Posse R, and Melgosa J, (2001).
For raising your child.
Madrid: Editorial Safeliz S.L 3.2.2 How to get the most out of this Course This course material provides with the advantage of reading and learning at your place, time, and place.
Each study unit provides you with the introduction, objectives and exercise to help understand the course better.
Try and do each Self Assessment Exercise as you come to it in the study.
Draw up a time table for yourself and make use of left and right margins of your course book to notes of main and key p oints.
3.3 Course Delivery 9 academic support available to you There are various during the course of you r study.
These academic support come in the form of tutorial sessions, facilitation and counseling support services.
3.3.1 Facilitation The language of instruction for this course material is English.
The medium is the print material.
Facilitation should take place at any NOUN Study Centre nearest to you.
The time of facilitation is flexibly arranged between you (the learner) and your facilitator.
3.3.2 Tutorial Sessions Tutorials are supposed to give you an opportunity to come face to face with your ‘teacher’ and with your fellow students.
This course material is your ‘teacher’.
Any questions and clarifications arising from studying this material will be handled during tutorial sessions.
Your tutorial facilitator will help facilitate learning.
You are encouraged to participate in these tutorial sessions although it is optional.
Every other question about the tutorials should be directed to your study manager, your facilitator or your study centre councellor.
Remember that tutorial sessions are flexibly arranged between you and your tutorial facilitator.
3.3.3 Counselling Counselling at NOUN is provided for you at two levels, academic and personal.
For academic counseling (on facilitation and course materials) you should go to your study centre 10 or enquires on tutorial facilitation and manager for enquiries.
F assignments, meet yo ur tutorial facilitator.
For personal counseling, students co unselors are available in your study centre to attend to your personal issues.
The study centre counsellor will give you guidance on personal issues as this wil l help to make your learning experience easier and smoot h. 3.4 Assessment There are three components of assessment for this course: Self Assessment Exercises and assignments at the end of each study unit, the Tutor-Marked Assignments; and a written examination.
In doing these assignments, you are expected to use the information gathered during your study of the course.
Below are detailed explanations on how to do each assignment.
3.4.1 Self Assessment Exercise (SAEs) There are Self Assessment Exercises spread out through your course material.
You should attempt each exercise immediately after reading the section that precedes it.
Possible answers to the exercises are provided at the end of the course book, however, you should check the answers only after you must have attempted the exercises.
The exercises are for you to evaluate your learning; they are not to be submitted.
There are also questions spread through each study unit.
You are required to attempt these questions after you have read a study unit.
Again, the questions are to help you assess your knowledge of the contents of the unit.
You are not required to submit the answers for SAEs.
11 3.4.2 Tutor-Marked A ssignments (TMAs) There are three Tutor-M arked Assignments for this course.
The assignments are designed to cover all areas treated in the course.
You will be given your assignments and the dates for submission at your study centre.
You are required to attempt all four Tutor-Marked Assignments.
You will be assessed on all four and the best three will be recorded.
Guidelines for writing Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
On the cover page of your assignment, write the course code and title, assignment number (TMA 1, TMA 2), and date of submission, your name and matriculation number.
It should look like this: Course Code: Course Title: Tutor-Marked: Date of Submission: School and Programme: Matriculation Number: 2.
You should endeavour to be concise and to the point in your answers and adhere to word limit where given.
Your answer should be based on your course material, further readings and experience.
However, do not copy from any of these materials.
If you do, you will be penalized.
Remember to give relevant examples and illustrations.
3.
Use ruled foolscap size paper for writing answers.
Make and keep a copy of your assignments.
12 4.
Your answers shoul d be hand-written by you.
Leave a margin of about 1.5 i nches of the left side and about 5 lines before the answer t o the next question for your tutorial facilitator’s comments.
3.4.3 Final Examination and Grading Each assignment (TMA) carries 10% and together will count for 30% of your total score for the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator for formal assessment on or before the stipulated dates for submission.
The work that you submit to your tutorial facilitator for assessment will count for 30% of your total course score, while the final examination will be 70% giving a total of 100% for this course.
The final examination for ECE 421 Health and Family Life Education will be of 2 hours duration.
Before examination you should have: 1.
Submitted all four Tutor-Marked Assignments for the course.
2.
You should have registered to sit for the examination.
4.0 Conclusion Conclusively, all the features of this course guide will help you achieve your aim and objectives for this course.
Make use of them to achieve maximum result s. 5.0 Summary ECE 421: Health and Family Life Education provides you a pedestal upon which you will learn, understand, examine and 13  th, lifestyle and family knowledge and review how you see heal practices.
Upon completi on of this course, you should be able to explain the relationship between wellness, lifestyle, individual and family health status.
I wish you success with the course and hope that it will enlighten you the more, be of interest and useful to you both personal and in your relationship with others.
All the best.
14 421 Course Code: ECE LTH AND FAMILY LIFE EDUCATION Course Title: HEA Course Developer: Dr. V. Nmabueze Faculty of Education Enugu State University of Science & Technology, Enugu Course Writer: Dr. V. Nmabueze Faculty of Education Enugu State University of Science & Technology, Enugu  Course Editor: Professor Nebath Tanglang National Open University of Nigeria Study Centre, Gombe STAFF IN CHARGE Dr. D N Ofoha School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos Course Coordinator: Mrs. H. I. Johnson School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos 15 ECE 421.
HEALT H AND FAMILY LIFE EDU CATION  MODULE 1 CONCEPT OF HEALTH Unit 1 Meaning of the Word Health Unit 2 Meaning of the Word Wellness Unit 3 Meaning of the Word Lifestyle Unit 4 Factors Associated with One’s Health Status.
Unit 5 Theories and Models of Health UNIT 1 MEANING OF THE WORD HEALTH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Brief History of word Health 3.2 Various meanings of the Word Health 3.3 Various definitions of Health 3.4 The Health Triangle 3.5 Steps to Responsible Health 3.6 The Composition of Health 3.7 The Seven Cardinal Points of Health 16 4.0 Conclusion  5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUC TION When you hear the word health, what comes to your mind?
A good looking man or woman?
A bouncing baby?
An athlete?
A pot bellied middle age man?
The list is really endless.
You will learn more about health and other key words associated with health in the first three units of Module 1 of this course material.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Recount a brief history of health (cid:1) Define health according to World Health Organization (WHO) (cid:1) Compare the definitions of health based on the different areas of health (cid:1) Draw the health triangle (cid:1) Explain the different dimensions of health (cid:1) State the seven cardinal points of health 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Brief history of the Word Health  The Word health is one of the most popular and yet abused word of our time.
Etymologically, health is derived from Health meaning sound and whole.
Health is an old 17 nd, whole or well.
The word comes from the same root English word meaning to make sou as the word heal.
Throughout history the search for survival have lead to different interpretations of health.
Each culture and generation have had its own concept which guided the definition they gave to the word health.
One of the earliest definitions of health came as a result of struggle for survival in the face of communicable diseases, pestilence, famine and wars.
By the 1800s with the introduction of public health laws and acts, the definition of health associated with communicable diseases began to reduce tremendously.
Mental and physical hygiene were incorporated th into health.
Towards the last two decades of the 20century, wellness and lifestyle became prominent in the meaning and definitions of health.
The word heath is something of an enigma.
Like the proverbial elephant, it is difficult to define yet easy to spot when we see it.
“You look well” stands as a common greeting to a friend or a relative who appears relaxed, happy and buoyant “feeling good” Any reflection on the term, however immediately reveals its complexity.
The idea of health is capable of wide and narrow application, and can be negatively as well as positively defined.
We can be in good health and poor health.
Moreover, health is not just a feature of our daily life; it also appears frequently on the political landscape.
Health scares such as (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, AIDS), Severs Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and swine flu - HINI Virus)and even the prospects of bio-terrorism have all exercised politicians and their medical advisers in recent times, and have all provided a steady stream of media stories.
Health risks seem to proliferate, even if, for most of us most of the time, these are less than urgent concerns.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 Pause and recount the brief history of health 3.2 Various Meaning of the word Health.
18 alth are: Other various ways of looking at he at health from a physical point of view, health would (cid:1) Physically, if one is looking now mean what makes it possible for a person to become what he / she wants to be and do what he / she wants to do.
(cid:1) Health as a state of being hale, sound and whole in body, a kind of wellbeing especially being free from physical disease, illness and form of handicap.
Note: physical vigor alone does not constitute total health nor is longevity alone the purpose of living.
Quality of living is as important as quantity of living.
Interpreting health from a mental point of view could look like – (cid:1) A good mental health spells out the ingredients of a good personality and that is one in which the individual’s cognitive (intellectual), affective (emotional) and psychomotor (physical) abilities are such as to enable him / her to live effectively and adjust to a given community and situation.
(cid:1) Good health as the attainment and maintenance of the highest state of emotional and mental vigor of which any given individual is capable.
On the other hand, from a social point of view – (cid:1) Health as an individual’s value, depending on a man’s / women’s ability to either control or adapt to his / her environment.
(cid:1) Health is the attribute which enables the individual to adjust to a given environment  (cid:1) Health as an outward manifestation of how we are adapting to stresses in our lives.
Good health suggests successful adaptation, while bad health shows a 19 alth is a continuous process.
That is it keeps on failure to adaptation.
He vels, so health exist in each individual in a continuum.
fluctuating to different le Diagrammatic Expression of Health from a Social Point of View.
Optimal Health  ↓ ↑ ← Physical / Environmental Stressors Good Health ↓ ↑ ← Social Stressors Average Health  ↓ ↑ ← Biological Stressors Poor Heath 20 ↓ ↑ ← Occupational Stressors Ill Health  ↓ Death Arguably, we as humans choose many of the stressors in our lives when we choose our lifestyle and we also choose how to adopt to stressors.
Recognizing our personal responsibility for health empowers us to promote our own health.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 State one definition of health from a social point of view  3.3 Various Definitions of Health Health is state of complete physical, mental and social well being of an individual and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.
(WHO, 1948) This definition was ratified during the first World Health Assembly, and has not been modified since 1948.
Short falls of WHO’s definition (cid:1) It is unrealistic (cid:1) It is not attainable 21 of physical, mental, social well – being corresponds (cid:1) A complete state ly to happiness than to health e.g.
much more close d (a psychologist) stopped smoking cigars for health *Sigmund Freu  reasons and he later observed that though he is healthier but that he was not happier.
*Having a serious disease is likely to make you less happy but not having a serious disease does not amount to happiness.
Strong points for WHO’s definition – (cid:1) it widened health to the psychological and social dimension (cid:1) it is a fine and inspiring concept and its pursuit guarantees health professional unlimited opportunity for work in the future.
Consequences of WHO’s definition of health – (cid:1) Have failed to distinguish health from happiness, any disturbance to happiness, however minimal, may come to be seen as a health problem.
(cid:1) Since the quest for happiness is essentially boundless, the quest for health also becomes boundless and this legitimizes an unlimited demand for health services (e.g.
plastic surgery).
Though some people may pursue happiness through music, religion or love.
(cid:1) It describes an ideal state rarely attained by most people and it contains no ingredients that can be readily measured or counted, either at the individual or the population level.
Because assessing the feeling of well – being may be a challenge and freedom from the risk of disease and ultimately health is not an achievable state.
Health can also be defined as a sustainable state of equilibrium among humans and other living things that share the earth.
The key word in this definition is equilibrium meaning harmony.
Human beings cannot long remain healthy in an environment in which they are 22 ngs or if other living things are dead or dying as a out of harmony with other living thi result of people’s actions.
The health of humans cannot be disassociated from the health of the life – supporting ecosystem (air quality, water etc) with which human interact and are interdependent.
Moreover, no matter how healthy the present generation may be, the health of future generations is dependent upon the integrity and sustainability of these ecosystems.
This definition is therefore a definition of ‘sustainable health’ that recognizes the interconnectedness between humans and the environment.
Since the mid-twentieth century, medical professional have been trying to conquer pathogenic micro organisms with antibiotics.
This is a war that cannot be won because micro – organisms have very short generation times, measurable in minutes.
Micro organisms can therefore adapt to the challenge of antibiotics by evolving and producing antibiotic resistant strains much more rapidly than new antibiotics can be developed.
An alternative to antibiotics which is perhaps insufficiently implemented is based on the ecological concept that humans are an integral part of the global ecosystem.
Immunization programs aimed at protecting people from diphtheria, tetanus etc has been very effective.
The micro-organisms responsible for these diseases are still there in people’s throats, in the soil, where ever is their usual habitat.
Once protected by immunization, people can live in harmony with these otherwise dangerous microorganisms and insect vector of disease.
This is a more certain way to ensure long term health for the population than the impossible goal of attempting to exterminate these other life forms.
Pathogen that have no other host than human can sometimes be eradicated, as the smallpox virus was and as the polio virus could soon be, at least regionally if not globally, but eradication is not feasible with microorganisms that can survive out – side human such as malaria parasites.
In the past health was equated with hygiene.
Hygiene was taught in primary schools such as daily health inspection of hair, teeth, cloth etc but this concept seems to have changed.
In recent times the concept of physical fitness was popularized.
More recently health is now viewed as a result of lifestyle.
In other words, one can achieve high quality or level of 23 f behavior.
Although it has been pointed out earlier that health if one adopts the right type o health for which he has the genetic potentials.
a person can only reach the level of Health can also be defined as the state of optimum of an individual for the effective performance of the roles for which he has been socialized.
This definition views health in terms of or in relation to the ability to perform roles or functions expected of the person.
Note: the requirement for optimum capacity to perform the roles, i.e.
the biggest capacity possible for that individual.
With this definition there is the temptation to claim health if one is able to function even in the presence of disease or discomfort.
E.g.
if a teacher has slight fever but is able to give his lectures, he might be tempted to claim that he is healthy.
On the other hand, Chambers Dictionary views health as a condition in which the individual is able mobilize all his resources for optimum living.
Resources here are referred to as physical, intellectual and emotional resources.
Besides physical health, your total health picture includes your mental / emotional health and your social health.
In other words, being healthy also means feeling good about yourself and getting along with others.
Health is a combination of physical, mental / emotional and social well – being.
3.4 The Health Triangle.
The three side of your health are connected, like the sides of a triangle.
Each side affects the other two sides.
E.g.
being physically tired or being hungry can make you feel anxious or aggressive.
Being depressed for a long time can make you feel physically weak and run down.
Experiencing problems in getting along with others can make you feel bad about yourself.
Being healthy means having a balanced health triangle.
It is not hard to have a balanced triangle.
All you have to do is decide to take action to keep each side of your triangle healthy.
24 HEALTH TRIANGLE THE  Physical health – includes total social health – involves care of your body.
This involves getting along with other.
keeping your body fit, by exercising This include working practicing cleanliness, grooming and playing well in a habits, and eating a well group, making and balanced diet keeping friends, giving and getting support when it is needed.
Mental and emotional health – includes liking who you are and accepting yourself.
This involves expressing emotions in a healthy way, facing life problems and dealing with its pressures.
Practicing making good choices (habits) helps you balance your health triangle.
It also lessens your chances of illness and helps you stay well.
Good health chances include:- (cid:1) Choosing the right food (cid:1) Avoiding tobacco products, alcoholic beverages and psychoactive drugs such as cocaine marijuana etc (cid:1) Taking part in regular exercise (cid:1) Learning ways to handle stress appropriately (cid:1) Getting along with others  SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 3 Exercise is one choice you make that affects your health.
25 paper and write four choices you’ve made in the last At this picture take a small piece of of the choices whether it affected your health one week and indicate against each negatively or positively.
3.5 Steps to Responsibl e Health  Taking care of your health is mainly your own responsibility.
The three basic steps to accepting responsibility for your health are:- (cid:1) Find out how much you know about your health using health inventory such as this- o I generally like and accept who I am o I deal with stress in positive ways o I eat a healthy breakfast every day o If I have problem with someone I try to work it out o I express my emotions in a health way o I have at least one hobby I enjoy etc (cid:1) Get good reliable information on how to stay healthy or improve your health by reading newspapers, magazines and surfing the net.
This way you keep up with data on new health discovery that could impact your health.
(cid:1) Take action – making the right choice  Balance / adequate diet.
 Regular exercises etc.
 Avoid tobacco and other hard drugs.
3.6 The Dimensions of Health 26 racting, dynamic dimensions.
By becoming familiar Your health is composed of five inte h, you can more easily recognize what it is about your with these dimensions of your healt health that may or may not be helpi ng you to master the developmental tasks.
.
We will now briefly consider each of the five dimensions of health so that you can more clearly see how each forms a part of your total health.
(cid:1) Physical Dimension of Health  You have a number of physiological and structural characteristics that you can call on to aid you in accomplishing your developmental tasks.
Among these physical characteristics is your level of susceptibility to disease, body weight, visual ability, strength, coordination, level of endurance, and powers or recuperation.
In certain situations the physical dimension of your health may be most important dimension.
Perhaps this is why many authorities have for so long equated health with the design and operation of the body.
(cid:1) Emotional Dimension of Health You also possess certain emotional characteristics that can be you as you grow and develop.
The emotional dimension of health includes the degree to which you are able to cope with stress, remain flexible, and compromise to resolve conflict.
Your growth and development can have associated with them some vulnerability, which may lead to feeling of rejection and failure that could reduce your overall productivity and satisfaction.
People who consistently try to improve their emotional health appear to lead lives of greater enjoyment than those who let feeling of vulnerability overwhelm them or block their creativity.
(cid:1) Social Dimension of Health A third dimension of total health is that of social abilities.
Whether you label these as social graces, skills, or insights, you probably have many strengths in this area.
Because most of your growing and developing has been undertaken in the presence of others, you can appreciate how this dimension of your health may be a critically important factor in your life 27  itional students may already be firmly established.
The social abilities of many nontrad m to develop new social skill that help them socialize Entering college may encourage the lleagues.
After being on campus for a while, with their traditional-age student co nontraditional students often interact comfortably with traditional students in such diverse places as the library, the student center, and the bookstore.
This interaction enhances the social dimensions of health for both types of students.
(cid:1) Intellectual Dimension of Health Your ability to process and act on information, clarify values and beliefs, and exercise your decision-making capacity ranks among the most important aspects of total health.
Coping skills, flexibility, or the knack of saying the right thing at the right time may not serve you as well as does your ability to use information or understand a new idea.
Certainly a refusal to grasp new information or to undertake an analysis of your beliefs could hinder the degree of growth and development your college experience can provide.
(cid:1) Spiritual Dimension of Health The fifth dimension of health is the spiritual dimension.
Although you certainly could include your religious beliefs and practices in this category, we would extend it to include your relationship to other living things, the role of a spiritual direction in your life, the nature of human behavior, and your willingness to serve others.
All are important components of spiritual health.
Cultivating the spiritual side of your health may help you discover how you “fit” into this universe.
You can enhance your spiritual health in a variety of ways.
Many concern opening yourself to new experiences that involve nature, art, body movement, or museum, listening to classical music, talking with your children, writing poetry, or pushing your body to its physical limits are just a few ways one can develop spiritual health.
Health is the blending of your physical, emotional, social, intellectual, and spiritual resources as they assist you in mastering the developmental tasks necessary for you to enjoy a satisfying and productive life.
Remember that this blending of your health resources is a never-ending process.
28 M FOR TOTAL HEALTH TABLE SHOWING CONTINUU Poor Health Freed om from illness Optimal Health Illness Physical Fitness Isolation/loneliness Social Support network Poor coping skills Mental Good coping skills Unloved/uncontrolled anger Emotional Loved/controlled anger Guilt/lack of purpose Spiritual Peak experiences Professional stagnation Occupational Professional growth 3.7 You and Your Health – The Seven Cardinal Points (cid:1) Eating breakfast almost everyday (cid:1) Observing six to seven hours of sleep most nights (as against clubbing well into the night) (cid:1) Having reasonable access to health care service (cid:1) Engaging in some form of physical activities/ exercise (cid:1) use of alcohol, if any  (cid:1) Absence of tobacco products usage (cid:1) Effective stress management skills ( Owie, 2003) (cid:1) Rest and relaxation .
29 LMOST EVERYDAY (cid:1) EATING BREAKFAST A By seven or eight in the morning, th e average person would not have taken any food for ten or more hours.
To start the day’s activities without replenishing the system is obviously harmful and reduces productivity.
The body, include the brain, needs constant supply of sugar, which is better and easier obtained from food energy.
Thus, a good breakfast should be a must everyday even if you are trying to lose weight.
(cid:1) SIX TO SEVEN HOUR OF SLEEP The need for six to seven hours of sleep derives from the fact that sleep replenishes the body, allows for repair to take place and prepare the system for a new day.
Lack of adequate sleep leads to confusion, reduce productivity and irritability.
(cid:1) ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE SERVICES Even with the best of health behaviours, sickness and disease will still affect us from time to time.
To return the body to normalcy with minimum damage, early diagnosis and treatment is required.
This, of course will not be possible without a reasonable access to health care services.
(cid:1) USE OF ALCOHOL Alcohol use and abuse are major risk factors for a large number of diseases ranging from liver cirrhosis to cancer of the mouth, esophagus and the stomach (cid:1) ABSENCE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS USAGE Tobacco products do not have any advantage whatsoever.
Tobacco is a major risk factor for a large number of diseases, including lung cancer, heart diseases, high blood pressure and several chronic pulmonary diseases including bronchitis.
30 LL (cid:1) STRESS REDUCTION SKI Stress refers to disruption of mind-b ody harmony and continues to be a silent killer.
Excessive stress is a major risk factor in a considerable number of diseases, both physical and psychological.
It does not really matter the source of the stress, the mechanism and health consequences are basically the same.
When we are stressed out our nervous and endocrine systems respond to the perceived threat or challenge.
These are normal physiological responses to meet temporary situational threats.
Illnesses arise when these physiological stress – response mechanism are continually activated.
The organs responsible for the physiological responses, e.g., the heart begin to wear out and become diseased.
Notably, because of the critical involvement of the endocrine, immunity is lowered leading to increase susceptibility to infection and other diseases.
4.0 CONCLUSION From our discussion so far, you can see that health could imply a definition or subjective perception of an individual (person’s) understanding and meaning of health.
Should we then say that health is a matter of opinion?
Remember the health triangle.
As you are aware a fourth dimension (Spiritual) health has been added.
Upset in any of these dimensions can affect the other.
Therefore, health is a state of balance between various aspects of life.
When these aspects are in balance, we experience a quality of life we call health.
It is commonly claimed that the purpose of being healthy is to be able to live well, on one’s own term.
But the complexity of health can be seen when we look at questions such as these:- (cid:1) Is social conformity an important aspect of health?
(cid:1) Can criminals be healthy people?
(cid:1) Which is more important, emotional comfort or physical fitness?
31 bsessed with their health (washing of hands hundred (cid:1) Some people appear to be o attitude?
times a day) is this a healthy Different professionals see health in different ways – e.g.
school teachers see health as related to their students being able to be socially useful.
Because teachers accept that the primary goal of the educational system is to prepare students for life in society.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about what health could mean to different people.
You also learnt about the health triangle and the composition of health.
In the next unit you will be introduced to another important concept like health called wellness.
6.0 TUTOR M ARKED ASSIGNM ENT (cid:1) Put up a one page write up using five points to explain what health means.
(cid:1) State five stressors that could affect people’s health.
7.0 REFERENC ES AND FURTHER READINGS Corbin C. B, Lindsey R, We LK G.J,Corbin W.R, (2002) Concepts of Fitness Wellness.
Boston: McGraw Hill Getchell.
B, Pippin.
R, and Varnes J, (1991) Health .
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Compy.
Merki M. B (1999).
Teen Health.
New York: Gencoe McGraw Hill 32 ur life: An invitation from Queen Owie 1.
(2003).Adding years to yo Hygeia.
th Inaugural Lecture Series 68.
University of Benin.
August 282003.
Prentice W. E (1999).
Fitness and Wellness for life.
Boston: WCB McGraw – Hill.
World Health Organization WHO (2006) Health.
http: / WWW.who.int /about / overview /en > UNIT 2 CONCEPT OF WELLNESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content  3.1 Definition of wellness 3.1.1 A wellness profile 3.1.2 Vitality the core of wellness 3.1.3 Wellness explained 3.1.4 Dimensions of wellness 3.1.5 Decision making for wellness 3.2 The wellness Continuum 3.3 Difference between Health and wellness 33 n wellness and other dimensions of health.
3.4 Relationship betwee h and Wellness Definitions 3.5 Dimensions of Healt  4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings.
1.0 INTRODUC TION In the previous unit we looked into the various meaning of health.
In this unit we will learn about wellness.
Wellness as a concept deals with the idea of living life to the fullest.
The quality of life – vitality, buoyancy, feeling good about oneself etc.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) Define wellness (cid:1) State five healthy behaviors in the wellness profile (cid:1) Identify one major difference between health and wellness (cid:1) Mention two reasons for the need of a wellness doctrine.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT  3.1 Definition of Wellness Wellness is an overall state of well – being or total health.
It is a way of life.
It involves making choices and decisions each day that promote good health or afford an individual a complete health.
Good Wellness Good Poor Wellnes Wellness s No illness Illness present No illness present 34 (B) (C) (A) Figure Wellness needs not be limited by ill ness.
The figure above illustrates the fact that the most desirable condition is buoyant health as seen in circle A, including freedom from illness and a high level of wellness.
However, a person with a physical illness could also possess a good wellness as in circle B. whereas there could be no illness and yet there is poor wellness as indicated in circle C. 3.1.1 A Wellness Profile This is a basic list of important healthy behaviors and habits – (cid:1) Having a sense of responsibility for your own health and taking a rather active stance towards your health.
(cid:1) Learning to manage stress in effective ways (cid:1) Maintaining high self esteem and mentally healthy ways of interacting with other people.
(cid:1) Understanding your sexuality and having satisfying intimate relationship.
(cid:1) Avoiding drugs, alcohol and tobacco.
(cid:1) Eating well, exercising and maintaining normal weight.
(cid:1) Knowing when to treat illnesses yourself and when to seek help.
(cid:1) Understanding the health system and using it intelligently.
(cid:1) Knowing the facts about cardiovascular diseases, cancer, infections, STDS and accidents and using your knowledge to protect yourself against them.
(cid:1) Understanding the natural processes of ageing and dying and accepting the limits of human existence.
(cid:1) Understanding how the environment affects your health and taking appropriate actions to improve it.
This is an important issue because habits and behavior established between the ages of 35 ay via out life or their effects usually stay with the 18 – 34 are crucial.
They usually st person via out life.
3.1.2 Vitality (The Core of Wellness) What gives you a feeling of vitality?
How often do you feel this way?
What are the circumstances?
If you want to enjoy vigor and health in your middle and old age, begin now to make the choices that will give you life – long vitality.
The concept of vitality can help shed light on our discussion of wellness.
Vitality is defined as the ability to function with vigor, to live life actively, energetically and fully.
It is considered by some to be the essence of wellness; vitality can be viewed as both the process and the result of integrating the various dimensions of health and well being.
Wellness is a state of energy, vitality and a meaningful life lived to its fullest.
re on ife st w Behaviour Wellness  3.1.3 Wellness Explained It is the integration of many different components (mental, social, emotional, spiritual and physical) that expand one’s potential to live (quality of life), work effectively and to make a significant contribution to society.
Wellness reflects how one feels (a sense of well 36 being) about life as well as one’s a bility to function effectively.
Wellness, as opposed to illness (a negative) is sometimes des cribed as the positive component of good health.
Wellness reflects how one feels abo ut life as well as one’s ability to function effectively.
Wellness is an overall state of well – being or total health.
It is a way of life.
It involves making choices and decisions each day hat promote good health.
fro ln f Wellness Meaningful work, a contribution to the society Freedom from debilitating condition Figure.
A model of optimal health including wellness 3.1.4 Dimensions of wellness Negative (-) Wellness dimension Positive (+) Depressed Emotional / mental Happy Ignorant Intellectual Informed Unfit Physical Fit Lonely Social Involved Unfulfilled Spiritual Fulfilled Negative Total out look Positive 3.1.4 Decision Making for Wellness What kind of decisions do you make everyday that affect your health?
The way you spend your time and the foods you choose to eat are two decisions.
After school, do you practice a musical instrument, ride your bike, or do you just watch TV?
Do you eat fruits or yogurt for after school snack or do you eat fruits, fried potato chips, candy, ice cream?
The everyday decisions you make will affect your health for years to come.
Of course watching TV one day a week after school or having candy for one afternoon snack will not harm your health.
Daily habits have long term effect on you.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 37 s?
What are the ingredients of wellnes 3.2 The Wellness Continuum The wellness continuum diagram shown below is a scale that shows a persons level of wellness, from a low level to a high level.
People on the left side of the continuum, the low level, usually rely on someone else to help them maintain their health.
People on the right side of the continuum, the high level, are usually responsible, have a high level of self discipline and have personal goals to achieving their complete state of health or wellness.
Figure The Wellness continuum.
(A) This illustration shows example of physical, mental, emotional Premature and social conditions and where they are placed in Death relation to a person’s level of wellness.
D is ab ili ty CDhi rsoor nid c er 38 Ls o sB oEnergy Lf C ha e cak l tof h I nat te nti on D E aMc iphna eiosr n an d a Frchp eeaei s f nr a ond m lF een Mveoer ld ge royf a te f eHnew ieeegrllil hg nbly,ge ie nvof ge l H of (cid:1) People on the high end of the continuum chart can handle the challenges that come High level their way.
Of health The people on the right side of the continuum accept responsibilities for maintaining their own health.
However, the level of wellness for most people is not high.
The levels usually cluster around the midpoint on the continuum.
Why do you think this is so?
On what point of the continuum do you fall?
What steps can you take to improve your position on the health continuum?
The choices you make regarding your health will influence your level of wellness for the rest of your life.
Can you think of choices you make that can help you to maintain your wellness?
Can you think of areas that need improvement?
What can you do to work toward maintaining a high level of wellness for your self?
39 THE WE LLNESS CONTINUUM (B) No choice Responsibility Wellness Education Early High level death of health EarlyDisability <symptoms, signs, awareness, education, growth and death wellness Traditional medicine Neutral zone High risk Moderate Low risk risk Traditional medicine concentrates on curing or alleviating disease, where as, the wellness model encourages people to prevent illness by improving their positive well being in a variety of ways.
Wellness, a way of life, which you design to enjoy the highest level of health and wellbeing possible during the years you have in this life.
Life is not an illness we seek a cure.
Instead it is a journey to be enjoyed and to enjoy it most, all aspects of self must be in tune and working harmoniously.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 Looking at the wellness continuum charts state two positive health habits that could move you to the right side of these charts.
40 and Wellness 3.3 Difference Between Health Health is a combination of physical, social, mental and emotional wellbeing, while wellness is a way of life that promote health.
All parts of health are affected by the wellness decisions people make (such as high self discipline, eating more fruit and vegetables and setting personal goals for self esteem, engaging in regular and proper physical exercise Health = Is optimal well – being that contributes to quality of life.
It is more than freedom from disease and illness, though freedom from disease is important to good health.
Optimal health include high – level mental, social, emotional, spiritual and physical well- being within the limits of one’s heredity and personal abilities.
Wellness = Wellness is the integration of many different components (mental, social, emotional, spiritual and physical) that expand one’s potential to live (quality of life), work effectively and to make a significant contribution to society.
Wellness reflects how one feels (a sense of well – being) about life as well as one’s ability to function effectively.
Wellness, as opposed to illness (a negative), is sometimes described as a positive component of good health 3.4 Relationship Between Wellness and other Dimensions of Health Being physically fit is critical to a healthful style of living but is no more important for total well being than over social emotional, mental or spiritual stability.
Arguably, fitness can impact each of these components negatively or positively.
In the wellness approach, there must be a balance between these components with no more emphasis on any single component than the other.
(cid:1) Relationship of emotion to wellness- Emotions play a major role in healthful living and have a great deal to do with how we feel about ourselves and others.
Emotional stability determines how well you adjust to life 41 iations in emotional stability may lead to both physical changes and deal with stresses.
Var and mental disturbances in health (cid:1) Relationship of social to wellness We interact with others who touch our lives and those lives we touch on daily basis.
Communication and interpersonal relationship are important to psychological development.
Another crucial aspect of healthy living is the ability to show emotions to others appropriately.
(cid:1) Relationship of intellectual to wellness When faced with variety of situation in life, one should be able to make wise decisions.
This is made possible when the individual has developed a set of values and beliefs which he / she will consider when making decisions in life.
(cid:1) Relationship of spiritual to wellness Spiritual means believing in some supreme omnipotent entity or simply establishing values, morals and ethics, with the need of establishing some basic purpose for our existence on earth.
This is ultimately what holds the wellness model together.
3.5 Dimensions of Health and Wellness Definitions Emotional health - A person with emotion health is (cid:1) Free from emotional – mental illnesses or debilitating conditions such as clinical depression or chronic stress.
(cid:1) Possesses emotional wellness.
Emotional wellness - Emotional wellness is a person’s ability to cope with daily circumstances and to deal with personal feelings in a positive, optimistic, and constructive manner.
A person with emotional wellness is generally characterized as happy, as opposed to depressed.
42  intellectual health is free from illnesses that invade the Intellectual health - A person with er systems that allow learning.
A person with brain and oth intellectual h ealth also possesses intellectual wellness.
Intellectual wellness- Intellectual wellness is a person’s ability to learn and to use information to enhance the quality of daily living and optimal functioning.
A person with intellectual wellness is generally characterized as informed, as opposed to ignorant.
Physical health - A person with physical health is free from illnesses that affect the physiological systems of the body such as the heart, the nervous system of the body etc.
A person with physical health possesses an adequate level of physical fitness and physical wellness.
Physical wellness - Physical wellness is a person’s ability to function effectively in meeting the demands of the day’s work and to use free time effectively.
Physical wellness includes good physical fitness and the possession of useful motor skills.
A person with physical wellness is generally characterized as fit versus unfit.
Social health - A person with social health is free from illnesses or conditions that severely limit functioning in society, including antisocial pathologies.
Social wellness - Social wellness is a person’s ability to successfully interact with and to establish meaningful relationships that enhances the quality of life for all people involved in the interaction (including self).
A person with social wellness is generally characterized as involved as opposed to lonely.
Spiritual health - Spiritual health is the one component of health that is totally comprised of the wellness dimension; for this reason, spiritual health is considered to be synonymous with spiritual wellness.
43 ility to establish a values system and act on the system Spiritual wellness- A person’s ab well as to establish and carry our meaningful and of beliefs, as constructive lifetime goals.
Spiritual wellness is often based on a belief in a force greater than the individual that helps one contribute to an improved quality of life for all people.
A person with spiritual wellness is generally characterized as fulfilled as opposed to unfulfilled.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 3 Name two dimensions of health and wellness and explain their differences.
4.0 CONCLUSION Prevention they say is better than curve.
A stitch in time saves nine.
Wellness promotion should be a priority in people’s lives because of the high cost of health care today.
It becomes reasonable that people should invest in wellness programs and activities.
A large segment of the Nigerian population cannot afford to be unnecessarily sick so it becomes imperative and cost effective healthy habits for the prevention of problems such as caners, HIV / AIDS, accidents, suicides and premature deaths.
Those who adhere to the wellness doctrine believe that it is the responsibility of the individual to work towards achieving a healthy lifestyle, to realize an optimal sense of well-being.
44 5.0 SUMM ARY This unit has taken you through the concept of wellness.
Notably among what you learnt in this unit included: (cid:1) The wellness profile (cid:1) The dimensions of health and wellness (cid:1) The wellness continuum chart (cid:1) The relationship between wellness and other dimensions of health (cid:1) The definitions of the various dimensions of health and wellness 6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNM ENT Draw and label the wellness continuum chart B.
7.0 REFERENC ES / FURTHER READING  Corbin C. B, Lindsey R, We LK G.J,Corbin W.R, (2002) concepts of Fitness Wellness.
Boston: McGraw Hill Getchell.
B, Pippin.
R, and Varnes J, (1991) Health .
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Compy.
Merki M. B (1999).
Teen Health.
New York: Gencoe McGraw Hill Owie 1.
(2003).Adding years to your life: An invitation from Queen Hygeia.
th Inaugural Lecture Series 68.
University of Benin.
August 282003.
45  ellness for life.
Prentice W. E (1999).
Fitness and W ill. Boston: WCB McGraw – H World Health Organization WHO (2006) Health.
http: / WWW.who.int /about / overview /en >  UNIT 3 THE CONCEPT OF LIFESTYLE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The meaning of lifestyle 3.2 Positive lifestyle habits 3.3 Steps for Behavior Modification 46 or healthy lifestyle change.
3.4 Philosophical basis f r your own health is a matter of lifestyle.
3.5 Being responsible fo 3.6 Making healthy lifest yle decisions.
3.6.1 Health decisions come in all sizes 3.6.2 Steps of Decision Making.
3.6.3 Practice makes it easier.
3.6.4 Taking control of your life.
3.7 Handling Emotions in a healthy way; a matter of lifestyle.
3.7.1 What are Emotions?
3.7.2 Kinds of Emotions.
3.7.3 Expressing emotions in a healthy way 3.7.4 Understanding your emotional needs 3.8 Life long Fitness: A matter of lifestyle.
3.8.1 Benefits of fitness 3.8.2 Factors affecting adherence to physical activity participation 3.8.3 Common reasons for not being Active 3.8.4 Common reasons for doing regular physical activity 3.9 Weight Management: A matter of lifestyle.
3.9.1 Gaining or losing weight 3.9.2 Dieting Do’s 3.9.3 Dieting Don’ts 3.9.4 Eating Disorders associated with weight obsession 3.10 Acting safely at home and at school: A matter of lifestyle.
3.10.1 Fire safety at home 3.10.2 Safety at school 3.11 Personal Health Inventory Guide.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 47  references / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUC TION It is exciting and empowering to know that to a great extent we have the power to determine our health status through the choices we make.
Whether we choose to eat healthy food instead of junk foods, wear seat belts when we are riding a car is really up to us.
When we choose to smoke or abuse alcohol, indulge in unprotected casual sec, all these choices go a long we to affect our health.
Remember life is a matter of choices and every choice you make, makes you.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you will be able to: (cid:1) Explain the meaning o lifestyle (cid:1) Outline the stages of lifestyle change model (cid:1) List five factors that promote lifestyle change (cid:1) State the steps for behavior modification (cid:1) Describe how you can be responsible for your own health through your lifestyle (cid:1) Explain what emotions are (cid:1) List ways to you can meet your emotional needs (cid:1) State the benefit of physical fitness (cid:1) Provide information on your rating on the personal health inventory guide 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Lifestyle Lifestyles are patterns of behaviour or ways an individual typically lives.
That is, your customary pattern of behaviour.
Many diseases are referred to as ‘lifestyle diseases’.
Heart disease, diabetes, arteriosclerosis, high blood pressure and some types of cancer, 48 poor eating habits, sedentary living and unhealthy work peptic ulcer all have been linked to environments.
SELF ASSESM ENT EXERCISE 1 Select two countries in different parts of the world and research the presence or absence of similar lifestyle diseases in those locations.
Also identify the factors that contribute to the presence or absence of the disease.
Getting fit by adopting a healthy style of living is gaining enthusiasm globally.
Can you think a reason for that?
Some of the reasons could be likened to people being conscious of their appearance, body weight control, going to play tennis, golf and exercising in the gymnasium as status symbols in the society.
Another reason being the thin images of models in the television programs.
The women’s fashion trend of small sizes (8,10,12) dresses in shops and markets, forcing most fashion conscious women and girls to lose weight so as to be able to fit into some of the these dresses.
The last but certainly not the least is high cost of health care.
It is now very clear that its cheaper to be healthy by engaging in positive lifestyle habits than engaging in negative lifestyle habits and being sick all the time.
Thereby spending your hard earned scarce resources trying to cure one disease or the other.
3.2 Positive Lifestyle Habits As a human being, you can do more for your health than any doctor or herbalist can do for you.
The idea of preventing diseases and promoting your health is far more easier than treatment of illness.
Adopting and maintaining positive lifestyle habits will go a long way in helping you maintain good health.
Some of these good lifestyle habits are: (cid:1) Never miss your breakfast - To start the day’s activity without replenishing your body is harmful and reduces productivity after an almost 8 – 10 hours of having not taken anything after a night.
A good breakfast will help you supply the much needed sugar for the workings of the brain and energy for the other body systems.
Even if you want to lose weight, do not forget to take at least 5 different servings of fruits every day.
Avoid too much saturated fats (butter, cheese etc) salt and sugar.
49 (cid:1) Engage in regular exercise - least 30 minutes, three times a week exercise.
Such as Engaging in regular moderate for at brisk walking, gardening, walking or running the stairs, jogging, or biking will help you- (cid:1) Reduce the risk of serious diseases such as heart diseases, diabetes, and colon cancer (cid:1) Reduce cholesterol and high blood pressure (cid:1) Increase your sense of well being and reducing depression and anxiety (cid:1) Help you maintain a healthy body weight.
(cid:1) Building and maintaining bones, muscles and joints.
(cid:1) Helping you manage some existing health conditions and preventing their reoccurrence.
(cid:1) Improving your quality of life and reducing the risk of dying prematurely.
(cid:1) Getting seven to eight hours of sleep – The need for seven to eight hours of sleep derives from the fact that sleep replenishes the body, allows for repair to take place and prepare the system for a new day.
Lack of adequate sleep leads to confusion, reduced productivity and irritability.
(cid:1) Making use of available health care services – Even with the best of health behaviours, sickness and disease will still afflict us from tie to time.
To return the body to normalcy treatment is required.
This, of course, will not be possible without a reasonable access to health care services.
Avoiding all tobacco product and other dangerous psychoactive substances such as marijuana cocaine etc.
If you must take alcohol, make sure you drink moderately and responsibly.
(cid:1) Learn to manage stress – 50 body harmony.
Stress can predispose a person to so Stress is the disruption of mind – ions such as high blood pressure, stomach upset lower many diseases and ill health condit immunizing of the system.
Some o f the ways to mange stress are.
(cid:1) Engage in recreational activities that you enjoy (cid:1) Get plenty of rest (cid:1) Learn to accept the things you cannot change, engage in meditation and deep breathing.
(cid:1) Engage in voluntary community services.
(cid:1) Learn to take things easy accept your follies and move ahead.
Practicing one healthy lifestyle does not mean you will practice another, though adopting one healthy behaviour often leads to adoption of another.
People do not make lifestyle changes overnight.
Rather, people progress forward and backward through several stages of change.
Factors that promote life style change 3.3 Steps for Behaviour Modification Health Behaviours people typically want to change – (cid:1) To lose or gain weight (cid:1) To stop smoking (cid:1) To stop using smokeless tobacco (cid:1) To eliminate or reduce caffeine consumption (cid:1) To reduce levels of stress (cid:1) To eliminate unsafe sex practices (cid:1) To improve fitness (cid:1) To eat more nutritiously (cid:1) To develop more meaniful friendship 51 ension of health (cid:1) To enhance the spiritual dim Steps to follow in changing the abo ve stated behaviours (cid:1) Establishing some specific short –term goals that are easily attainable.
(cid:1) Make a personal contract to accomplish these goals.
(cid:1) Devise a plan of action (cid:1) Chart your progress daily or keep a journal (cid:1) Encourage your friends and family to help you (cid:1) Set up a reward system for yourself  (cid:1) Be prepared for obstacle along the way (cid:1) Revise your plan when necessary (cid:1) Get some idea about your current health practices and behavior and see areas where change is necessary (cid:1) Identify any practices and behaviours.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 2 Mention any three steps for health behaviors change 3.4 Philosophical Basis for Healthy Lifestyle Change.
The four letter acronym HELP philosophy can provide a basis for making healthy lifestyle change possible.
Each letter in the word help characterizes an import part of the philosophy.
H – Health - A personal philosophy that emphasizes health can lead to behaviours that promote it.
This theory suggests that people who state intentions to put their beliefs in action are likely to adopt behaviours that lead to health, wellness and fitness.
52 E – Everyone- Everyone can ben efit from healthy lifestyle.
Accepting the fact that everyone can chang e a behavior or lifestyle means that you are included.
Physical activity is not just for athletes it is for you.
Eating well and adopting stress management techniques is not just for everyone it is for you.
Healthy lifestyle can be practiced by every one L – Lifetime- Healthy behaviours are most effective when practiced for a lifetime.
Young people sometime feel immortal because the harmful effects of unhealthy lifestyles are often not immediate.
As we grow older, we begin to realize that we are not immortal and that unhealthy lifestyle have cumulative effects.
Starting early in life to emphasize healthy behaviours result in long term, wellness and fitness benefits.
P – Personal- Healthy lifestyle should be based on personal needs.
No two people are exactly alike.
Just as there is no single pill that twill cure all illness, there is no single lifestyle prescription for good health, wellness and fitness.
It is important for each person to assess personal needs and make lifestyle changes based on those needs.
3.5 Being Responsibl e for your own Health is a Matter of Lifestyle.
Some people today think that health is the responsibility of doctors, hospitals, clinics and the government.
They feel that health is someone else’s responsibility, not their own.
If they become sick, they reason that the doctor will prescribe the right medicine or will send them to the hospital or to a specialist who will provide the proper remedy.
It is important to realize, however, that health cannot be purchased and that the responsibility cannot be relegate to some other person or agency.
Health is an obligation on the part of individuals, and it is erroneous to equate more health service with better health.
Instead, individuals, must take responsibility for their own health by adopting a positive lifestyle.
The decisions that you make will have an impact on your health.
You are the one who decides what to eat and when and if to exercise, drink, engage in drug abuse, smoke or see 53 make will leave their imprint on your health and well a doctor.
Thus the decisions you re sick they have only themselves to blame.
Today, being.
In many cases, if people a ated many health scourges and has provided humans modern medical science has elimin with knowledge about the causes of diseases and many preventive measures.
However to be effective this knowledge must be applied.
The realization that health is a personal responsibility has resulted in many individuals making conscious efforts to adopt sound health practices.
The challenge of attaining the optimal level of health for ourselves and our loved ones is a lifetime one – a matter of one’s lifestyle Good health is part of a happy, satisfying life, learning how to get and stay health should be an important part of your life.
That is why health education is so important.
Health education means proving health information in such a way that it influences people to change their attitudes and take positive actions regarding their health.
The goal of health education is to help people live long and productive life.
Health education is more than just learning health facts.
It can help you again the tools you need to maintain and improve your total health and wellness.
You can use the health facts you learn in all areas of your life.
3.6 Making Healthy Lifestyle Decisions Evaluating the degree of risk may sometimes be comforting.
It often helps to have a system for weighing things carefully.
Shows a model for decision-making that can help you make wise health choices.
An example will show you how the model works.
(cid:1) Start the problem Imagine that your friends, many of whom smoke cigarettes, are encouraging you to start smoking.
Your best friend smoke and so do your parents.
Your grandparent, who visits often, do not smoke and always ask your parents to quit.
Every time you are with your friends, they want you to try a cigarette.
You feel a great deal of pressure to start smoking.
The problem, or decision you must make, is whether or not to smoke cigarettes.
(cid:1) Identify your options 54 n go along with your friends and being to smoke o a You have many options.
You ca to smoke.
You could smoke only in the presence of regular basis.
You can choose not  your friends and not smoke at other times.
(cid:1) Choose one option Now think about your options.
Select the one that you think you would like the best.
You may not have a clear favorite.
In this example, imagine that you do not want to smoke.
(cid:1) Evaluate the outcomes What would be the positive outcomes of that decision?
You could feel that approval of your grandparents.
You also might win approval from your parents, even though they smoke themselves.
You would be free form the health risks that come from smoking.
You would save money by not buying cigarettes.
You would avoid the problem of stained fingers and teeth.
And would have greater endurance for sports and other activities.
Now consider the possible negative outcome of your decision.
Your friends may tease you.
You might feel less grown up than your friends.
Your friends may continue to pressure you to change your mind.
How might you reduce these possible negative outcomes?
You could ignore your friend’s comments.
You could develop other talents to make you feel grown up.
You could simply tell your friends that you are responsible for making your own decisions.
You might even consider new friends who do not pressure you to smoke 55  State the problem.
Identify your options.
Choose one option.
What decision must What are my choices?
Which do I like I make?
best?
Evaluate the outcomes.
What are the possible consequences?
Positive outcome Negative outcome.
How can I decrease the negative outcomes?
Gather more information as needed  Decide and Act Will I go ahead with this option?
Or choose another option and evaluate it 56 Figre - Making good decisions req uires a method and practice.
By using this model you will less often regret a hasty decision.
You may decide that you need more information before you can make a firm decision.
You can go to the library to read books and articles about the effects of smoking on health.
You can also ask people you respect, such as your family doctor.
Once you have more information, you have to evaluate the positive against the negative outcomes.
(cid:1) Decide and Act If you feel the negative effects of smoking are stronger than the benefits, you will make the decision not to smoke.
Your action will be to refuse cigarettes.
(cid:1) Review the results Once you have acted, it is important to think about the results of your decision.
Taking this last step in the model may either confirm your original decision or cause you to revise your thinking and make a new decision.
You may even find that your friends respect your decision.
You can use this model to look closely at any health decision you want to take.
Evaluating all of the possible outcomes will help you see alsides of even very difficult problems.
By evaluating the outcomes before you act, you can change your mind and consider new options.
You can avoid living through the outcomes of a poor choice.
3.6.1 Health Decision Come In All Sizes An important part of good mental health is being able to face problems and work on finding solutions to them.
We all have problems, some of them major, some of them minor.
Decision making can be used to solve many of these problems.
Knowing how to make decisions is an important skill to develop.
(cid:1) Examining the risks 57 s. A risk behavior is the possibility than an action may Many actions you take involve risk thers.
When you take a risk, you expose yourself and cause injury or harm to you and o ple, if you decide not to wear a helmet when you ride others to possible danger.
For exam  your bike, this would be considered a risk behavior.
You cannot avoid all risks.
You take a risk whenever you cross the street or climb the stairs.
However, reasonable risks such as these are not likely to injure you or someone else.
(cid:1) Risky situations Unreasonable risks carry with them the likelihood that someone will get hurt now or in the future.
The best way to lower the risk is to avoid risk, situations.
For instance, do not pick a fight with someone you disagree with.
Instead, express your feelings in a calm manner and walk away before the conflict turns violent.
(cid:1) Taking precaut ions You can cut down on the risk your take by planning ahead and taking precautions.
A precaution is a planned action taken before an event to increase the chances of a safe outcome.
For example, learning to ski can be a high-risk activity.
However, you can make it less risky by using safe equipment and by taking ski lessons.
Before making any major decision, think about the risks involved.
Then ask yourself these questions.
(cid:1) Are they necessary risks?
(cid:1) If the risks are reasonable, what precautions can I take to increase my chances of a safe outcome?
(cid:1) If I am taking risks to show off or to feel important, what could I do instead to feel better about myself?
3.6.2 Six Steps of Decision Making Whenever you must make a major decision, it help to know as much as you can about the decision-making process.
Decision making is the process of making a choice or finding a solution.
It involves a series of step you can follow.
58 (cid:1) State the situation.
hy is there a decision to make?
Why am I in this Ask yourself question such as: w situation?
Who is involved?
(cid:1) List the options What ways do you have to deal with the situation?
(cid:1) Weight the possible outcomes.
Ask yourself if there are both positive and negative results of each choice (cid:1) Consider your value.
Values are the beliefs and ideas that are important to you and to your family.
They should serve as guidelines for making decisions.
(cid:1) Make a decision and act.
Everything you know at this point to make a decision.
You can feel good that you have prepared so carefully.
(cid:1) Evaluate the decisions.
You may decide that your decision was the right one, or your may choose to act different.
After you have made the decision and taken action, reflect on what happened.
You might ask yourself the following questions: (cid:1) What was the outcome?
Was it what I expected?
(cid:1) How did my decision affect each part of my health triangle?
(cid:1) How did my decision affect the way I feel about myself?
(cid:1) What effect did my decision have on others?
(cid:1) What did I learn?
Would I take the same action again?
3.6.3 Practice Makes It Easier It helps to practice decision making ahead of time.
For instance think about some of the problems that you or your family face.
Go through all six steps to come up with a healthy solution for each problem.
This can help you prepare for times when major decisions come your way.
The more you practice the decision-making process, the easier decision making becomes.
Do not hesitate to ask your parents and other people whose judgment you respect for their 59  will prepare you, so you will be able to make wise suggestions.
In time, the practice decisions on your own.
A crucial part of lifestyle and prevention is making sound health decisions.
Each day you make decisions that affect your health.
When a decision is made, it often affects other decisions.
There might even be a series of needed decisions each decision might influenced the next one.
A decision tree diagrams the possible choices and steps indecision making.
The figure below illustrates the choices and steps that might be used when deciding whether to drink alcohol.
Even this simple example shows the health decisions are often quite complex.
You can have greater control over personal health if you understand how decisions are made and what influences them.
We will now like to look at how to make decisions and then at what is needed to put these decisions into practice.
Drink too much Drink only beer Drink slowly Eat food also Drink to much  Drink alcohol Drink only wine Drink slowly Eat food also Enjoy drinking Go to party Drink mixed drink Tolerate drinking Drink?
Drinks Pretend to drink alcohol Drink alcohol-like beverage Make excuses Drink many beverages Condemn alcohol Do not drink alcohol Drink soda Eat food Drink many minerals 60 Pretend to be sick Drink nothing Eat food Condemn alcohol Just don’t drink Figure A decision Tree: Deciding whether to use alcohol at a party.
Why Set Goals?
How do you feel about your life?
Do you believe that life is something that happens to you, or do you believe that life is something over which you have some control?
You can help give your life direction by setting goals.
A goal is something you aim for.
Reaching any goal take planning and effort.
Goals are important to your self-esteem, or the way you feel about yourself.
People who set goals and achieve them feel better about themselves and about their lives.
If you do not have any goals, ask yourself why.
Are your afraid of failing or afraid of being made fun of?
Then ask yourself how you can remove the obstacles that keep you from setting goals and working to achieve them.
The Importance of Goals Your goals are important because they keep you focused and on track.
They help you identify what you want out of life.
They also help you use your time, energy, and other resources wisely.
61 homework assignment, are short term.
Other takes Some goals, such as completing a money to buy a new bike is a long-term goal.
Finishing longer to achieve.
Earning enough school and learning to play a music al instrument are also long-term goals.
Both long-term and short-term goals are important.
For instance, suppose you wanted to run 5 miles in a race sponsored by Nigerian bottling company.
The race is two months away.
To attain this long-term goal, you need to set some short –term goals.
These are like stepping – stones that you could manage one at a time 3.6.4 Taking Control of Your Life Taking control of your health depends on more than just recognizing healthy choice.
Your personal attitudes your feeling and beliefs – also play role in how well you take care of yourself.
You need to believe that making good choices and developing good health habits can affect your health.
Your attitudes also include the way you feel about yourself.
If you like who you are and fee that other people like you, you will want to care of yourself.
You will want to be at your best in all areas.
To insure that you are at your best, you will make choices that protect and promote your health.
Taking care of your health is mainly your responsibility.
The list that follows shows the three basic steps you should take in accepting responsibility for your health.
(cid:1) Find out how much you know about your health.
This means knowing at any time your health level on each of the three sides of your health triangle.
(cid:1) Get good, reliable information on how to stay healthy or improve your health Breakthroughs in health are happening all the time.
By reading magazines or newspapers, you can keep up-to- date on events that could affect your health.
(cid:1) Take action This means setting realistic goals for yourself.
If you decide you want to lose weight, do it gradually, following a sensible, safe eating plan.
Taking action also means becoming actively involved in your total health.
Eating a bowl of high fiber cereal and fruit each 62 oing to snack on sweet the rest of the day.
Working to morning is not enough if you are g a full-time job.
maintain a high level of wellness is SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 3 List three habits that affect your health  3.7 Handling Emotions in Healthy Ways: A Matter of Lifestyle 3.7.1 What Are Emotions Your emotions are your feelings, such as happiness, love, sadness jealousy, anger.
They are a natural part of life.
Emotions play a major part in your mental and emotional health.
They can influence everything you do, including how you behave, for example, if you feel happy when you are with your friends, you probably will want to spend time with them.
Likewise, fear of failure may keep you from trying our for a sports team.
3.7.2 Kinds of Emotions Some people believe that certain emotions are bad or wrong.
They may think that it is wrong to feel anger, for example or they may be ashamed of feeling afraid.
In reality, emotions are neither good nor bad, right nor wrong.
They are part of being human.
How emotions are expressed or handled is another matter.
Sometime people handle their emotions the way that are hurtful to themselves or others.
People with good mental healt h seek healthy responsible ways of managing their emotions.
An important step in leaning how to manage your emotions is to be aware of them.
When last did you felt each of these emotions?
Can you recollect why you felt as such?
People do not always agree on what such emotions as love and joy mean.
How ever, people everywhere in the world would recognize any of these basic emotions (cid:1) Happiness- Is a well being when you are happy, the world looks brighter, you can make decisions more quickly, and you feel better about things in genera.
You are also more likely to be considerate to other people.
63 (cid:1) Sadness – is a normal, heal th reaction to unhappy events such as a pet dying or a good friend moving away .
When you are sad, you may feel more easily discouraged and less energet ic.
(cid:1) Fear – is an emotion that can help keep you safe from danger.
However some fears, such as the fear of failure, may keep you form doing the things you want o need to do.
(cid:1) Anger is a common reaction to being insulted or attacked.
It is an emotion that everyone feels form time to time.
Lashing out or suppressing anger can be unhealthy ways of coping with this emotion, but you can learn healthy your anger.
3.7.3 Expressing Emotions in Healthy Ways People express emotions in different ways.
People often learn how to express emotions from watching how those close to them express their emotions.
In some families, people are very open and talk frequently about feelings.
Some other families do not say much but communicate how they feel buy smiling when they are pleased, or by slamming doors remaining silent, or crying when they are displeased.
Some people have difficulty dealing with such emotions as envy, guilt, fear, and anger.
Everyone, however, can learn how to deal with and express emotion in healthy ways.
Good communication is a two-way process.
It means speaking in a way that helps others understand you.
It also involves being a good listener.
Good communication skills can help you let other know what you are thinking and feeling.
These skills can also help you understand other people’s feelings.
Managing Fear and Anxiety Have you ever felt anxious before taking a test, giving a report, or speaking in front of others?
When you are anxious of fearful, you are apt to take shorter breaths, your heart beasts faster, and your muscles tense.
Anxiety can help you do better on a test by releasing energy to help you work harder.
However, fear and anxiety can also cause you to lose sleep or even to panic.
Some ways in which you can cope with anxious feelings include talking 64 gh at yourself, using relaxation techniques and planning about how you feel, learning to lau ahead.
Expressing Anger It is normal to fell angry at times, but anger is one of the emotions that are sometimes expressed in unhealthy ways.
Some people yell or hit when they are angry; other hold their anger inside.
There are healthier was to express anger.
Try these steps when you feel angry.
(cid:1) Take a deep breath and calm down.
(cid:1) Focus on exactly what made you angry.
(cid:1) Think of words to express your true feelings.
(cid:1) Tell the other person how you feel.
3.7.4 Understanding your emotional needs There are certain things that your body must have.
They are called physical needs and they include food, water, and sleep.
You also have emotional needs.
These are needs that affect your feelings and sense of well-being.
You basic emotional needs include the following: (cid:1) The need to feel worthwhile.
You need to feel that you make a difference in the world-that you are making a contribution.
When you help another person do something or you come up with a useful idea, you are contributing (cid:1) The need to love and be loved.
You need to feel that you are cared for and that you are special in someone’s eyes.
You also need to feel that way about others.
(cid:1) The need to belong.
You need to know that others like you and accept you as part of a group.
The first group that you belong to is probably your family.
Meeting Emotional needs in Healthy Way People with good mental and emotional health try to meet their emotional needs in healt hy ways.
For example, they may offer to help someone without being asked, or as a friend how her day went and really listens to the answer.
They may do volunteer work for a food cause, or start a club and do their best to make it a success.
Meeting emotional needs in healthy ways means making the choice to engage in healthy behavior.
It also means saying no to unhealthy behavior.
65 People with good mental and emoti onal health try to meet their emotional needs in healt hy ways.
For example, they may offer to help someone without being asked, or a friend how her day went and really listen to t he answer.
They may do volunteer work for a good cause, or start a club and do their best to make it a success.
Meeting emotional needs in healthy ways means making the choice to engage in health behavior.
Is also means saying no to unhealthy behavior.
3.8 Lifelong fitness: A Matter of Lifestyle Being physical active is as natural and necessary as eating and sleeping.
The need for exercise is not new.
Many years ago, most people had to use physical labour in their daily lives.
Today much of this work is done by machines.
But the body still needs exercise.
Being fit makes it easier to carry out your everyday activities.
A fit person has energy to study long hours, play in a band, or perhaps meet the demands of a part-time job after school.
In additions, the physically fit person can enjoy many activities such as swimming biking and playing football with fiends and family.
3.8.1 Benefits of fitness The ability of your heart, blood vessel, lungs and muscle to work their best is called physical fitness.
To be physically fit you need a regular program of exercise.
Exercise makes your muscles and bones strong.
It works your circulatory and respiratory systems so that they deliver needed amounts of fuel and oxygen to your cells with less effort.
Exercise also improves your coordination.
In addition, it burns calories and aids the digestive system.
Fitness helps you look better, manage weight, and have more energy.
Overall, people who are physically fit tend to be healthier.
They usually have lower blood pressure, fewer cases of heart disease, and increase resistance to disease.
Other benefits of fitness are: Improve appea rance (cid:1) Maintains good muscle tome (cid:1) Keeps off excess fat (cid:1) Maintains posture 66 Improve body functions (cid:1) Strengthens bones and ligaments (cid:1) Provides strength and muscular endurance (cid:1) Keep muscles and joints flexible  (cid:1) Improves digestive and excretory functions.
(cid:1) Reduces chances of injury (cid:1) Provides greater energy Improve health (cid:1) Reduces backaches (cid:1) Enhances cardio respiratory efficiency (cid:1) Lowers blood pressure (cid:1) Increases resistance to disease (cid:1) Reduce the risk of heart disease.
Improved mental, social.
Social and emotional well-being (cid:1) Improve self-image  (cid:1) Reduce stress (cid:1) Improve alertness (cid:1) Enhances quality of sleep (cid:1) Increases social involvement (cid:1) Relieves depression 3.8.2 FACTORS AFFECTING ADHER ENCE TO PHYSICAL ACTIVITY PARTICIPATION Balancing your feelings about physical activity and indeed to a healthy lifestyle behavior is important to lifestyle adherence.
Many predisposing, enabling and reinforcing factors discused previously affect people attitude to adopting healthy lifestyle behavior.
67 Inadequate leadership Instruction and Encouragement Time inconvenience Regular routine Muscoskeletal problem Freedom from injury Exercise boredom Enjoyment, fun, variety Individual commitment Group comaraderie Lack of progress awareness Progress, testing and recording Spouse and peer disapproval Spouse and peer approval Poor adherence Good adherence These boxes illustrates how more negative than positive factors result in poor adherence.
Ideally, a person who has more positive factors will adhere to physical activit y participation.
3.8.3 COMM ON REASON PEOPLE GIVE FOR NOT BEING ACTIVE.
Reason Description Strategy for Change I don’t have the time This is the number one Planning a daily schedule reasons for not exercising.
can help you find time for Invariably, those who feel activity and avoid wasting they don’t have time time on things that are less indicate that they know they important.
Learning the should do more exercise facts in the concepts that and that they plan to in the follow will help you see the future when things are less importance of activity and hectic.
Young people say how you can include it in that they will soon be your schedule with a established in a career and minimum of effort and with then they will have time to time efficiency.
68 exerc ise.
Older people say that they wish they had taken the time to be active then they were younger.
Its too inconvenient Many who avoid physical Research shows that if you activity do so because it is have travel more than 10 inconvenient.
They are minutes to do activity or if procrastinators.
Specific you don not have easy reasons for procrastinating access to equipment, you include: It makes me will avoid activity locating sweaty and it messes up my for activity and find a time hair.
is important I just don’t enjoy it Many do not find physical There are many activities to activity to be enjoyable or choose from if you don’t invigorating.
These people enjoy vigorous activity, try may assume that all forms more moderate forms of of activity have to be activity such as walking.
strenuous and fatiguing to count as exercise.
I’m no good at physical People might laugh at me; With properly selected activities sport make me nervous and activities, even those who I am not good at physical have never enjoyed exercise activities are reasons some can get hooked.
Building people give for not being performance skills can help, active.
These people often as can changing your way lack confidence in their own of thinking comparisons to abilities.
In some cases, others can help you feel this is because of their past successful.
experiences in physical education or athletics (sports) I am not fir so I avoid Some people avoid exercise There are good medical 69 activity beca use of health reasons.
reasons for no doing Some who are unfit lack physical activity, but many energ y.
Starting slowly can people with problems can build fitness gradually and benefit from exercise if it is help you realize that you properly designed.
if can do it.
necessary, get help adapting activity to meet your needs  I have no place to be active, Regular activity is much If you cannot find a place, if especially in bad weather.
more convenient if facilities it is not safe, or if it is too are easy to reach and the expensive, consider using weather is good.
Still, low –cost equipment at recreational opportunities home such as rubber bands have increased considerably or calisthenics.
Lifestyle in recent years.
Some of activity can be done by the most popular activities anyone at almost any time.
require very little equipment, can be done in or near the home, and are inexpensive.
I am too old As people grow older, many Older people who are just begin to feel that physical beginning activity should activity is something they start slowly.
Lifestyle can do.
For most people, activities are a good this is simply not true.
alternative.
Setting realistic Studies indicate that goals can help, as can properly planned exercise learning new activity skills, for older adults is not safe such as resistance training but has many health and appropriate flexibilit y benefits including longer exercise.
life, fewer illnesses, increased working capacity, and improved sense of well 70 being and optimal funct ioning .
3.8.4 COMM ON REASONS FOR DOING REGULAR PHYSICAL ACTIVITY Reason Description Strategy for change I do activity for my health, Survey one reason for doing Gaining information wellness, and fitness regular physical activity.
contained in this course Unfortunately, many adults material would help you say that a doctor’s order to see the value of regular exercise would be the most physical activity.
likely reason to get them to Performing the self- being a regular program.
assessments in the various For some, however, waiting concepts will help you for a doctor’s order may be determine the areas in too late.
which you need personal improvement I do activity to improve my In our society, looking good Some people have failed in appearance.
is highly valued, thus past attempts to change physical attractiveness is a their appearance through major reason why people activity.
Setting realistic participate in regular goals and avoiding exercise.
Regular physical comparisons to others can activity can contribute to help future attempts to be looking your best.
more successful.
I do activity because I enjoy A majority of adults say Those people who do not it.
that enjoyment is of enjoy activity often lack paramount importance in performance skills or feel deciding to be active.
This that they are not competent is not surprising, given in activity situations.
statements from participants Improving skills with 71 such as experiencing the practice, setting realistic peak experience, the runner goals, and adopting a new high or spinning free.
The way of thinking about  sense of fun, the feeling of performance can help a well-being and the general person to be successful and enjoyment associated with to enjoy activities.
physical activity are well- documented.
I do activity because it Relaxation and release from Activities, such as walking, relaxes me.
tension rank high as reasons jogging, or cycling, are why people do regular ways of getting some quiet physical activity.
For years, time away form the job or it has been recognized that the stresses of daily living.
activity in the form of sport and games provides a catharsis, or outlet, for the frustrations of normal daily activities.
Evidence indicates that regular exercise can help reduce depression and anxiety, both common symptoms associated with streeful living.
I like the challenge and A sense of personal Some people get little sense sense of personal accomplishment associated of accomplishment form accomplishment I get from with performing various activity.
Tacking lessons to physical activity.
physical activities is learn new skills or frequently a reason for attempting activities new to people doing activity.
In you can provide the some cases, it is merely challenge that makes learning a new skill, such as activity interesting.
Also, 72  baske tball or tennis; in other adopting new ways of cases , it is running a mile or thinking that allows you to doing a certain number of avoid comparisons to others crunches that provides this with a focus on the task feeling of accomplishment.
rather than competition with The challenge of doing others can help.
something you have never done before is apparently a very powerful experience.
Physical activities provide opportunities not readily available in other aspects of life.
Frequent answer to the If you find physical activit y I like the social involvement question, why am I to be socially unrewarding I get from physical activities physically active?
Include: you my have to find it is a good way to spend activities that both you and time with other members of friends or family enjoy.
the family; It is a good way Taking lessons together can to spend time with close help.
Also finding a friend friends and being part of the with similar skills can aid in team is a satisfying feeling.
sport performance.
Focus Physical activity settings on the activity rather than can also provide an the outcome.
opportunity for making new friends.
Competition is the main The thrills of victory and Some people simply do not reason I enjoy activity sport competition are two enjoy competing.
If this is reasons often given by the case for you, you can people who participate din participate without physical activities.
For competing or select 73 many , the competitive noncompetive individual exper ience can be very activities satisf ying.
Physical activity helps me For many people, Physical activity is feel good about myself.
participating in physical something that is self- activity is an important part determined and within your of their identify.
They feel control.
Participation in better about themselves regular program can help when they are regularly you feel good about participating in physical yourself and build your activity.
confidence and self-esteem.
Physical activity provides Being outside and Many activities provide opportunities to get fresh air experiencing nature are opportunities to be outside reasons that some people more frequently.
If this is give for being physically an important reason for you, active.
try to seek out parks and enjoyable settings for your activities.
Source: Corbin C.B.
Lindsey R, Welk and Corbin W(2002)  3.9 MANAGING YOUR WEIGHT: A MATTER OF LIFESTYLE We all want to keep our weight under control.
Weight control means reaching he weight that is best for you and then staying at the weight that is best for you is called your desired weight.
It’s based on your sex, height, and body frame (small, medium, or large).
People who stay at their desired weight tend to be healthier than those who are either underweight or overweight.
Weight control probably receives more attention than almost any other health issue.
Fad diets are popular for short periods of time.
Diet gimmicks are often expensive, unsafe, 74 doctor before starting any weight-lose program and and ineffective.
Check with your to lose weight quickly and safely.
remember that there is no easy way Many of us feel strong pressure to be thin.
Most young people, however, don’t need to lose weight.
In fact, unwise dieting may in refer with normal growth development A person who is overweight weights mere than the desired weight for his or her sex, height, and frame size.
This is not the same as being obese.
Obesity is more serious conditions than being overweight.
It means having too much body fat.
Obese people weight at least 20percent more than their desired weight.
Their obesity puts them at grater risk of disease and other physical problems.
Gaining or Losing Weight Someone who is overweight or obese needs to lose weight.
Someone who is underweight may need to gain weight.
Although it is often difficult in practice, losing or gaining weight is simple in principle.
To lose weight, you must take in fewer calories or burns up more calories than you usually do.
To gain weight, you must take in more calories than usual.
It is important to select foods that have high nutrient density.
The fastest way to burn up calories is to exercise more.
You should also exercise when trying to gain weight to be sure the weight you add is muscle and not fat.
Dieting do’s (cid:1) Follow a diet and exercise program under the supervision of a doctor to endure that the plan is safe.
(cid:1) Set realistic goals (1 to 2 pounds of weight loss per week) (cid:1) Exercise to help burn calories (cid:1) Change poor eating habits (cid:1) Consider food preferences when planning your diet (cid:1) Eat nutrient-dense foods.
75 s from the five food group (cid:1) Eat mainly low-calorie food aking a second helping (cid:1) Eat slowly and wait before t try doing something else-take a walk or visit a friend (cid:1) If your are temped to snack, (cid:1) Weigh yourself only once a week at the same time of day (cid:1) Focus on your progress.
Dieting Don’t (cid:1) Don’t be taken in by diets promising quick results (cid:1) Don’t rely o special formulas or products (cid:1) Don’t lose more than 2 pounds a week  (cid:1) Don’t eat fewer than 1,400 calories a day (cid:1) Don’t skip meals (cid:1) Don’t weigh yourself every day (cid:1) Don’t reward yourself with food (cid:1) Don’t become discouraged if you have a setback BULIMIA Bulimia, believed to be one of the more common eating disorders recurrent episodes of binge- type eating (pigging-out) followed by purging (vomiting and laxative abuse).
Usually the binge consists of food high in calories form fat or sugar, such as bags of cookies, doughnuts, and chips.
A typical binge involves the consumption of several thousand Calories during 1- to 2- hours time period.
These binges may occur once a month or in severe cases, several times a day.
The behavior is so time consuming, affected college students may have drop out of school because they have no time for classes or studies To avoid gaining weight form the positive caloric situation, the person follows he binge with purging through vomiting, laxatives, or fating.
People who engage in such behavior tend to binge and purge in secret; particularly the purging behavior is hidden form friends and family members.
Person with bulimia are generally college-age women who are about average or not excessively over fat.
76  ANOREXIA NERVOSA l disease in which a person develops an aversion to food Anorexia nervosa is a psychologica and a distorted body image.
Over a period of time, the person loses a considerable amount of body weight so that health and life are threatened.
Recently, anorexia nervosa has become a more widespread problem, although not as widespread as bulimia.
About 90% of the cases involve females, and the disorder usually begins around puberty.
It is usually very obvious that individuals are “anorexic”.
They are so thin that they appear to have a life-threatening disease such as terminal caner.
The subcutaneous fat layer is nearly absent so that veins ban be seen on arms and legs.
The typical feminine shape due to body fat deposits is absent.
Extreme physical activity behaviors are also characteristic of the illness; the anorexic may jog or work out tirelessly.
The normal female hormonal cycle depends on a certain minimum level of body gat; most of these women fail to menstruate.
In certain sports, anorexic behavior may be apparent, particularly for those athletes who think a thin appearance is important.
These spots include gymnastics, dancing, cheerleading, track, and to some degree, tennis.
This has been called anorexia athletic.
These athletes seem to associate a slender appearance with the ability to perform successfully and appear more attractive.
In many instances the condition begins as an attempt to reduce body fat through caloric reduction and increased exercise.
Instead of binge satisfied with reaching a healthy goal weight, the person becomes obsessed with the ability to control body weight and continues the effort.
Anorexics may fast, but often they eat small, precisely measure quantities of food that do not supply enough calories to fuel the high energy demands of their physical activity or to maintain a reasonable amount of body fat.
Reports of a combination of anorexia and bulimic behaviors are not uncommon.
This is often called bulimia nervosa.
An estimated 20% of those affected with this psychological disease die form the effects of severe malnutrition or the chemical imbalances created by purging.
3.10 Acting Safely at Home and at School: A Matter of Lifestyle You may think of your home as a happy and comfortable place.
In reality, every home has many hazards or possible sources of harm.
Each year, hundreds of thousands of people are 77 cleaning products, slippery bathtubs, and objects left on injured at home by such hazards as st injuries at home can be prevented.
stairs.
Like accidents in general, mo (cid:1) Preventing falls Falls are very common in the home and can lead to serious injuries.
They occurred most often in kitchens, bathrooms and on stairs.
Falls account for many broken bones in order family members, whose bones may be brittle.
(cid:1) Preventing poisonings Poisonings are serious problem, especially for children.
Curious about everything but unable to read labels, toddlers and preschoolers may eat or drink toxic substance without knowing they are poisonous.
Cleaning products and medicines are the most common causes of home poisonings (cid:1) Preventing electrical shocks Electricity provides us with many of life’s necessities, including heat and light.
However, electricity can be deadly if misused.
Most home electrical accidents involve problems wit h wires or outlets or misuse of electrical appliances.
To prevent electrical shocks, never pull out a plug by its cord.
Pull on the plug instead.
Do not over load an outlet with too many cords.
Make sure you keep electrical products away for water, and never use an electrical product when you are wet.
Unplug appliances that are not working properly, and have them serviced.
Safety in the home Home can be safe if people are careful to make them so.
What are some ways of making a home safe?
(cid:1) Store unsafe substances – Store cleaning products and other potential poisons on high shelves out of children’s reach or better yet, lock them up.
(cid:1) Remove dangers – Wipe up spills quickly (cid:1) Plugs and outlets – Never overload an outlet with too many plugs.
Always replace frayed wires.
(cid:1) Act safe – Use ladders or step stools, not chairs to reach high places.
(cid:1) Handle Medicine Properly – Use childproof caps and throw out drugs that have passed their expiration date-the date that tells when medicine is on longer useful.
78 lug appliances that do not work correctly.
Have them (cid:1) Electrical Appliances – Unp repaired or replaced.
3.10.1 Fire safety at home Fire needs three elements: fuel, heat and air.
Fuel can be stored rags, wood, gasoline, or paper.
Heat may be a match, an electrical wire, or cigarette.
Oxygen in the air feeds the flames.
These elements are found in most homes.
To prevent fires that occurs at home.
(cid:1) Keep stoves clean to avoid burns and grease firs when cooking.
(cid:1) Make sure that electrical wires, outlets, and appliances are safe.
(cid:1) Make sure that no one smokes in bed.
(cid:1) Keep flammable objects at least 3 feet from a portable heater.
(cid:1) Throw out old newspapers and other materials that burn easily.
(cid:1) Use and store matches properly, and keep matches and cigarette lighters out of the reach of small children.
The most dangerous home fires are those that occur during the night when everyone is asleep.
By installing smoke alarms in your home, your family can reduce the risk of injury from fire.
A smoke alarm, or smoke detector, is a device that makes a warning noise when it senses smoke.
The sound is loud enough to warn your family to move to safety, even if everyone is asleep.
A smoke alarm, should be installed in each level of your home, especially outside the bedroom area.
Be sure to test the smoke alarm regularly and replace the battery if need.
Another important step in preparing for a fire is to plan a fire escape route and practice using it.
Agree on a placed where everyone will meet outside 3.10.2 Safety at school Safety is a concern in places where many people gather.
Schools are such places, so they must meet certain safety standards.
Equally important for safety at school is the behavior of the students.
The follows list include some of the ways in which students can help make school a safe place for themselves and others.
79 nd consumer sciences classes.
Wear appropriate safety (cid:1) Industrial arts and family a ’s instructions carefully.
gear and follow your teacher d after school sports.
Concentrate on what you and (cid:1) Physical education class an those around you are doing (cid:1) Science labs.
Use equipment and chemicals only as directed.
(cid:1) Hallway traffic.
Walk; don’t run, in halls and lock rooms.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 4 (cid:1) Mention two ways you can make your home safe (cid:1) Mention to ways you can prevent falls in your home.
3.11 Personal Health Inventory Guide Having gone through the first three units of this course material.
I challenge you to assess your personal health practices.
By going through this health inventory guide, I aim to sensitize you on some risky habits some of us indulge in and those we consciously or unconsciously fail to do.
(cid:1) Heredity (family medical history) One of my close relative has had.
(cid:1) Heart disease (cid:1) Caner (cid:1) High blood pressure (cid:1) Asthma (cid:1) Glaucoma (cid:1) Alcoholism (cid:1) Mental illness Note: the idea is that if any close relative of your (mother, father, grandparents etc) has ever had any of this health problem listed above, the tendency that you may also suffer from it is high.
As a person, you have to watch out for it and try take preventive measures, such a, adopting positive lifestyle habits to counteract or reduce chances of experiencing such health problems.
80 (cid:1) Mental Health en am emotionally down (cid:1) I allow myself to cry wh (cid:1) I express feelings (love, fear, anger) constructively (cid:1) I have friends or relatives with whom I discuss problems (cid:1) I keep anxiety from interfering with my activities at school and home (cid:1) I do not allow stress to build up and give me headaches or stomach upset (cid:1) I have hobbies that help me away get from daily tasks (cid:1) Nutrition (cid:1) I eat a wide variety of foods (bread, cereals, mild, fruits and vegetables) (cid:1) I avoid refined and processed foods high in sugar and saturated fats (cid:1) I avoid adding salt to my food (cid:1) I eat breakfast regularly  (cid:1) I avoid eating between meals (cid:1) Physical Fitness (cid:1) I do vigorous exercise such as running, swimming, brisk walking or biking for 30 minutes at least 3 times a week (cid:1) I exercise to build muscle strength and endurance at least 3 times a week (cid:1) I stretch to build flexibility (cid:1) I warm up and cool down when I exercise (cid:1) The exercises or sports I engage in I intend to carry on with them for life (cid:1) I maintain a normal body weight for my age and height (cid:1) I try to get 7 – 8 hours sleep each night Substance Use and Abuse (cid:1) I avoid smoking cigarettes, cigar, pipe and using other forms of tobacco (cid:1) I try to avoid the second hand smoke of others (cid:1) I avoid drinking alcohol  81 choactive substances such as marijuana, cocaine etc.
(cid:1) I avoid using psy (cid:1) I avoid riding wi th a driver who is under the influence of alcohol or any psychoactive sub stance.
Personal Health Hygiene (Care) (cid:1) I brush and floss my teeth daily (cid:1) I keep my skin and hair clean (cid:1) I visit a dentist to check my teeth twice a year (cid:1) I go for medical check up at least ones in every year (cid:1) I use my medications religiously when am sick (cid:1) I avoid using non prescription drugs (cid:1) I check my blood pressure level at least once a year (cid:1) I practice self examinations for cancer (breast exam for girls and women, testicle exam for boys and men)  Public Health (cid:1) I avoid polluting my environment: by lowering radio and TV sets to avoid noise pollution, burning things to avoid air pollution and not littering wastes.
(cid:1) I recycle such items as cans, paper, glass, clothes and books when and where possible I walk or bike when possible instead of riding cars Safety measures (cid:1) I use safety belts when driving or riding in a car (cid:1) I obey traffic laws (cid:1) I follow water safety procedures and can save myself or others, form drowning (cid:1) I use safety precaution when working with power tools, firearms and other dangerous equipment.
82  dures are observed in my home such as covering water (cid:1) Safety proce around the home, quick repair of electrical equipment boides in and etc.
(cid:1) I have knowledge o first aid method to help others in emergency situations.
Stress Control (cid:1) I have a job or do other work I enjoy (cid:1) I find it easy to relax and express my feeling freely (cid:1) I have close friends, relatives or others who I can talk to about personal matters and call on for help when needed (cid:1) I participate in group activities (such as church and communit y organization or hobbies that I enjoy.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 5 Have gone through this personal health inventory guide, state four think you can do to improve your health status 4.0 CONCLUSION I believe that it has been existing and revealing going through this unit.
I sincerely hope that you will go ahead and personalize and practicalise most of the things you have learnt in this unit.
In the next unit you will learn about factors that affect, influence and determine the level f health and wellness that each and everyone of us has.
5.0 SUMM ARY Going through this unit you have learnt: (cid:1) The meaning of lifestyle  83 (cid:1) Positive lifestyle habits thy (cid:1) Steps for behavior for a heal lthy lifestyle change (cid:1) Philosophical basis for a hea (cid:1) Steps to take in making healthy positive lifestyle decisions (cid:1) Benefit of physical fitness (cid:1) Do’s and don’t of dieting (cid:1) How to act safety at home and school (cid:1) To assess your self using the personal health inventory guide 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNM ENT list and explain five healthy habit one can undertake regularly to be healthy  7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Corbin C. B, Lindsey R, We LK G.J,Corbin W.R, (2002) concepts of Fitness Wellness.
Boston: McGraw Hill Getchell.
B, Pippin.
R, and Varnes J, (1991) Health .
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Compy.
Merki M. B (1999).
Teen Health.
New York: Gencoe McGraw Hill Owie 1.
(2003).Adding years to your life: An invitation from Queen Hygeia.
th Inaugural Lecture Series 68.
University of Benin.
August 282003.
Prentice W. E (1999).
Fitness and Wellness for life.
Boston: WCB McGraw – Hill.
World Health Organization WHO (2006) Health.
http: / WWW.who.int /about / overview /en > 84 Ejifgha A.U.
(1999) Development of Health Education in Nigeria 1882 – 1992 Owerri.
Canun Publishers Nig.
Ltd Taylor S.E (2003) Health Psychology.
Boston: McGraw Hill Higher Education  Getchell B, Pippin R and Varnes J.
(1991) Health.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Compy Insel P.M, Roth W.T, Rollins L.M, Peterson R.A and Stone T (1991) Core Concepts in Health California: Mayfield Publishing Compy Glantz K, Lewis F.M and Riner B.K (1990) Health Behavior and Education San Francisco: Jossey Bass Marki M.B(1999) Teen Health New York: Gencoe McGraw Hill rd Brues, C. & Ruchardson, G. (1992) Decisions for health 3ed.
( Weatern Michigan University Custom Edition ) Dubuque, lowa Win.
C. Brown.
Glanz, K, Lewis, F.M.,&Rinner, B.K.,(1997) Health behavior and education San Francisco; jossey-Bass  Janz, N.K.
& Becker, M.H.(18984).
The health and illness behavior A Decade Later.
Health education quarterly.
11, 1-47.
Rosenstock, I.M.,(1990) Historical origin of health belief model.
Health Education Monograph UNIT 4 HEALTH DETERMINANTS CONTENTS 85 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Factors That Affect Your Health 3.2 Determinants of Health 3.3 Other Factors Influencing Your Health 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor – Marked Assignment 7.0 References / Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUC TION You have gone through the concept of health, wellness and lifestyle in the last three units.
In this unit you are going to learn about the factors that influences both a large extent.
2.0 OBJECTIVES When you have diligently studied this unit, you should be able to (cid:1) List at least four factors that affect your health (cid:1) Explain how culture can affect the health status an individual (cid:1) Name five factors that can affect your wellness level 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Factors that affect your health In addition to the kind of health choices you make, other factors affect health.
They are heredity, environment, and available health care services.
86  Heredity (Genetics) (cid:1) Heredity refers to innate ability.
It include all genetic traits such as: (cid:1) Anatomical make up e.g.
height, body structure, colour of eyes, skin etc.
(cid:1) Susceptibility (or tendency) to certain disease and condition (cid:1) Intellectual or cognitive ability (intelligent Quotient, level) (cid:1) Artistic talent endowment It is the passing of traits from your parent as a result of the transmission of genes (DNA).
Your hereditary traits include your eye, body build, skin colour etc.
Your heredity may also include a tendency to get certain diseases.
e.g.
diabetes, sickle cell disease etc.
If you know your family history of disease, you can behave in a way that will reduce your risk for certain diseases.
For e.g.
people whose parents have had heart attacks can reduce their own risk of heart diseases by exercising regularly and eating foods low in fat.
Heredity serves as the foundation upon which other factors act.
It supplies the raw materials which structures the kind of health we can enjoy.
It determines the healt h potential of an individual.
It determines the level of health that is possible for an individual some of the inherited traits contributes to behavior.
Environment Is the sum total of your surroundings.
It includes the place where you live, the school you attend and the people you see often.
If you live in a warm climate you learn to protect your skin and eyes from UV (ultra violet) rays of the sun.
The people in your environment influences your health choices both positively and negatively e.g.
exercise, drug abuse, clubbing well into the night instead of sleeping, smoking and alcoholism etc.
Environment has physical biological, emotional and social components e.g.
of these environmental factors are: (cid:1) Physical components - water, food (cid:1) Biological components - micro-organisms 87 affection, feeling (cid:1) Emotional components - social settings, social cultural heritage (cid:1) Social components - Behavior /lifestyle Behavior refers to actions that contribute to a style of living.
It includes cultural – behavior which is a pattern of living that is common to group of persons.
Behavior interacts with environment to affect inherited traits.
Behaviors may be favorable to health.
E.g.
covering mouth when sneezing and observing personal hygiene.
On the other hand it can undermine health e.g.
unsafe sex, drunkenness, drug abuse etc.
Health Services  Health services are sometimes classified as an aspect of the environment but they also provide facilities for protecting health e.g.
immunization services are designed for health protection.
In addition, health service provide facilities for restoring health when it has failed e.g.
surgery, chemotherapy etc.
The higher the quality of health service, the better the health of the people.
These major groups of factors interact to determine health and influence the quality and quantity of optimal health.
Health service are strongly determined by where you live, work or school e.g.
urban cities and rural villages.
To get the most out of available health care, you need to have regular health maintenance such as immunization, dental check up and physical examination.
Keeping up on current healt h information can also help you choose the best ways to promote and protect your health.
Although you have little or no control over these factors, that affect your health, the way you behave has an effect on them.
Your behavior is the way you act in many different events and situations in life.
Your behavior can have a positive or negative impact on any or all of the factors.
Since you can control your behavior you need to do everything you can to make healthy choice.
Remember life is a matter of choices, and every choice makes, makes you.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE 1 Explain how environment could act as a factor influencing your health.
88 3.2 Determinant s of Health.
Both individual and population hea lth are determined by physical, biological, behavioral, social, and cultural factors.
First among the physical factors is the radiant energy of the sun, which is ultimately essential for all life on earth.
Hippocrates identified climate, environment topography, and aspects of behavior as determinants of health.
Climate is assuming greater importance than hitherto due to the climate changes caused by increasing industrialization and energy consumption.
Environmentally, the presence or absence of trace elements in the soil or water, such as fluorides to toughen dental enamel, iodine to stimulate the thyroid gland, and lead compound that damage the developing brain, act to enhance or impair our health.
Biological determinants of health are inherent or acquired.
Genetic heritage is a contributing factor to longevity, and to susceptibility or resistance to a wide range of diseases that include the pathogenic microorganisms responsible for some of the great plagues that have afflicted humans for millennia.
Molecular geneticist have demonstrated that the interaction of human communities with the plague bacillus, the influenza and small pox viruses, the malaria parasite, and with several other microorganisms, played a role in determining the differentiation and distribution of early races of human in Africa and Asia.
On a much shorter time scale, pathogenic microorganisms may be the, most important biological determinants of health and disease.
Immunity or resistance to pathogens is a very important determinant of good health.
Immunity is enhanced by prior exposure, or by maternal exposure in the case of newborn infants, who acquire maternal (passive) immunity to some infections before they are born, and have it reinforced after by antibodies in breast milk.
Routine immunization of infants and small children protects them fro m harm of many common and formerly dangerous pathogens including those that cause diphtheria, tetanus, measles, poliomyelitis, and whooping cough.
Nutritional status is another important influence on resistance to infection.
Individual and populations are most vulnerable when they are malnourished or starved, which is why plagues often accompany famines, wars and interactions Behavioral determinants have been much studied.
An association of certain diseases wit h particular personality types has been observed empirically for centuries.
An irascible 89 n lined to occurrence of stokes, and an association has temperament, for example, has bee sk of coronary heart disease and a type.
A personality, been demonstrated between high ri behavior.
Research on mind-body intentions, which marked by forceful and aggressive unites the disciplines of psychology, neurology, and immunology, made great progress in the last quarter of the twentieth century and began to clarify and explain these relationships.
Social determinants that influence or determine health are also complex.
There is epidemiologic evidence that good health is determined at least in part by social connectedness.
Persons who have many and frequent interactions with other family members and with a network of friends have a more favorable health experience in many ways than those who are socially isolated, live alone, are estranged from their theory family and have little or no family and social support systems.
It is difficult however, to unravel social connectedness and personality factors that may encourage gregariousness or a solitary way of life.
Position in the social hierarchy plays a role.
Social networks an support systems, and social positions, are in part determined by factors beyond the control of the individual.
While they are interrelated with personality factors, they are very complex and not well understood.
Studies have shown that economic conditions dramatically affect health and longevity.
A consistently strong relationship has been demonstrated between income levels and healt h status in every country where the relationship has been examined.
Many interactions between social, economic, and cultural factors also help to determine or influence community health.
Culture is defined as the set of custom, traditions, values, intellectual, artistic qualities and religious beliefs that distinguish one social group or nation from another.
Culture influences behavior through customs such as use of or abstention from meat, alcohol, and tobacco; the practice of rituals such as circumcision; martial customs such as the prevailing age at which women marry; attitudes towards family size, childbearing, and child rearing; personal hygiene; disposal of the dead; and much else.
Peoples values may be the most significant component of culture that affects behavior and through behavior, health.
For example, since the late nineteenth century, an understanding of the important of personal hygiene have become part of the value system of many cultures.
I the late twentieth 90 hifted towards a rejection for tobacco smoking as a century, values in many nations s e 1960s, the oral contraceptive pill contributed to the socially acceptable custom.
In th sexually liberated values and behav ior that encouraged casual promiscuity and which was only partially overshadowed by the threat of infection with HIV / AIDS (human immunodeficiency virus / acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) in the 1980s and later.
The order prerequisites for health were identified as: freedom form the fear of war, equal opportunity for all, and satisfaction of basic needs (food, education, clean, water and sanitation, decent housing), secure work, a useful role, and political well and public support.
All these are embodied in one way or another in the determinants of health outlined above, but when expressed as they were by the WHO working groups, the relevance of human values to achievement of good health becomes more explicit.
Ultimately, values may matter more than anything else in influencing health.
3.3 Factors Influencing Your Level Wellness HEALTH LIFESTYLE HEALTH  Wellness (cid:1) Regular physical activity (cid:1) Eating well (cid:1) Managing stress (cid:1) Avoiding destruction habits (cid:1) Practing safe sex (cid:1) Adopting good safety habits (cid:1) Learning first aid methods (cid:1) Adopting good personal health habits Physical Fitness (cid:1) Seeking and complying with medical advice (cid:1) Being an informed consumer (cid:1) Protecting the environment 91 E 2 SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCIS habits that could affect your wellness level Mention three lifestyle behavior or  4.0 CONCLUSION The factors that affect the health status of an individual or community are very important consideration in any health discussion about our health, adequate attention must be paid to these factors and determinants of health and wellness 5.0 SUMM ARY In this unit, you have learnt: (cid:1) Factors affecting your health and that of others (cid:1) Determinants of health (cid:1) Factors influencing your wellness level 6.0 TUTOR – MARKED ASSIGNM ENT Write briefly on how genetic could be a factor in obesity as a health problem.
6.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Corbin C. B, Lindsey R, We LK G.J,Corbin W.R, (2002) concepts of Fitness Wellness.
Boston: McGraw Hill Getchell.
B, Pippin.
R, and Varnes J, (1991) Health .
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Compy.
Merki M. B (1999).
Teen Health.
New York: Gencoe McGraw Hill  Owie 1.
(2003).Adding years to your life: An invitation from Queen Hygeia.
92 th Inaugural Lecture Series 68.
Univer sity of Benin.
August 282003.
Prentice W. E (1999).
Fitness and Wellness for life.
Boston: WCB McGraw – Hill.
World Health Organization WHO (2006) Health.
http: / WWW.who.int /about / overview /en >   UNIT 5 MODELS AND THEORIES OF HEALTH PROMOTION CONTENT S 93 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content  3.1 Differentiation between models and theories 3.2 The Health Belief Model 3.3 The Stages Of Change Or Transtheoretical Model 3.4 Theory Of Reasoned Action 3.5 Social Learning Theory Or Social Cognitive Theory 3.6 Health Models (Owie 2003) 3.6.1 The Medical Model 3.6.2 The Environmental Model 3.6.3 The Holistic Model 3.7 Health Models (Beattie 1993) 3.7.1 The Biopathological Model 3.7.2 The Ecological Model 3.7.3 The Biographical Model 3.7.4 The Communitarian Model.
4.0 CONCLUSION 5.0 SUMMARY 6.0 TUTOR – MARKET ASSIGNMENT 7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS 1.0 INTRODUT ION 94 he theories and models that back up the practice and In this unit you will learn about t teaching of health, education and h ealth promotion.
All these areas of health are concern about human behavior as it affects t heir health that of theirs and their environment 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:1) In your words define a model (cid:1) Explain what you understand a theory to mean in your own words (cid:1) State the various models as outlined by Owie (2003) (cid:1) Mention the various models as outlined by Beattie (1999) (cid:1) Draw and label the transtheoretical model 3.0 MAIN CONTENT  3.1 Difference between Theories and Models There are a number of significant theories and models that underpin the practice of healt h protection.
It would be useful to make a differentiation between theories and models.
Theory (cid:1) An integrated set of propositions that serves as an explanation for a phenomenon.
(cid:1) Introduced after a phenomenon has already revealed a systematic set of uniformities (cid:1) A systematic arrangement of fundamental principles that provide a basis for explaining certain happenings of life.
Examples: Social Cognitive Theory, Theory of Planned Behavior (cid:1) Model subclass of a theory.
It provides a plan for investigating and or addressing a phenomenon (cid:1) Does not attempt to explain the processes underlying learning, but only to represent them (cid:1) Provides the vehicle for applying the theories 95 nstheoretical Model Example: Health Belief Model, Tra Those theories that attempt to explain health behaviour and health behavior change by focusing on the individual.
Examples include: (cid:1) Health belief model (cid:1) Theory reasoned action (cid:1) Transtheoretical (stages of change) model (cid:1) Social learning theory Health behaviour is the central concern of health education and health promotion.
It is a major component of all definitions of health promotion and usually the crucial criterion variable in health education intervention assessments.
Positive health behaviour changes in practically all the normal direction are usually the ultimate concern in health education and health promotion endeavors.
If there are observed changes in health behaviour without a corresponding change in health status then we have conflict which may only be adequately resolved by looking at other health related issues, such as the link between behaviours and health status.
SELF ASSESSM ENT EXERCISE (cid:1) In your own words define theory  (cid:1) What do you understand a model to mean?
3.2 Health belief model The health belief model (HBM) was one of the first models which adapted theories fro m the behavioral sciences to examine health problems.
It is still one of the most widely recognized and used models in health behavior applications.
This model was originally introduced by a group of psychologists in the1950’s to help explain why people would or would not use available preventive services, such as chest x-rays for tuberculosis screening and immunizations for influenza.
These researchers assumed that people feared diseases and that the health actions of people were motivated by the degree of fear (perceived threat) 96 factions, as long as that possible reduction outweighed and the expected fear reduction of practical and psychological; barriers to taking action ( net benefits) The HBM can be outlined using fo ur constructs which represent the perceived threat and net benefits: (1) perceived susceptibility, a person’s opinion of the chances of getting a certain condition; (2) perceived severity, a person’s opinion of how serious this condition is; (3) perceived benefits, a person’s opinion of the effectiveness of some advised action to reduce the risk or seriousness of the impact; and (4) perceived barriers, a person’s opinion of the concrete and psychological costs of this advised action Another concept is known as cues to action.
These are events (internal or external) which can activate a person’s “readiness to act” and stimulate an observable behavior.
Some examples of external strategies to activate “readiness” can be delivered in print with educational materials, through any electronic mass media or in one-to-one counseling.
Another concept that has been added to HBM since 1988 in order to better meet the challenges of changing unhealthy habitual behaviours (such as being sedentary, smoking or overeating) is self- efficacy.
Self-efficacy, a concept originally developed by Albert Bandura in social cognitive theory (social learning theory), is simply a person’s confidence in her/ his abilit y to successfully perform an action.
Even though the HBM was originally developed to help explain health related behaviours, it has also helped to guide the search for “why” these behaviors occur and to identify points for possible change.
Using this framework, change strategies can be designed as referred to earlier.
The HBM has been used to help in developing messages that are likely to persuade an individual to make a healthy decision.
Using the HBM, messages that are suitable to health education for such topic are hypertension, eating disorders, contraceptive use, or breast self-examination has been developed.
However, there are two main weaknesses which have been noted about the HBM.
First, health beliefs compete with an individual’s other beliefs and attitudes which can also influence behaviour.
Secondly, in decades of research in the social psychology of behavioral change, it has not been shown that belief formation always precedes behavioral change.
In fact, the formation of belief may actually follow a behavior change.
MODEL EXPLANAT ION 97 NEGATIVE LIFESTYLE POSITIVE LIFESTYLE Smokers not considering stopping 1.
Totally sedentary persons (precontemplation) (precontemplation stage) Thinking about stopping (contemplation) 2.
Thinking of becoming active (contemplation) Bought a nicotine patch or a book about 3.
Buying a pair of walking shoes smoking cessation (preparation stage) and appropriate clothing for they have moved beyond contemplation activity (preparation stage) and are preparing to take action Smoker make some changes in behavior 4.
Those who have started some even a small one (action stage) e.g activity even if infrequent are cutting back on the one of cigarettes smoked When a person has finally stopped 5.
Those who have exercising smoked smoking for a relatively long regularly for 6 months are period of time (6 months) the maintenance said to be at the stage of stage would have been reached.
maintenance.
Whether the lifestyle is positive or negative, people move from one stage to another in an upward or downward direction.
They may move on to maintenance or revert back to contemplation depending o their attitude and personal experiences.
This bring us to – Factors that promote lifestyle changE 98 HEA LTHY BEHAVIOUR Maintenance Action Preparation Contemplation Precontemplation Enabling factors Predisposing factors Reinforcing factors (cid:1) Self management *Knowledge *Family (cid:1) Skills *Beliefs *Peer (cid:1) Access *Enjoyment *Health educators (cid:1) Environment *Attitudes or professionals *Self – confidence Am I able?
Is it worth it?
FACTORS THAT Personal factors INFLUECE CHANGE *Age IN HEALTHY *Gender BEHAVIOURS *Heredity  Personal factor - Factors such as age, gender are related to healthy lifestyle adherence but are typically not under your personal control 99 makes you more likely to decide that you should make Predisposing factors - Anything that style such as regular physical activity a part of your a healthy life normal routin e. Enabling factor - Anything that helps you to carry our healthy lifestyle plan.
Reinforcing factor - Anything that provides encouragement to maintain healthy lifestyle such as physical activity for a life time 3.3 Stages of Changes Model or Transtheoretical Model The stages of change or transtheoretical model was initially published in 1979 by Prochaska.
In the 1980’s Prochaska and DiClemente worked further on this model in outlining the stages of an individual’s readiness to change, or attempt to change, toward healthy behaviours.
The stages of change model evolved from research in smoking cessation and also the treatment of drug and alcohol addiction.
More recently it has been applied to other health behaviors, such as dietary changes.
Behavior change is viewed as a process, not an event, with individuals at various levels of motivation or “readiness” to change.
Since people are at different points in this process, planned interventions should match their stage.
Stages of lifestyle change model summarized in table Maintenance Regularly practice healthy lifestyle Action I have made some lifestyle changes Preparation Am getting ready to make a lifestyle change Contemplation Am thinking about changing Precontemplation I don’t want to change 100
