Course Code ECE 121 Course Title Child Development Course Developer/Writer Dr. (Mrs.) Modupe M. Osokoya Institute of Education University of Ibadan Ibadan In Charge Dr. Lucy Lawani School of Education NOUN, Lagos Course Coordinator Dr. Lucy Lawani School of Education NOUN, Lagos i ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: All Rights Reserved Printed by …………….. For National Open University of Nigeria ii ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS PAGES Module 1…………………………………………...................... 1 Unit1 The Need for Studying Child Development……… 1 Unit2 Assessment of Growth in Children……………….. 12 Module 2………………………………………………………….
20 Unit 1 Language and Speech Development……………….. 20 Unit 2 Motor Development………………………………… 32 Unit 3 Social Development………………………………… 41 Unit 4 Emotional or Psychological Development………… 48 Unit 5 Intellectual Development…………………………… 57 Unit 6 Spiritual Development……………………………… 67 Module 3…………………………………………………………… 76 Unit 1 Personality Development and Acquisition of Identity.. 76 Unit 2 Play…………………………………………………….
86 Unit 3 The Characteristics of Giftedness in Young Children… 98 Module 4…………………………………………………………… 110 Unit 1 School Readiness I………………………………….. 110 Unit 2 School Readiness II………………………………….
120 Unit 3 Discipline as Part of Education……………………… 132 Unit 4 The Task of the Teacher…………………..………… 146 iii NoneMODULE 1 Unit1 The Need for Studying Child Development Unit2 Assessment of Growth in Children UNIT 1 THE NEED FOR STUDYING CHILD DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Child Development 3.2 Purpose of Studying Child Development 3.2.1 Recognizing the Nature of the Child 3.2.2 Predicting Adult Behavior 3.2.3 Appreciating Variation in Individuals Behavior 3.2.4 Using the Knowledge to Improve the Life of other Children 3.2.5 Enjoying Studying Children 3.2.6 Showing Understanding to their behavior 3.2.7 Understanding their Capabilities 3.2.8 Being Able to Detect Unusual Behavior 3.3 Methods and Problems of Studying Child Development 3.3.1 Scientific Method 3.3.1.1 Experimental Method 3.3.1.2 Scientific Observation 3.3.1.3 Longitudinal Method 3.3.1.4 Cross-sectional Method 3.3.1.5 Other Scientific Methods 3.3.2 Traditional Method 3.4 Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION It is expected that to be able to give function education to children in their early years, we should be interested in them.
One way by which we can show this interest in them is to understand them.
To understand children we must appreciate certain features that make up their personalities.
Note that the making up of one’s personality is a process 1 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT involving many complex things.
One of such complex thing is the focus of this course, and that is Development.
If the interest of the adult taking care of children is to make the children comfort, happy and live a full healthy life in future, then the adult need to understand the developmental stages of the child.
Children need comfort, safety, love, warmth, security etc.
To be able to provide all these and make them happy and subsequently educate them, the knowledge of child.
Development is essential.
This is probably the first course you will be doing in this program B.
A.
Early childhood Education.
This unit is therefore taken as the introductory unit to the programs and of course introductory unit to the course child Development.
I am sure you will enjoy the course and the program as a whole.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the meaning of child development  appreciate the need to study child development  identify methods of studying child development  describe the methods of studying child development  practice studying children  recognize problems of studying children  suggest ways of ensuring an all round study of the development of a child.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Child Development This is likely to be your first specialist course in the program B.A.
Early Childhood Education, and as such before we begin to talk about child Development, let’s make it clear what we are considering in this program as Early childhood Education.
Early Childhood Education typically includes the study of nursery schools, kindergarten and primary levels of education.
Some also refer to it as pre-primary and primary Education.
Although, different trends in educational issues are considering other broader interest of Early Childhood Education, some even include the study of different age ranges of children in Early Childhood Education.
2 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT I want to assure you that some of the courses you will come across in this program you will set to know more about what Early child hood Education is all about.
Now lets talk about the present course – child Development.
Child Development can be taken as natural development in every child in every culture of the world Parents all over the world, observe their children and come out with guidelines on how to take proper care of their own children and other children .
Child Development has helped to provide useful information on the general growth and development of children.
To a great extent the knowledge of child Development has helped to provide appropriate attitude, skills and values to children.
Some universities have been teaching child Development since the 1900’s.
It is sometime taken as part of disciplines like Psychology social Psychology, anthropology and Home – Economics.
Some other higher institutions refer to Child Development as Human Development.
It is necessary that the study of child development goes along with the study of subject matter areas like Mathematics, social science, sciences, and language so that students can link the development principles to the subject area and how it can be applied in the process of teaching young children.
The main task of a teacher it to ensure that high standard teaching and learning takes place in the class, and even outside the classroom, the teacher need to know the general characters of children and consider how the knowledge can benefit him/her.
Now that we know what we mean by child development, let us look at what we stand to gain from the knowledge of child development.
But before then, check your progress.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is Early Childhood Education?
2.
What is Child Development?
3.2 Purpose of Studying Child Development The understanding of child development is important to the future academic growth of the child.
Some great thinkers of the past believe that the traits children show in their early years of their life have great implications for their future development.
These involve with the studying of child development have come to identify the following as purposes of studying child development.
3 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.2.1 Recognizing the Nature of the Child The study of child development (CD) enables the teacher to understand the need, interest, nature and problems of the child.
By understanding the nature, need and interest of the child, the teacher will be able to teach the child effectively and efficiently.
The knowledge of CD enables one to recognize what the children need at the different stags of their life.
With this understanding it will be easy to give them support, encouragement, control, help them to solve their problems and provide necessary things for them to enrich their mind and body.
3.2.2 Predicting Adult Behavior As adults, we all know that we too have passed through childhood.
We are also able to recognize certain characteristics which we have been learning from childhood.
A teacher needs to study the development of a child so as to be able to predict the kind of person, the child will develop to as adult.
It is also possible to predict the time or period that a child will be able to do certain things e.g.
cutting of teeth, writing, reading, speaking etc.
It is also possible to predict the kind of occupation the child can do well in when he becomes an adult.
3.2.3 Appreciating Variations in Individuals We are able to appreciate variations in the behavior of individuals as we grow from child to adult.
It is when one is a child that a lot of changes (development) takes place in ones life.
It is the changes that take place in person when the is a child, that will determine to a great extent, the type of adult he will be.
Such changes like height, acquisition of personality, type of language memory, reasoning pattern, wishes, opinions, anxieties etc.
When we now notice the variations in these characteristics among individuals (as adults) we are able to understand them as effect of their early childhood development.
3.2.4 Using the Knowledge to Improve the Life of other Children By studying the development of a child, we are able to apply the knowledge gained to improve the life of other children.
Those in the position of authority usually seek advice from those who have expert knowledge of CD, so as to plan good things for children.
The teachers and others who study children are useful in giving such advices.
The teacher who have mastered child development can also plan good 4 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT teaching and learning methods.
He can also make use of the expert advice in addition.
3.2.5 Enjoying the Study of Children Child study is an interesting thing to do.
Children can be very interesting as one take time to study their development.
Artists, Poets, Philosophers etc, are usually attracted by children.
These categories of people usually admire the creativity children show, even while playing and how it is so easy for children to learn the things they do.
Many adults, generally, are usually amused by the activities of children as they watch them grow.
3.2.6 Showing Understanding to their Behavior When we understand child’s development processes, we will not be baffled, irritated or annoyed when they do certain things, we consider some of their unpleasant behaviors according to their stage in life.
Occasions like:  when a two-year old wets his pants  when a child of three-years old bashes his head on his teddy or jumps up and down destroying a valuable thing.
 When a four-years old child cries because his mates refuse to play with him  When a six-years old sucks fingers.
We are able to know that behaviors of these types are quite normal in their stage and that the child will eventually outgrows such behaviors later.
3.2.7 Understanding their Capabilities We will not make a mistake of asking children to do what we believe they can not do.
We will not waste the time of a child, except deliberate, by asking him/her to do certain things.
We know what is beyond the limit of children at every stage of their life through our understanding of the processes and stages of child development.
For example, we will not be  Asking a three year old baby to stand still or sit in a place.
 Encouraging nursery class students to share playing materials.
 Expecting a five year old child to read a passage from a book.
5 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.2.8 Being Able to Detect Unusual Behavior We can spot danger signals or detect problematic situation in child’s behavior through our knowledge of child development when we notice a child behaving too long in a manner that he should have outgrown we will call another person’s attention to it, so that something can be done.
Examples: i.
A one-year old child who cannot sit up on his own.
ii.
A two-year old child who cannot walk.
iii.
A ten-year old child who cannot read simple words.
Those unusual behaviors can be detected with experience.
We have now seen all that we can gain by studying children, we may now consider the methods that we can adopt and the likely problems are may face in the process of studying children.
But before then lets check our progress.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention and discuss 5 major benefits of studying child development 3.3 Methods and Problems of Studying Child Development There are different methods of carrying out research study on child development, the method to use depend on the purpose, use and condition for the study.
Here are some common methods 1. the scientific method 2. the traditional method.
3.3.1 Scientific Method The scientific method can still be divided: a) Experimental method b) Scientific Observation method  Longitudinal  Cross-sectional 6 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT c) Other scientific method includes use of  Interviews  Anecdotal records  Rating scale  Questionnaire I will not like you to get frightened with these terms, try to understand the meanings of the terms on your own.
As much as possible will describe them briefly, but I want to assure you that as you proceed in this program, all these terms will become familiar to you.
3.3.1.1 Experimental Method This is a scientific method of studying children.
The method allows the person studying the children’s behavior to control and make certain things to change as he may wish.
The person can take up a particular issue to study at a time, or study certain behaviors along with other behaviors (or characteristics).
For example, the person studying some sets of children, they may all be of the age group, he can teach a set to perform a task, may be to draw an object, then later mix them with another set that were not taught how to perform the task.
The person will then watch how all the sets of children are carrying out the steps towards performing the task.
From the results of the experiment, many things will reveal itself about the behavior of the children.
It is experiment because, the person studying the children is controlling some things, comparing the difference between those who were taught with those who are not taught.
He wants to know whether teaching them before, will make any difference.
There are many ways of doing experimental study.
3.3.1.2 Scientific Observation Method Note that the last method-experimental method, is also scientific, the observation, is that the person study the children does not control any behavior or characteristics.
Like the example given above, here the person will not teach any group or set, just observe all of them and see how they will perform the task.
We have two types of scientific observation method and these are: Longitudinal method Cross-sectional method 7 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.3.1.3 Longitudinal Method In this way, a set of children can be studied for a long time continuously.
For example, the person studying the children can identify a group of 10 children can be nursery class, he then start to be observing some aspects of their life, records how they do these things, way how they start to write 1 or talk, he will continue to do this on the same set of children till they get to primary four or even primary six.
All the while the person record what they, may be every month or every two-two weeks or every three-three months.
The person then try to study his records and analyze his findings.
The time for longitudinal study may be as long as three years, five years, six years, or even 10 years continuously.
This is done so as to study certain characteristic in children as they grow.
A comprehensive growth and development of children can be studied in this way.
The changes or the stability in some children’s characteristics can also be studied like this.
This method of studying children is however expensive and takes too long time before one can complete it.
And also some of the children the person is studying may not be available again for the study before the end of the study, for one reason or another.
3.3.1.4 Cross-sectional Method This is a process whereby the person studying the children may gather small sets of children of different age group.
For example, he may get 5 nursery class students, 5 primary 2 students, 5 primary 3 students 5 primary 5 students and then observe them performing some task.
The task may also be reading or writing like the example we gave in longitudinal method.
He will then compare the way they perform the task across the four groups he has selected.
At the end the person will come out with a report on how similar or different they are.
The cross-sectional method is better than longitudinal because it is easy to complete the study within a short time, and it is not expensive.
Again the person studying the children is sure of having the number of children he want in each group.
The method is however, not as good as longitudinal method because, a lot of things are assumed, unlike the longitudinal method.
For example, in the example we are taking, the person studying the children is assuming that the primary 3 students he is using were like the nursery students when they were in nursery, which may not be so.
In the longitudinal, it is the same set of students, no assumption of this type.
8 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.3.1.5 Other Scientific Methods a) Interviews The person carrying out the study, can carry out interview with the children, or the parents, teachers, or care givers of the children he is studying.
b) Anecdotal Records This involved writing down every thing a child does in a particular setting during a given period.
It may be while playing or while in the class, may be through out a day or week.
c) Using Rating Scale in Questionnaire The person studying the child can draft a scale or a particular issue (Rating Scale) or write out some questions (a questionnaire) for the child to answer.
Examples (i) I like going to school very well not at all 5 4 3 3 2 1 (Rating Scale) (ii) Which of the following food do you like best Rice - Bread - Beans - Yam – (Questionnaire) Note that the person carrying the study must first of all explain how to answer to the child or parent or teacher or care giver of the child.
And he must seek their co-operation.
3.3.2 Traditional Methods Parents and other adult members of the society can also observe children as they grow with writing their observations down or using any particular established procedure.
They can judge whether a child is growing well or not using their experience.
3.4 Problems In the process of studying the development of children, some problems are usually involved.
We will just describe some of them briefly as follows: 9 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT (i) Lack of funds There may be inadequate fund (money) available to study child development especially on a large scale i.e.
involving a large number of children of different backgrounds.
Though bodies like UNICEF, UNESCO are trying in this respect.
We need to have government and other established agencies to fund study on child development.
(ii) Lack of competent people Many people are not trained in the area of studying children.
It is therefore easy for those involved in it to lose interest and be frustrated.
(iii) People not making use of the findings The findings of few study on child development may not get to the general public.
The report of the study may just be locked up in somebody’s office.
In this way they are not useful to the general public.
(iv) Ready note record keeping Many of those who even carry out study on child development may not keep their record well enough.
(v) Illiteracy and Ignorance Some parents because of their low level of education or non at all, or due to share ignorance or superstitions belief may not co- operate with the peoples carrying out study on their children.
(v) Nature of children It may not be easy to gather meaningful information from children because of their nature.
Children are not good at expressing themselves meaningfully and may be difficult to motivate, especially the pre-school ones.
(vi) Legal and moral aspect There is a limit in law, to what a researcher can make children do against their wish.
Apart from this, some parents or teachers or school authorities may not like the person asking the children certain questions.
10 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Identify a set of 5 children in your school or area and conduct a study on how they come about talking.
You will need to know how they start to pronounce words.
You may need the assistance of their mother.
Put down your records like below: 0 – 3 months ------------------------------------ 3 – 5 months ------------------------------------ 2 – 5 years ---------------------------------------- (This division, however depends on the age of the children you have selected) 4.0 CONCLUSION Child Development study is an essential aspect of early childhood education, that every teacher or adult with keen interest in young children should participate in.
There are many things to gain by studying the development of a child.
It is important to watch how children behave and to act on hat we learn about them and from ourselves.
We can use the knowledge to improve upon the development of children put in our care a, teachers, parents or adults in the society.
11 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 2 ASSESSMENT OF GROWTH IN CHILDREN CONTENTS Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Need for Growth Assessment 3.1.1 Selection of Growth Standard 3.2 How to Assess Growth Pattern 3.3 The Use of Growth in Chart in the Assessment of Growth in Children 3.4 Signs of Disorder in the Growth Pattern of Young Children 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Some factors were mentioned in the last unit as factors that may influence the rate of growth of a child.
You will also recall that one of the objectives of the last unit is that you should be able to identify a child that is not growing normally from among a group of children.
It was also painted to you that it is important for teacher or parent to monitor the growth of children.
These last two objectives of the last unit is expected to be at the level of your applying what you have learnt.
In this unit, we are going to elaborate more on how you can recognize a child that is having abnormal growth or a child that is not growing as expected.
There will be some activities which we take you out a bit out of the content of this unit.
There are going to be practical exercise which may also demand that we check some things up in our secondary school textbooks.
This is just for simplifying and clarity of points, so do not be afraid that you are going to Biology again.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  recognize the need for a growth standard  select parameters that can be used to assess growth standard  use growth charts to assess the physical growth of children 12 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT  identify the disorder of growth of different ages of young children  define some terms use to describe abnormal physical growth e.g.
tall stature, short stature and obesity.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Need for Growth Assessment Parents and guardians who have entrusted the early childhood Education of their children or wards to the hands of school teacher or care givers, do turn only because of the academic aspects.
One of their other reasons may be because the parent or guardians especially the mother is so busy with house hold chores and her career that she may not even have time to notice any unusual thing about her child.
Such a parent or guardian expect the teacher to do such thing for her instead.
Sometimes you hear even the parents slaving the teacher of their children for not telling them certain things the teacher had observed to be bad in the children.
In our discussion in unit one, the need for studying child development, one of the purpose of studying child development is to be able to detect unusual behavior in children.
Children are put into our care as teachers because of the trust and confidence their parents and the society at large have on us.
It is therefore part of our duty to be able to monitor and assess the growth and of course development of children put in our care.
In the last unit, we discussed growth, a type of physical development.
I believe that before we move to another topic, we should also discuss briefly how we can assess the growth of children.
Before we can assess the growth of children, we need to know what standard to base our assessment on.
You may then be asking in your mind, what is a growth standard?
3.1.1 Selection of Growth Standard Sometimes ago, the World Health Organization (WHO) had recognized the need to have a growth chart for both children and adult, so as to compare the growth rate of individual across the world.
The committee on International Union of Nutrition sciences has also proposed the recommendations of a growth standard.
However, research are still on a growth standard that can be acceptable by all countries of the would.
They advised that each country of the world should come up with their own standard through the study of child development in their respective countries.
In Nigeria, for example, there is no particular published growth chart that can base used to monitor and assess child growth with.
However, it is a common thing in an hospital, especially in the children’s section, to 13 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT find a growth chart illustrating how a child is expected to be growing from birth to about 18 years.
Some experts who had been studying child development had even suggested that the growing pattern of the children of the elite in the population of a country can be used as a standard.
Their argument is that the children of such well-to-do and educated members of the society have access to the best health care and they are always eating good food.
This is saying that except for the factor of hereditary such children of the well-to-do grow normally.
The child development experts believe that every other children of the community should also be assessed based on their and such unlucky children should be monitored to grow normally as well.
A warning here is that, some parents may even be well to do, but may not have enough time or awareness on the need to monitor their children who may not also be growing normally.
This is why a national growth standard is necessary, so that every child can be assessed based on this.
We may however consider certain features of growth so as to know what to look for while assessing the growth pattern of children.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Visit a hospital or health centre and ask for their growth chart.
Study it.
2.
Select a set of children within the same age bracket, take their height and weight, and compare the measurements.
3.2 How to Assess Growth Pattern Children do not grow in the same rate, and the growth of a child does not occur in all direction in the same rate.
Some parts of the body grow of faster rate than other parts.
The rate of growth as a child become older may be so rapid in some stages while so slow in some other stages of their live.
We have discussed this in the last unit.
Here we want to consider certain features of growth, these features in some books are called principles of Growth.
For simplicity, we refer to them as features.
These are.
1) Cephalo-caudal (Head to foot) This refers to growth pattern of head growing before the other parts of the body.
This is often called the “head to foot” growth.
The brain for example, which is in the head, grows up to 70% of 14 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT it as early as when the individual is 2 years old.
(i.e.
at childhood).
No other part of the body grow so fast in that stage.
2) Proximdiztal This means that the centre part of the body grows more before parts like leg, arm etc.
3) Discontinuity of growth mate In some stages of the life of a young child, we have periods when we have rapid growth and some other periods when it is almost as if no growth is taking place.
For example there is period of rapid growth rate between age of 0 months to 2 years, while the growth rate slows down between age 2 years and 10 years.
Below is a sketch graph of growth rate.
s t h g i e h 2 1/2 5 10 15 - Age in Years While assessing the growth rate of a child, these features of growth should be considered along with the growth standard.
Also some measurement of some specific parts of the body can also be a pointer to whether or not the child is growing normally or not.
Some of these measurements were mentioned in unit one.
We may still list them again: (i) Weight: The weight of the child follows a particular pattern as the child grows: the weight should be about 4 times the weight or birth.
15 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT After 2 years: the weight gain should be at the rate of 2 eg -.5 eg.
per year.
(ii) Length/height: the standing height of a child after 2 years old is taken as child’s stature.
From age 2: the child increases in height and the rate of 4 cm to 5 cm per year.
By the From age 13: the height of a child is three times his height at birth (iii) Body Circumference: a Circumference is the round length of round object.
The circumference of the head and chest in particular is a pointer to whether a child is growing normally or not.
Head: an increase of 2 cm occurs after one year, later a small increase of 0.5 – 1.0 cm occur after every year till the person is 18 years old.
Chest: the head circumference is usually more than the chest, at birth, but later, the size of chest become more.
No significant increase of size is noticed between age 1 and 5 years.
I will now want you to do the following activity so as to set this growth monitoring procedures right.
Activity One Visit a health centre or clinics familiarize yourself with instruments use for measuring the height, weight, circumference of the head, and chest.
Take note of all the precaution to be taken while taking the measurement.
3.3 The Use of Growth Chart In this section, I will not want to bother you with some medical terms use to describe abnormal growth in children.
I will however like you to do the following exercise to get used to assessing the growth pattern of children the more.
You will need the knowledge you gather while doing.
Exercise one of this unit to help you in this next exercise.
So if you have not done that this is the time to do it.
16 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Identify a set of about 10 children and take the following measurement on them, make table like below: Age Group 1 - 3 years 3 – 6 years 6 – 12 Comma years Serial Number 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Male or Female Weight (kg) Height (cm) Head Circumference Comment on whether normal or not 3.4 Signs of Disorder in Growth Pattern in Children We shall only describe 3 common growth disorders among children, and these are Short Stature Tall Stature Obesity (i) Short stature: A child whose skeleton does not grow proper may have either short trunk (abdomen area) or short arm and leg.
Such a child will grow shorter than his mate.
This is good to children to eat food items that contain necessary ingredients that will make their bones to develop well.
(ii) Tall stature: A child whose skeleton over grows may have too big trunk (abdomen area) and the arm and leg will also over grow, leading to tall stature.
Food intake should be advised to be moderate.
(iii) Obesity: A child in said to be obese when the weight of the child is 20% more than the corresponding weight for his height.
Obesity may be caused by over eating, over protection and lack of activities.
This is common between the age of 5 and 6 years in children.
Obesity may however be due to hereditary factors.
17 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Activity Two Make reference to your Biology textbook while you were in secondary school.
If you do not keep such books again, you can get a secondary school student around you to borrow you his/her textbook.
Read the section on Growth and development.
4.0 CONCLUSION There is an increasing demand for well qualified people to work in public centre, day care centre and schools for young children so as to take proper care of the children while their parents are at work.
One way by which such adults, to whom the care of young children is entrusted is help them to be able to monitor the growth of the children.
These adults taking care of children, especially in schools, are expected to act as parents, nurse, doctors, teachers, guardian, counselors and friends.
To do this effectively, they need to know, among many other things, how to assess the growth of children, so that they can easily recognize a child that is not growing normally.
Some of the things to look for that show whether or not a child is growing well have been discussed here.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have deliberated on the need for having a growth standard.
This growth standard is to be used to assess whether or not a child is growing normally.
The processes that we can take to assess whether a child is growing normally or abnormally were mentioned.
We have also drawn our attention to growth charts that we can get in health centre or hospitals.
Awe also learnt that some specific measurements like height, weight, circumference of the head, and chest are pointers to the growth pattern of the body.
Some terms like short stature, tall stature and obesity were described as signs of abnormal growth.
In the next unit we go further by discussing Development in a more generalize form.
It is believed that Development is always a follow up to growth in young children.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why do we need to have a growth standard in this country?
2.
Mention 3 things that can be measured to assess the growth rate of children.
18 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS A Basic Biology Textbook.
Pictures, of how the measurement of weight, height, circumference, head and chest and child-arm of a child can be taken.
A Growth Chart (like the type use in hospitals).
Indira Gandhi National Open University (1998).
Growth and Development School of Health Sciences.
Indira Gandhi Open University.
Sokan, B. O. and Akinade, E. A.
(1994).
Development Psychology.
Caltop Publishing (Nigeria) Limited.
19 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT MODULE 2 Unit 1 Language and Speech Development Unit 2 Motor Development Unit 3 Social Development Unit 4 Emotional and Psychological Development Unit 5 Intellectual Development Unit 6 Spiritual Development in Your Children UNIT 1 LANGUAGE AND SPEECH DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Language?
3.2 Functions and Characteristics of Language 3.3 Stages of Language Development in your Children 3.4 Conditions and Circumstance required for Acquisition of Language 3.5 Factors that Affect Language Development in your Children 3.5.1 Educational Factors 3.5.2 Environmental Factors 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Development, one of the complex things in human nature was described in the last unit.
We are told that development is maturity and is an essential part of a child.
Development takes place in stages, there are different types of development and some factors affect the development of a child.
One of the types of Development in a young child is language and Speech Development.
This is the focus of this unit.
Language development brings a great change in the life of a child.
Language Development opens the child to a new world.
The child can now speak out and communicate effectively and efficiently like adults.
It is a very important development stage that adult should help the child to achieve well.
In this unit the various functions and characteristics of language shall be so explained that you can appreciate the need to help 20 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT a child have a normal and proper language development.
Stages involved in the development of language and speech making will also be described, conditions and circumstances that encourage acquisition of language shall be mentioned Some factors that can affect the development of language in a developing child, will also be listed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  define language  outline the characteristics of language  recognize the various phases and stages of language development in young children  describe the stages of language development of a child between the age 0 months to 5 years  appreciate circumstances that can encourage speech and language development  list factors that can affect language development  Illustrate that environment and not hereditary has more influence on language development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Language?
Language is a means of communication.
It is a form of expression.
For human being, language is used for the purpose of interaction between two or more persons.
Language can be verbal (spoken) or non-verbal.
Language involves speech making, verbal language.
In this our present discussion (unit) we shall be focusing more on the verbal form of language .
This is why the title of the unit is Language and Speech Development.
Let us clarify the terms ‘verbal’ ‘non-verbal’ and ‘speech’ before we move to the next section.
“verbal” means ‘speaking” while ‘non-verbal” is communication without speaking out, it usually involves the use of body signs or common diagrammatic signs like the types we see on high ways.
A body sign here includes clapping, nodding of head etc.
You sometimes say somebody is making a “speech”, when speaking to a person or group of people.
Speech at times is also used to describe the speaking style of a person.
You now realize why we call the Unit Language and Speech Development.
21 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is Language?
2.
Differentiate between verbal and non-verbal language.
3.2 Functions and Characteristics of Language In the last section, we defined language as means of communication.
This is the primary function of language and it characterizes language as a medium of communication.
Language can be used for more things than communication and Language can be characterized based on the function it serves at a specific time.
The following are various characteristics of language, and the function it serves: (i) Language as specific attribute of human beings: The kind of language we speak as individuals makes up our characteristics as a person.
We can describe a person by referring to the way the person speaks.
Yet this is a development from childhood.
(ii) Language as a medium of communication: Language is an efficient means of communication.
There can be verbal and non- verbal language.
Children develop language both in verbal and non-verbal form, though in this unit we refer more to the verbal language development.
(iii) Language is a means of Socialization: The child’s use of language affects his intellectual development and the way he interacts with people.
Language is an important instrument for interaction.
Language is used to interpret the world around the child.
The child (even adult) uses language as a necessary thing for successful social relationship with others around him.
Language gives meanings to things; the socialization of a child greatly depends on his language development.
(iv) Language as a means of exploration: When a baby begins to call “Mummy” or “Daddy” and receives attention as responses, it really excites the baby, so he will begin to be more interested in words.
He wants to know more words and their interpretation and importance.
Children talk to objects around them too, in so doing they develop speech making ability.
They also use the same medium to test themselves on the use of language.
An adult around them can help them to clarify impressions and also stimulate new ideas in them.
22 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT (v) Language as a medium of thoughts: Language is used in thinking, memory, reason and in school life generally.
To be able to understand and speak out to people, you have to think in a language you are used to.
It is therefore necessary in the teaching –learning process.
(vi) Language is a medium of hearing: Just as we mentioned in the last paragraph, a teacher should be very interested in the language development of a child so as to know how to present what he wants to teach and how to teach it.
Remember that in unit one, we said that development should be taken alongside the teaching of subject area.
(vii) Language is a medium of expression: Language development brings a great change in the life of a child.
The child who has now developed the language ability can speak out, unlike before when he was only used to crying and making meaningless sound.
The child can now express his feeling to others.
Language development is therefore a very important stage that adult should help a child to develop well.
The child makes less noise when he can express himself meaningfully.
(viii) Language as a means of actualization of intelligence: Before a child begins to speak out, he will be imitating, storing words in his memory, trying to make meanings out of them.
For a child to start to make meaningful statements he is actualizing his intelligence, to a large extent, he must be using his reasoning power.
Note that the child’s reaction to words is based on the meanings he attaches to words and its relevance to his inner self is based on the meaning he gives to his environment.
This is why a teacher needs to be interested in the language development of a child so as to know how to organize his teaching.
(ix) Language as closely linked to and determined by culture: The syntax (arrangement of words) of a language affects a child’s language development differently from one country to another or from one culture to another.
This is why it is so easy for children to learn new language before age five (5).
By age five the language development process in a child must have reached its highest state.
After age five, it may be difficult especially if the grammatical organization of the new language is different from the language the child is used to.
For example, some language requires that an adjective comes before the noun (e.g.
English – My big bag) but some other language requires that adjective comes after the noun.
(You can think of an example of this yourself.)
Language development is closely linked to culture.
23 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List and describe the characteristics of a language 3.3 Stages of Language Development This is the central part of this unit.
Language learning (or development) is one of the complex aspects of human beings.
The way it occurs, begins or reaches its climax is not very clear.
But people continue to research into it, and they continue to come out with more facts about the process.
Regardless of the culture in which a child lives, children begin to understand language by imitating the sound he hears around him.
It is necessary to be familiar with stages of language development in children so that the teacher or parent can detect when a child is not developing well at each stage.
Language development takes place in children, in two major phrases, namely Pre-linguistic speech phase and Linguistic speech phase The pre-linguistic speech phase has the following stages: (i) Undifferentiated crying (ii) Differentiated crying (iii) Cooing (making sound like that of a dove) (iv) Babbling (confused talk or foolish talk) (v) Lallattion (imperfect imitation of others) (vi) Echolalic (imitation of others) (vii) Expressive babbling (making particular sound to mean something nearly irrelevant to the thing).
The Linguistic Speech Phase (i) The one-word sentence (ii) Multiple-word sentence (iii) Grammatical correct utterances.
We won’t be taking these stages one after the other, but rather we will take the stages of language development in children as they advance in age.
You should be able to identify the phase (as stated above) that the child is undergoing as he advances in age, as you read along.
0 – 12 months The child makes language in forms of babbling, crying, cooling.
The adult, most of the time the mother, sister or older sibling, who is used to 24 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT the child usually make meanings out of the overall impression of the child.
The phonemes (sounds of language) that make up the vowels and consonants of language formulation come as part of the child in the first year of life.
12 months – 18 months During this period, the child practices and imitates all kinds of sounds he hears as he listens to grown ups while they talk.
He stores up in his mind, the names of familiar objects and enjoys the words and sentences in songs, and rhymes.
As he reaches 18 months (11 years) he is getting ready to start communicating with 2 people like every other person.
You should note that before age 2, the child is only interested in walking, balance, picking things up and other physical activity without paying attention to how to pronounce words or understand them.
He talks to himself by making meaningless sounds or even sentences; sometimes he only makes noise to express himself.
In most cases, during this period, the child uses the same word or set of words to mean different things e.g “Bye-Bye” can mean “Welcome” , Good-bye” “no, I am not going “ Please let us go out” depending on the situation.
To the child “Ta-Ta” can mean the name of a person, to the child every person or every woman may be “Ta-Ta”, it can even mean “Thank you”.
18 months – 2 years The child begins to build up his vocabulary.
He can begin to use words and he is greatly interested in people talking.
He repeats so many words after the adult.
He can name so many things around him.
This is when the baby really needs an adult who can constantly name things to him, look at pictures with him and speak short sentences to him.
He can now cope with short flow of words.
At 2 years old The child now wants to make up the “lost period” this is a year of exploration and discovery on two major aspects of life.
These aspects are in the physical and speech development.
The child is like a talkative in this stage.
He wants to know the names of everything he comes across.
He wants the adult to continue singing songs and rhymes to him and also enjoys listening to stories.
25 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 2 – 3 years The child is a companion, plays with materials and finds time to be with other children and adult so that he can enjoy conversation with them.
He now refers to himself as “I” or “me”.
Note that, by this period of life, the child has now got 20 temporary (milk) teeth, these of course, influence his speech making, having enough number of teeth in the mouth, and he can now pronounce words clearly.
During this period the child can now form sentences which may contain a noun or verb, along with his non-verbal expressions, that adult can make meaning from.
4 – 5 years The child is now speaking freely, he can exchange greetings, ask for information and clarifies new facts that he does not understand.
He is always asking questions beginning with “what”, where or who”.
He is happy to hear new words.
The development of language through greater vocabulary development, leading to greater knowledge make the word of the child larger, During this period, the child loves to show off his new words and ever wanting to test there effect on people.
Before he reaches the age of six he must master the basic grammatical rules of the local language he speaks.
It is believed that children’s vocabulary increases rapidly between 20 words to 2000 words between the age of 18 months to 5 years.
The period 3 – 6 years, and 10 – 11 years are the period when language development is very high in children.
This is actually the period of school, i.e.
the period of pre-primary and primary education (early education)s Note that children are different in nature, some get easily excited, some don’t some get easily irritated, and some don’t.
This may affect their language development.
The differences in these developments may be normal to the child.
Now try your hand on this exercise.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Discuss the language development of children between age 2 and 5 in details.
26 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.4 Conditions and Circumstances Required for Acquisition of Language As you must have seen in our discussions of stages of language development in children, adults need to create good atmosphere/environment for the child to develop in language.
Adults should not take talking to babies as foolish things.
We should note that the voice adult is conformity to the baby and he is gradually learning from it.
As adults sings to children, he is able to recognize sounds, if he hears them often, he tries to repeat them.
The child should be given opportunity to develop his language or speech ability well.
Teachers should know the stages of language development and the conditions necessary for proper language development in children.
Children brought up in homes like motherless babies’ homes or social welfare centers don’t have adequate adult-child individualist interaction such children don’t develop their language capability well.
Children should be given opportunities to show signs of babblings, cooling and little crying that will make them develop their language easily .
The care-givers and nurses should not be like wood or stiff dolls to the children By the age of two years, when the child is already walking, adult can help them in language development by asking them to go and bring certain objects from parts of the house, class or school.
In this way,, you are helping the child to be familiar with words and thee actions associated with such words, He is also building his vocabulary.
3.5 Factors that Affect Language Development of Young Children As have been said in the concluding part of 3.3 stages of language development, there are certain factors that affect Language Development, either directly or indirectly.
Let us list the factors, but may not discuss them in details, by discussing them in details we may be going beyond the scope of this course.
However, we will talk briefly on the first two which are very relevant to our present course/program in general.
Here they are: i.
The education situation educational factors ii.
Educative methods iii Socio-economic status iv Model v Accomplishment vi Experience 27 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT vii Physical factors viii Psychological readiness ix Maturation x Intelligence xi Motivation xii Sex xiii Family size xiv Birth order xv Multiple births xvi Contact with others xvii Personality xviii Culture When you look closely at those factors, you will realize that they can all be categorize into either Hereditary or Environmental Factors (see unit 4) you may try doing this classification as a form of exercise.
Nevertheless, let’s briefly consider the first two-the educational aspect and environment in general.
3.5.1 Educational Factors It is necessary that the teacher of young children have some knowledge of the grammatical components of language like phonetics syntax semantics etc so that the type of language lessons teacher plans for children at school are relevant to the child language development.
This is why as students of early childhood education you should be taking English 101: Introduction to grammar and composition along with this course, child development.
The home language of a child is also very important to the child language development and ability to grasp the one they teach him at school.
To test how children are following a story or book, the teacher can ask them to do certain things whenever they hear some words or sentences.
They can be asked to jump, clap or shout.
It is amazing the way they do this.
In summary, the teacher of young children should note that, the child needs to develop two major language skills, and these are listening skill and spoken skill.
3.5.2 Environmental Factors Children develop speech/language ability through listening and imitating adults.
It then follows that children that live in homes where adults speak to them often and have many audio visual gadgets like Radio, 28 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Television around will develop in language faster than the one that is not so exposed.
There must be necessary things to stimulate the children.
It is necessary that children are allowed to freely interact with their environment so as to have normal speech and language development.
They should not be given unnecessary restriction..
The school environment should also be stimulating; children should know how to listen effectively to stories, rhymes and dramatic plays.
They should be allowed to say their own stories too and encouraged to read.
It follows then from this explanation and what we learnt in unit 4, under factors affecting development, that in the case of language development?
Environment and not Hereditary is more responsible for speech and language development SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
List 3 grammatical components of language: 2.
Mention 8 factors that can affect language development.
Discuss 2 of the factors.
4.0 CONCLUSION One of the complexities in Child Development is Language and Speech Development.
This type of development is a very important aspect of child development because through it, the child is able to communicate with others around him.
When the child understands words representing objects and things around him, his world becomes larger.
Language Development goes together with socialization and intellectual development.
It is in stages and can be affected by so many factors directly or indirectly.
5.0 SUMMARY Language Development brings a great change in the life of a child.
In this unit we have discussed how this can come about in the life of young children.
We highlighted functions and characteristics of language.
Conditions and circumstances that will make language development take place were explained briefly.
Factors that affect Language Development in young children were stated while we elaborated on two of the factors.
In the next unit, we shall be considering another type of Development – Motor do with the development of the system of the body and movement.
29 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Language is a means of communication it is a form of expression.
2.
Verbal means ’spoken out’ while ‘non-verbal is communication without speaking out.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 i.
Language as specific attribute of human beings ii.
Language as a medium of communication iii.
Language is a means of socialization iv.
Language as a means of exploration v Language as a medium of though vi Language is a medium of learning vii.
Language is a medium of expression viii.
Language as a means of actualizing intelligence ix.
Language is closed linked to and determine by culture.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 2 – 5 years  the child becomes a talkative  wants to know the name of everything he comes across  wants adult to sing songs and rhymes  Enjoy listening to stories  Enjoy conversation with his mates through playing  refer to himself as “I” or “me”  can now form simple sentences  like asking questions starting with “what” , “where” or “who” ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Phonetics, syntax and semantics  the education situation  model  socio economic status  experience  anti-culture  intelligence  contact with others  multiple births  personality  motivation  family size 30 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the functions of language in young children 2.
Discuss how the teacher should provide stimulating environment for pre-primary school children to have language Development.
3.
Mention the two basic language skills that a young child should possess.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinbote, O. Oduolowu E. and Lawal B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria – A Basic Text Sterling – Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ibadan.
Lee, Catherine (1977).
The Growth and Development of Children.
Longman Group London: Second Edition.
Margolin, Edythe (1976).
Young Children: Their Curriculum and Learning Process.
Macmillian Publishing Co. Inc. Sokann, B.O and Akinade E.A (1994).
Developmental Psychology.
Caltop Publications (Nigeria) Limited.
University of South Africa (1997).
Early Childhood Development.
Study Guide.
University of South Africa, Pretoria.
31 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 2 MOTOR DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Motor Development?
3.2 General Overview of Motor Development in Young Children 3.3 Stages in Motor Development in Young Children and Implications for Teachers 3.3.1 0 – 12 Months 3.3.2 1-2 Years 3.3.3 2 – 3 Years 3.3.4 3-4 Years 3.3.5 4-5 Years 3.3.6 5-6 Years 3.3.7 6-8 Years 3.4 Conditions and Cautions to be observed by Teachers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, our focus was on speech and language development in young children.
There we considered the functions and characteristics of language.
Stages of language development in young children were described and we rounded up with factors that may affect the speech and language development in young children directly and indirectly.
This present unit, will also be on another type of development.
This is Motor Development in Young Children.
we shall briefly describe what we mean by Motor Development.
We first consider a general overview of Motor Development before describing and explaining each stage in detail, while describing the stages, we will point out how the teacher can help the children to make sure they have proper and normal motor development.
32 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to:  explain motor development  identify stages of motor development in young children  appreciate stages of motor development in young children  choose appropriate environment for the different stages of motor development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Motor Development?
We have been talking about “Development” right from the beginning of this course, so we don’t need to take up the term again.
Motor is the new term now.
Motor from our common usage of the term, is something that brings about, gives or provides movement.
It follows then that when we say Motor Development, we are referring to the body systems network that leads to movement.
We can even take motor development of children as a form of physical development, since it is something we can see happening i.e.
an outward thing.
Please, note that this does not mean that motor development is the same thing as growth.
The only link between them is that both are physical in nature.
At times when describing Motor Development, as you may come across in some textbooks; it may be qualified with the word Gross i.e Gross Motor Development.
Gross here means total, so Gross Motor Development implies Body Movement in totality.
Before Motor Development can take place in a child, it means some art of the body must have developed for the process.
The two major organs of the body that is usually referred to are the bones (skeleton) and the Muscles.
Muscles are the fleshy part of the body that covers the skeleton.
The actions of this muscles on the different types of bones in our body is very important to motor development.
The muscle around the bones of children continues to grow until they become adult.
The muscle is not fully developed when they are still very young.
This is why the very young children don’t have control over the part of their body.
They easily get tired of walking or using part of the body in movement, though they also recover easily.
33 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is the meaning of Gross Motor Development 2.
The two major organs of the body used for movement are …… and …… 3.2 General Overview of Motor Development in Young Children Motor Development is usually orderly and generally follow a sequence in children.
You will remember that we mentioned cephalocaudal growth (i.e head to feet) when we were discussing assessment of growth in unit 3.
This is very applicable to motor development.
A baby lifts his head, hold it erect before he sits, he sits before he stands.
Motor growth rate starts from the inner area of the body to the outside area.
At the beginning the baby holds object without having control over his muscles, so the objects keep falling and he keeps re-picking, but gradually he overcomes this and is able to hold objects tightly.
The child begins to have milk teeth between six to eight months.
However, some babies may start as early as four (4) months (though this is not common).
By the age of 3 years, a baby has got 20 milk teeth in his mouth.
During the period pf teeth cutting, the baby experience some discomfort, pain, disturbed sleep.
The mother or caregiver, just have to be patient with the baby, because he will be restless and difficult to pet or pacify.
One way in which the adult can help him is to make sure that the has adequate feeding and maintains general cleanliness around the baby, so that the baby is not infected by any disease in this difficult time.
It is wrong to believe that the baby must always fall sick in this period except that all those activities he was enjoying before the period will be suspended or reduced.
Adult should be understanding.
However, some signs of fever, rashes etc, may be shown on him, this can easily be treated.
With the presence of teeth the child can eat solid foods unlike before; he is not able to chew easily.
But this can affect his system, so the mother, caregiver or teacher or adult around should be watchful.
3.3 Stages of Motor Development in Young Children and Implications for Teachers Infact bones are soft at early stages of life.
The bone becomes harder later, but the rate of doing this depends on the natural make up of individuals.
By the age of one year, most children have developed 3 out 34 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT of the 28 wrist and hand bones that they should have when they are adults.
Muscular development is an essential aspect of child development.
This development affects the desire of the child to move around, to enjoy high level of energy activities.
The more the muscles are used, the more it becomes stronger and ready for more future use, the bones and muscles become stronger with greater and more regular activity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Relate cephalocaudal growth in human being to motor development in children.
We will now take the motor development in children as they advance in age.
3.3.1 0 – 12 Months Before age of 6 months, the child can sit up on his own, and can hold up his head.
As he approaches age 1 year, he can hold on to a furniture to stand up.
He can try standing alone for a short period.
He tries to move forward at times, he often bends down using his knees and hands.
The fast ones may even begin to walk staggerly in this period.
He can pick up small objects between his thumbs and other fingers.
He deliberately throws them back almost immediately, and can continue to pick and throws back as long as he wishes.
The child learns about his environment as he moves around it.
He develops his sensory motor, intelligence along as well (Sensori-motor Intelligence you will get to know the meaning of this in unit 9).
He discovers things, people, squeezing or manipulating the object he comes across.
The child believes that everything around him is safe.
He is a risk-taker.
To the child a piece of broken glass or a soft sponge can equally be tasted like a food item.
The adult around him should always be on the look out for whatever the child comes in contact with.
3.3.2 1-2 Years The child can walk without assistance; he wants to move around as much as possible.
He pulls things out from any corner of the house or room or class as he plays about.
Once a baby begins to walk, he becomes so excited about it that he spends most of his time and energy on it.
35 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.3.3 2 – 3 Years This is the age of discovery and exploration.
The child is not satisfied with staying in one place.
Because he is aware of his ability to move about, he becomes an active explorer.
He can climb and jump down from furniture, he can also climb staircase.
He is energetic.
He copies the movement of adult around him.
The child can turn pages of books, able to hold pencils and crayons, can draw lines.
He wants to feed himself since he can hold the spoon and the cup, though he will waste food.
The child wants to continue testing more through walking, running climbing and walking tiptoe.
3.3.4 3-4 years The child can jump, run,, climb and balance himself.
He can also stand on one leg for a few seconds and peddles try cycle.
He has increase co- ordination of the parts of his body with ‘increased speed and strength’.
To show his new strength, he enjoys carrying, lifting, and moving heavy objects.
He loves washing hands.
Not that he wants the hands clean but only to exercise his newly acquired skill of being able to turn taps or simply to play with water, he enjoys holding slippery soap, make lather with soap and later rinse his hands and dry his fingers.
He is able to balance more blocks on top of each other then he could do before.
He can make some little sensible scribbling with crayon on a paper.
His motor activity is now becoming specialized and focused.
Hand-eye co-ordination increase.
The child can be performing with his hands and still be watching others.
The child can compare the way he carries out some activities with the way other children or adults do the activities.
The child is proud of his skills and wants to show it off.
3.3.5 4-5 years Motor skills at this stage are well developed in the child.
However there can be difference in how active children of this age group are or how much of confidence they can develop.
With the help of the adult caring for them and their ability to use all their natural endowment properly, they can control many of the more activities quite easily.
They can arrange things on a table though they may not be able to differentiate accurately between sizes of objects.
36 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.3.6 5 – 6 Years Children in this group, can skip, jump off 3 steps, catche a ball.
They concentrate on the motor skill they have mastered eg skipping a rope.
You easily observe group of children around this age at break time running, jumping, etc trying to know who is best among them.
They are not really competing but to master their skill.
During this stage, the child is ready to extend his motor development to spatial development i.e.
recognizing the difference in distance from one place to another.
To do this effectively depends on the stimulating environment the teacher provides.
3.3.7 6-8 Years The body becomes bigger, though the growth rate may not be as fast as before (see unit 2).
The muscle of the child becomes stronger.
Boys usually become stronger than girls though girls of this age can be fatter.
The child can now afford to stress the eye more to do some regular reading.
But the adult or teacher should not make the child strain the eyes too much by asking the child to read lengthy passage; this can affect the eye badly.
He should be allowed to develop interest and right attitude towards reading-on his own.
During this period, because of their advanced motor development, they enjoy doing more physical activities within their power.
They enjoy games, like to dance to music, wanting to do things with style.
The child can be restless in this stage.
Now do this exercise SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Identify 5 children of these age ranges: 2-3, 3-4, 4-5, 5-6 ad 6–8.
Observe them for a period of about 2 hours, make a list of their motor activities, in a tabular form.
3.4 Conditions and Cautions to be observed by Teachers Right from birth, children have skeleton, muscles and other parts of the body that can be used for movement.
The only thing is that this part of the body is tender and soft; they need to be developed before they can be used.
If the child is not careful, the bones can easily bend or break.
This is why it is not good to make pre-school children do certain things; they can bend of break their bones or even be deformed or have abnormal shape for life.
The sitting position of children should not be the type 37 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT that will give any side of the body too much pressure.
They should not be asked to carry heavy load or walk long distance.
The teacher can organize activities like playing with toys, crayons, sand, water, clay pencils for the sake of developing the motor skill in the nursery and lower classes.
The teacher will only make sure that the children are not engaged in activities that can harm them.
By the time the children get to age 6-9 years, the bones and muscles are fairly developed for more movement, and the children are always ready to exercise their body.
The teacher should also help them to organize reasonable activities like running, jumping, throwing, kicking and catching.
These activities however, should be monitored so that they don’t over do things.
Note that the child at every stage must be well fed and be given balanced diet.
This food must contain necessary vitamins and minerals in the proper proportion.
This is because this will influence its muscle capacity and subsequently his motor development.
A child that is not well fed can easily be noticed, because when others are trying to get involved in activities that will lead to their motor developments, he is not interested.
The teacher should inform the parents about his observation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Children are born with skeleton (the bony structure of the body), muscles and other parts of the body meant for movement.
At birth these parts of the body are soft and tender, but with the right food and appropriate activities, these parts of the body develop for motor activities.
These activities include crawling, walking, running, jumping, throwing etc .
Motor Development actually involves the developmental stages of the body as it is able to be used for movement.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have considered Motor Development in young children.
Motor development, we were told has to do with the movement of all the body and it involves the co-ordination of all parts of the body.
At the different stages of child development, he is able to perform certain motor activities; these stages were illustrated with their corresponding activities.
The teacher, we are told has an important role to play in making sure that he organizes appropriate activities for the children according to their ages and abilities.
38 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT In the next unit we are going to consider another type of child development process which is Social Development.
Social Development deals with the way the child is able to interact easily with his mates and adult effectively and for the mutual benefit of all.
One of the importance of education is socialization; the child is included.
The school environment should be conducive for social interaction.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Gross Motor Development means total body movement.
2.
The two major organs of the body used for movement are the muscle and the skeleton.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Cephalocaudal growth in human development means from head to toe; this is applicable in motor development since a baby lifts his head, hold it erect before he sites and he sits before standing.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Compare your observations with what you have in the notes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain Motor Development.
2.
Suggest 3 activities in each case that can be organized for children in the ages 3 – 5 and 6 – 7 for normal Motor Development.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinbote, O. Oduolowu E. and Lawal B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary Education in Nigeria – A Basic Text Sterling – Horden Publishers (Nig) Ibadan.
James O. Lugo and Gerald J. Hershey (1974).
Human Development New York: Macmillian Publishing Company.
Lee, Catherine (1977).
The Growth and Development of Children.
Longman Group London.
Second Edition.
Margolin, Edythe (1976).
Young Children: Their Curriculum and Learning Process.
Macmillian Publishing Co. Inc. 39 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT National Educational Technology Centre (2001).
Notes of what the care giver should know about the child.
Paper presented at NETC/UNICEF, Early Child Development and Education (ECDED) Workshop held of NETC Centre Kaduna.
Ed Nwamadi C.O NETC Kaduna.
Sokan, B.O.
Early Development and Adolescence Fig.
4.1: Sequence of Mastery of Locomotor Behaviour.
Source: Mary M Shirley, The First Two Years, Institute of Child Welfare Monograph No.
7, Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, Copyright 1933, renewed 1961 by the University of Minnesota.
40 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 3 SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT IN YOUNG CHILDREN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Social Development 3.2 Stages of Social Development in Young Children 3.2.1 0-2 Years 3.2.2 2-3 Years 3.2.3 3-6 Years 3.2.4 7-12 Years 3.3 Causes of Improper Social Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt about Motor Development in young children.
Motor Development you were told involves the movement of parts of the body, it has to do with how well the child can co-ordinate parts of the body to make regular type of movement.
Stages at which children acquire necessary skills to be able to make some definite and specific movements like walking, drawing were also highlighted.
This unit, will focus on another type of development in young children.
This is social development.
The child as a member of the society he lives in must learn and develop the acceptable pattern of behaviour in the society .The child needs social development as he grows to an adult so that he can live well and be happy in the society.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to  describe what is meant by social development  identify certain behavioural patterns expected of a growing child in the society  identify stages of social development in young children  list causes of improper social development in young children.
41 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Social Development Socialization is the process by which individual acquires some behavioural patterns, beliefs and standards that the type of people or cultural group he lives will value and appreciate.
Socialization also means being able to live like others around you and be accepted by the society.
In child development, it is a process of bringing the young ones up into the behavioural regulations of the society.
The child is born to a wide range of behavioural patterns like aggressiveness (hostile activity), selfishness, generosity, honesty, dishonest, timidity, (i.e.
easily frightened or not having self - confidence) etc.
The child, as he lives in the society develops the urge to adopt any of these behavioural patterns that is acceptable to the society.
The culture in which the child is growing usually have its own standard of behaviour, but the development or the socialization method that the child is exposed to through the agents of socialization available to the child determines what he develops to.
The possible agents of socialization are the home, the peer group, the community, the school, and the religious organizations.
It may even be difficult for the school to change some behaviour in a child if the home and/or his peer group (the type of friends he moves with) have solidly built a kind of behaviour in him.
This is why it may be necessary to move some children from one place to another if they are found to be developing negatively to the way of life acceptable by the society.
One of the problems people face in their life is how to manage their feeling.
Socialization process and development provide ways of doing this.
In early childhood education, the child is taught how to cope with some constraints (not always having his way) at the same time he is allowed to express his feelings of anger, hostility or jealousy.
The child becomes socialized when he learns to behave in the ways expected of him by the people who look after him.
He has to behave in a way typical of other children of his age and of the general culture.
The society teaches us, through our interaction with others, how to behave.
These others, for a child may be the child's parent, sisters/brothers, teacher’s etc.
The child is taught how and when to feel guilty, be ashamed, be angry, be happy, be proud etc.
The child therefore needs sufficient care of the adult.
In most cases it is the mother or the teacher.
The child gets used to eating the kind of the 42 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT food they eat around him and is also given toilet training.
While interacting with the child the adult should be careful not to react to the child based on his frustration or any unpleasant state of mind.
The child is helpless.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is socialization?
2.
Agents of socialization to a child are………, … ,…….. and … 3.
Some behavioural pattern that a child will have to adopt from the society included …………, ………….., ……… and……….
3.2 Stages of Social Development in Young Children From Birth to the age of three (3) years, children want their parent to play with them.
They want attention, time active co-operation and encouragement.
They prefer these to any number of expensive toys.
They cannot understand why their mother should leave them alone.
They want to socialize with their mother.
However at another stage of their life they are able to play and interact with other member of the society, as they like.
Some stages can be identifying in the social development activity of the child, as he grows in age, here are some of such stages: 3.2.1 0-2 Years At the beginning the child is self-centered although he responds to others when they play with him.
But gradually as the child reaches the sensory-motor stage (see unit 6 and unit 9), he begins to socialize (enjoy playing) with people especially with other children like him.
The child co-operates to be dressed but would not like dressing to last long.
3.2.2 2-3 Years The child has got little experience in his interaction with people, because of this he easily get annoyed in this stage.
The child cries for every minor unpleasant thing like just saying you are not playing with him, when he wishes to play with you.
Though children at this stage, easily get over such feelings.
In this stage, the child can now differentiate between members of his family and others.
He wants to do so many things and learn to do what he can not do, but it appears adults are always saying 'No' to him, so he himself wants to say "No" to adults, he wants to be allowed to do what he likes to do.
43 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT The child is interested in the effect of his behaviour on others.
He also wants to assert himself to say, "This is me" he attracts people to himself if he is rejected by adult it can cause anxiety or even rebellion from him.
Though the child may be selfish in this stage, he still plays with his mates.
He can be indifferent or be submissive to others.
Children at this stage are not cruel or aggressive; they remain lovable if they are loved.
3.2.3 3-6 Years The child is ripe enough to enjoy the companion of others.
He likes to make good relationship with other children of his age.
He also plays with his brothers and sisters.
The child is still after satisfying himself but also believes in sharing.
He tells a great deal of stories about himself.
He prefers to play in a group instead of playing alone or with anyone person.
He is co-operative and friendly.
He shows protection towards younger brothers or sisters and playmates.
He defends the right of his brothers and sisters if there is need for it.
The child desires to win approval from others.
His conversation changes from protest to wishes and description of events and actions, he seeks mutual interest from other children and adults.
He identifies his own sex, and loves to play with other children of his own sex.
Girls go with girls, boys go with boys.
He also loves being with his parents.
Children in this age show self-reliance, trustworthiness and friendly co-operation with adults 3.2.4 7-12 Years The child can now understand and obey rules and regulations.
In addition, children of this age group, exhibits the following: i.
Watches television with rapt attention.
ii.
Read a lot, enjoy stories about themselves.
Iii Depend less on adult except for specific help.
iv.
Enjoy acting dramatic play v. Enjoy doing group work while adult is supervising and acting as neutral person.
vi.
Can be violent or rebellious when excited by irresponsible adults.
vii.
Enjoy team game.
44 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT viii.
Mix well with opposite sex, but very much aware of own sex; can sometimes choose to go to own sex.
ix.
As they get near II or 12 can be friendly and co-operative with adults.
Teachers can help these children by making sure that they are provided with rich academic environment; provide books, music and creative materials for them.
They should be made to trust and be independent of adults around them.
They should be provided with opportunity to learn about the real world and opportunity for games as well.
3.3 Causes of Improper Social Development in Young Children Children can show evidence of improper social development in different forms at school.
In most cases these improper behaviour can be traced to the environment at home.
It has been shown from the study of child development that a child may not be sharing proper social development if 1.
His parents are illiterate 2.
His parents are poor 3.
His parents are backward looking 4.
The child is not given adequate food.
5.
The child is given little or no medical attention at home 6.
There is no provision of learning facilities etc.
Such children, apart from not doing well in school subjects, they also become unruly i.e.
difficult to control.
A sympathetic and patient teacher can help the child by giving a child like that, special and additional attention.
There is nothing a child can do about his background, but a good teacher can make the child feel like other children at school.
If one of the problems is negative attitude from parents, a good teacher can speak to the parents to create a form of encouragement to the child at home The best way, by which the teacher can also help, is to see himself as a teacher, a parent, a detective and a friend to the child.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Suggest 2 activities each that you believe children of ages 2-3,3-6 and 7-12 will enjoy doing.
45 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 2.
Identify a child around you that is showing improper social development considering his age.
State the improper behaviour and find out the cause of the behaviour.
4.0 CONCLUSION Socialization is one of the reasons for sending children to school.
The child needs to behave in such a way that he will be acceptable by the society.
Children going by their nature, develop socially into the system gradually.
There are some specific behavioural patterns they show as they advance in age.
Teachers however need to monitor them so that they behave according to the norms (i.e.
normal expectation) of the society.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt about the social development in young children.
Socialization you are told is being able to live like others around you and be accepted by them.
Different behavioural patterns expected of young growing children were listed and you are told what may make a child not to grow according to the expectations of the society.
In the next unit, we are going to consider another similar developmental process in young children.
This is emotional and psychological development.
This has to do with feelings of the child, like social character's it also goes in stages and certain factors may prevent proper development of it also in children.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Socialisation is a process whereby an individual acquires some behaviour patterns, beliefs and standards that the type of people or cultural group in which he lives with, value and appreciate.
2.
Some behavioural pattern that a child will have to adopt from in the society includes aggressiveness, timidity, honesty, and dishonesty.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
2-3 years old child will enjoy (i) Crying for every minor unpleasant things (ii) Wants to do so many things (iii) Wants to assert himself (any two).
46 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 2.
3-6 years old child will enjoy (i) to make good relationship with other children of his age.
(ii) Playing with brothers and sisters (iii) Enjoy saying a lot about himself (any 2) 3.
7-12 years child will enjoy i Watching television will rapt attention ii Depends less on adults except for specific help.
iii Enjoy acting dramatic play (any two of what we have in 3.2.4) 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss in details, the type of social behaviour pattern expected of children between primary 3 to primary 6 in a primary school.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinbote, S., Oduolowu E.; Lawal B.
(2001).
Pre-primary and Primary Education I. Nigeria.
A basic Text.
Sterling-Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ibadan.
Ayodele, S.O; Araromi, M.A; Adeyoju C.A.
and Isiugo-Abanihe I.
(1995).
Methods of Classroom Teaching.
Educational Resources and Study Group.
Institute of Education.
University of Ibadan.
Ibadan.
Indria Gandhi National Open University (1998).
Growth and Development PGDMCH-5 School of Health Sciences.
Indria Gandhi National Open University.
Lee, Catherine (1977).
The Growth and Development of Children 2nd edition.
Longman Group Limited London and New York.
Margdolin, Edythe (1976).
Young Children - Their Curriculum and Learning Processes.
Macmillan Publishers Co. the New York Collier Macmillan Publishes London.
National Educational Technology Centre (2001): Notes on What The Care Giver should Know About the Child.
Paper Presented of NETC/UNICEF Early Childhood Development and Education ECCDE Workshop held at NETC center Kaduna.
Edited by Nwamadi C.O.
NETC Kaduna.
47 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 4 EMOTIONAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT IN YOUNG CHILDREN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Emotional and Psychological Development 3.2 Stages of Emotional and Psychological Development in Young Children 3.2.1 0-12 Months 3.2.1 1-2 Years 3.2.3 2-3 Years 3.2.4 3-6 Years 3.2.5 7-11 Years 3.3 Causes and Possible Solutions to Improper Emotional and Psychological Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you learnt about the Social Development in young children.
There we talked about the need for the young child to adapt to the behavioural pattern in the society he lives in so that his behaviour can be acceptable in the society.
Stages of Social Development and causes of improper development were explained.
In this unit we will be discussing a similar kind of development.
This is called Emotional and Psychological Development.
Emotions have to do with our state of inner feeling, like feeling of joy or feeling of fear.
We shall also describe the various stages children get to in this regard.
We shall also mention some causes of improper emotional development and the implication for the teachers or adults who are bringing up the world.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to  explain what is meant by emotional and psychological development  identify stages of emotional or psychological development in young children  list causes of improper emotional development.
48 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Emotional and Psychological Development Before we go into our discussion proper, let me simply clarify what we mean by Emotion or Psychology.
In simple language emotion is the excited inner feelings of a person; it can be feeling of joy, feeling of fear etc.
Psychology is simply a person's mental make up.
At times we even use the terms as if they mean the same thing.
However the two usually go together.
You will get to know more of the term psychology in a course you will be doing later in this programme.
Psychology is study as a Social Sciences course just like Economics and Geography that you are used to.
You will enjoy studying the Psychology of education and there you will understand the meaning of emotional or psychological feelings the more, it can be very interesting to study.
In our normal discussion we sometimes say at somebody is mature or not mature enough for certain activities.
What we mean here is that the person is or not developed enough for such task.
Here we may not be referring to the physical appearance alone, but the in built feeling of the person is not ripe enough for such a thing.
For example, there is a limit to and degree of how people can accept failure.
Some after experiencing failure in a certain thing; can easily adjust and continue with life, some may not be able to recover quickly.
The same thing too with success, the way people show it may overdo thing that the success may be followed by a bad thing again.
In academic knowledge we call things like this emotional or Psychological Readiness of developments Stone, a psychologist has called the type of development described above a process or organic growth towards maturity.
Organic here means something of internal actions of a living body.
Vatsa, another psychologist, said maturation in this regard is a complex of biological process that guide development.
It is generally accepted that both the maturation of certain part of the body (hereditary or natural in-built of a person) and environment affect how a child develops or acquire the skill to perform certain task.
It is believed that naturally the parts of the body that will perform certain task must be developed before environment then selectively dictates the direction and the timing of the development.
For example if the brain is not developed, how can a child understand the feeling he is receiving or expressing?
The kind of emotional development that takes place in young children continues to affect their lives in later childhood days in the area of intellectual and social development and even in their development of personality.
49 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Emotional feelings is ------------------------ 2.
By psychology we mean ------------------------------- 3.
Why do we need to monitor a child's emotional development?
3.2 Stages of Emotional and Psychological Development in Young Children Emotional or psychological development unlike other developmental process cannot easily be divided into stages, it is continuous and can be very fast in some periods and slow in some other periods and different in the way children show it.
For example a five year old, may be so developed intellectually, language wise, but still be crying for minor things like a two year old baby.
Similarly we can have a girt of about 5 years as well who calmly act as mother to others in her age group.
There may be another case of a ten year old girl who has got to puberty (i.e.
develop characteristics like adolescent-having breast or menstruating), among other ten-year old girl who had not got to this stage.
Emotionally she may be behaving differently from these other girls; she will be more moody and restless.
Some children will grow up to be taller or shorter than their mates while others may grow cleverer or be better tempered or more optimistic than their mates.
However we shall still describe some landmarks which those who are studying child development had brought to our attention as follows: 3.2.1 0-12 Months At this stage, the baby is happy, confident, friendly, no longer suspect strangers, eager to co-operate with anyone ready to play with him.
He is curious and is easily distracted by new things.
He can play happily alone if he is sure the mother is nearby.
3.2.1 1-2 Years At about one year old or shortly before it the child cries more when the mother leaves him.
He will even cry harder if he is comforted by a stranger.
50 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT The baby does not like being frustrated or denied of what he wants, he screams then, but it is easy to distract his attention with new things.
He becomes suspicious of people in this stage even those that he was tolerating before.
When the child begins to make his first reasonable movement, i.e.
being able to crawl, walk, and talk (see sensori-motor stage in unit 6 and unit 9) he is able to establish a kind of attachment to his mother or any adult that is usually around him.
As the child reaches age two he has developed motor and language skill to some extent.
Giving by his body make up, he is socially and emotionally ready for early childhood education, at least the pre-primary level where he can mix with his kind of people and learn to control his feeling among his age group.
Some schools don't want to accept children of this age; they believe that they are too young to cope with; they can be put in the preparatory or play group.
3.2.3 2-3 Years The child is loving and responsive, but always wanting to have his own way.
He can wake up from sleep and just be screaming with fear, he needs to be reassured and comforted.
The child in this stage is afraid of the dark, even domestic pets that he has known before can frighten him.
Note that the child in this stage, does not know the difference between dream and reality.
3.2.4 3-6 Years There is a decrease in the number of times he uses physical emotional expressions.
For instance, he can now use language to show his anger, he doesn't have to cry or shout.
Children in this stage can fairly control their emotions but as he reaches age of six, he can be unstable with his emotion.
The child at this stage may hate what he has liked before, but gradually changes again.
The child does not fear strange situations and persons but develops relative increase in the fear of imaginary creatures in the dark and serious bodily harm.
51 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT As they approach age five or shortly after five, they can be boastful and wanting to show off.
Teachers need experience to understand them in this stage, the teacher should use the time to give them more challenging task to do.
The teachers then give them only genuine praise and encouragement so that he can render their boastfulness useless.
At six, the child tends to be self-centered, irritable and aggressive.
However, they can still be loving, friendly and co-operative all the same.
The child at this stage is very curious and finds it difficult to accept failure and frustrations.
3.2.4 7-11 Years The following emotional development can be observed in the children of this age bracket: 1.
Self critical, (wanting to know how good he is) 2.
More stable with emotion.
(can control their feelings) 3.
Can be moody and dissatisfied at times though they gradually gets over this kind of feeling.
4.
Knows the difference between fact and fantasy (cannot be fooled easily).
5.
Cannot control his own energy (i.e.
always wanting to do things beyond their energy).
6.
Can become overtired and irritable (since they sometime overwork themselves).
7.
Emotionally not dependent on adult.
8.
Is satisfied with intellectual activities (i.e.
what can task his brain/thinking) 9.
Enjoys physical activities 10.
Can be anxious against ineffective adults.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Observe a group of 4 children; make record of their actions to situations.
You can tabulate your findings based on their ages.
State the period of time that you make your observation.
3.3 Causes and Possible Solution to Improper Emotional and Psychological Development Some children at times may be noticed not to be able to control their emotions.
At times one would expect that they should have outgrown certain emotional problems.
They are expected to have shed the effect of some problem they go through in their very 52 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT early life.
Some children when they grow to an adult you still notice such emotional problem in them.
A ten year old child for example is not expected to continue to show signs of dissatisfaction to a thing for too long.
You don't expect a five year girl to always get angry over a minor thing or shed tears so easily.
A psychologist, Deniss Child, while reporting on the work of a committee that studied human behaviour, categorised emotional disorders into: a.
Nervous disorder- fears, anxiety, timidity.
b.
Habit disorder -speech defect, day dreaming, bed-wetting c. Behavioural disorder- speech defect, stealing, lying d. Organic disorder -head injuries, brain tumors, epilepsy.
e. Psychotic disorder -delusions (deceiving oneself, bizarre behaviours (unusual or weird behaviours) f. Educational and vocational difficulties -inability to concentrate, slow learning etc.
Sine emotional problems are many and different; their causes are also many and different, in nature.
When a teacher notices any of this behaviour in children, he should find out what may be the cause.
it could be from home; from the child’s peers (i.e.
his playmates at school) or even the teacher himself may be the cause.
If the child is not getting enough affection from the people he believes they love him, or he is having feeling of insecurity, he may be having emotional problems.
If the teacher traces the cause of improper emotional development to the home of the child, he can discuss the issue with the parents.
In this way both the teacher and the parent can think of solution to the problem together.
To sum up what the teacher can do to help the child put in his care, is that the teacher should see himself as a parent, a doctor, a detective and above all a friend to the child.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
List the 6 categories of emotional disorders in human beings.
2.
Suggest one way by which a teacher can help a child to overcome a named improper emotional or psychological development.
53 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION Emotional or psychological development is one of the dimensions of development in children.
Emotional development is concerned with the process of feelings and reactions of children to.
situations around them.
Like other types of development in children, the child has to learn to control his feeling to others.
It also goes in stages though the stage is not so easy to mark out.
There can however be cases of improper development in children.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed emotional psychological development in young children.
Emotion you are told is the expression of the inner feeling of a person and that psychology is the mental make up of a person.
Emotional development is a process, which advances as the child increases in age.
A child that has always been fearful and considers loneliness a nightmare, gradually grow to be independent and able to manage his feelings without bursting into crying all the time.
Emotional development causes in stages.
You are also told that there can be improper or disordered development at times.
In the next chapter, we shall be taking another interesting developmental process in children.
This is intellectual or cognitive development.
Intelligence has to do with the reasoning, thinking and judging pattern of individual.
In young children the intellectual development takes place in a sequential manner.
This means that the changes in every stage are a continuation of the changes that have taken place in the stage before it.
We will also discuss how the type of academic task to be given to children at each stage must be selected so that they are relevant to the child intellectual stage.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Emotional feelings are the way of expressing the inner reactions to a particular thing.
2.
By psychology we mean a person's mental make up 3 It is necessary to monitor a child's emotional development so that it will be easy to detect when he is not developing well in this respect and likely try to help the child.
We should note that the type of emotional development in a young child continues to affect his life in later childhood days in the area of intellectual social and personality development.
54 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Nervous disorder 2.
Habit disorder 3.
Behaviourial disorder 4.
Psychotic disorder 5.
Organic disorder 8.
Educational and vocation of difficulties.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Fear in 8-year-old child Solution: Teacher gives child confidence; tries to assure the child that no danger can come his way.
OR Boastfulness Solution: Teacher gives more challenging task and genuine praise where necessary.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the emotional changes that can be observed in children of primary 1 to primary 3 in a primary school.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinbote, S., Oduolowu E.; Lawal B.
(2001).
Pre-primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
A Basic Text.
Stirling-Horden Publishers (Nig.)
Ibadan.
Ayodele, S.O; Araromi, M.A; Adeyoju C.A.
and Isiugo-Abanihe I.
(1995).
Methods of Classroom Teaching.
Educational Resources and Study Group.
Institute of Education.
University of Ibadan.
Ibadan.
Indria Gandhi National Open University (1998).
Growth and Development PGDMCH-5 School of Health Sciences.
Indria Gandhi National Open University.
Lee, Catherine (1977).
The Growth and Development of Children 2nd edition.
Longman Group Limited London and New York.
55 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Margolin, Edythe (1976).
Young Children-There Curriculum and Learning Processes.
Macmillan Publishers Co., the New York Collier Macmillan Publishes London.
National Educational Technology Centre (2001): Notes on what The Care Giver should know About The Child.
Paper Presented of NETC/UNICEF Early Childhood Development and Education ECCDE Workshop held at NETC center Kaduna.
Edited by Nwamadi C.O.
NETC Kaduna.
56 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 5 INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT IN YOUNG CHILDREN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Intellectual Development 3.1.1 What is Intelligence?
3.1.2 Some Works on Intelligence 3.1.3 Intellectual Development 3.2 Stages of Intellectual Development 3.2.1 The Sensori-Motor 3.2.2 Pre-Operational 3.2.3 Concrete Operation 3.2.4 Formal 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the past four units, we have been discussing different and specific types of development in young children.
We have had Motor Developments, Language and speech Development, Social and finally Emotional and Psychological Development.
You would have realized that these development processes are not totally unique or separate they are all related to one another.
In the last unit we talk about emotional and psychological development as the process a child goes through whereby he learns and grows to control his feelings.
The process is a continuous one though we described them in stages just for clarity as the child grows in age.
In this unit, we shall take another form of development in young children for discussion.
This is intellectual development in young children, since intellectual development implies the growth of the child level of intelligence.
Definite stages involved shall be discussed one after the other.
57 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define the term intelligence  mention environmental factors that affect intelligence  explain intellectual development  identify the four stages of intellectual development as illustrated by Piaget  recognise the intellectual characteristics of a child in each stage of intellectual development  suggest ways of helping the child to have adequate intellectual development.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Intellectual Development Like it is always said at the beginning of every unit, in the past four units, 'Development' is a term you are used to already.
The new word here is Intellectual, which comes from the word Intelligence.
It will be appropriate then to define the word intelligence.
3.1.1 What is Intelligence?
Intelligence is a mental power.
We say a person is intelligent, if the person shows sign of smartness, wisdom, and quick for understanding things etc.
However in an academic setting of this nature, we need to give the definitions that have been given by scholars or experts in the educational matters.
Here we go: Wechsler: Intelligence is the aggregate of the global capacity of the individual to act purposefully.
Guilford and Piaget: It is the ability to profit from experience, the ease with which a child learns a new idea on a new set of behaviours and the limit to which a person might profit from experience.
Whatever definition we give to intelligence, it is determined by both Hereditary and Environment.
A child may be born with all necessary ingredients as a very intelligent person, but if the kind of environment he is exposed to does not suit his development, he may not be able to develop this intelligent capability in him.
There are some environmental factors that will determine how much of the in-built intelligence in a person (a child) will develop, some of these are: 58 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT (i) The diet of the mother during pregnancy (ii) The diet of the child in his first few months of life.
(iii) Cultural rearing practices (iv) Socio-economic status of the parent SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define the term intelligence 2.
State the two major factors that can affect intelligence 3.
Mention 3 environmental factors that influence intelligence 3.1.2 Some Works on Intelligence Alfred Binet (a French Psychologist) Benjamin Bloom (an American Psychologist and Jean Piaget (a Swiss Psychologist) are the world most prominent social scientist who have done so much study on intelligence that there is not how we talk about intelligence that we will not refer to their studies.
Binet was known most for his famous Binet Intelligence test and Piaget for the work he did on stages of intelligence development, he called it mental operations.
Bloom showed with evidences that 80% of a person’s intelligence at age 17 had developed as at age 8.
Binet Intelligence test was first used in France to identify how much children can gain from a learning instruction.
He did this then because of the over-crowded public schools that was in France.
He gave the test to identify the duller i.e.
the mentally retarded who could not gain anything from what the teacher was teaching them.
The main reason for the test then was to find a way of reducing the number of children in public schools, those who could not cope, were then taken out of school and were placed somewhere else.
Intelligence test does not suggest how a teacher can teach but only to tell the teacher those who cannot learn well.
But teachers can use it to plan the method of teaching, by knowing the highly intelligent students, the teacher gives them more tasking (challenging) things or exercise to do, and to the low intelligent he tries to come down to their level most of the time so that they can also gain something from the teaching.
After Binet intelligence test, there has been so many other, countless number of intelligence tests that people develop and use for different purpose.
we will not bother you with these in this course, you will come to them in the course on Psychology of Education.
59 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Piaget worked on---------------------------- and he called it ---------- 2.
What was the primary purpose of Binet intelligence test?
3.
How much of a person’s intelligence is developed by the age of 8?
3.1.3 Intellectual Development in Young Children Before we talk about this, let us draw your attention to one word Cognitive.
Sometimes we find some books saying cognitive development instead of intellectual development.
Sometimes you here cognitive domain or cognitive level.
Cognitive has to do with knowing (or quality of thinking).
The term is sometimes used like intelligence.
When we want to describe the level of knowledge of a person, the rate of understanding new things, if somebody is so good at all, we refer to such person as having a high cognitive level.
Now coming back to what we want to discuss- Intellectual Development.
Piaget's work (study) on intelligence was more popular than that of Binet.
Piaget wrote many books on various aspects of his findings.
His general submission is that there are four separate stages in the intellectual or cognitive development.
The period never varies in arrangement except that the age at which we start noticing the different/stages may be different in children.
Some may be early, while others may be late.
Each stage is a continuation of the changes in the last stage before it.
Piaget's work is more relevant to us especially with the kind of categories or divisions he found out in his study.
They are most relevant to the primary school setting.
But the stages are not so distinct (stand out) there is a wide range in the ages.
Piaget's work tells us about the various stages of intellectual development in children, from which we can kn how to plan our teaching methods and what we should expect from the children at every stage.
According to piaget there are 4 stages of intellectual development in children, and these are: i.
The sensori motor (0-2 years) ii.
Pre-operational (2-6 or 2- 7 years) iii.
Concrete operation (6-11 or 7-12 years) iv.
Formal operation (11 onwards or 12 onwards) 60 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Piaget believed that there must have been some biological development of the body before the 9 stages can set in.
To him, we human beings are biological organisms (living things, who must find ways of sitting into the environment so that we can survive.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Intellectual Development is the same thing as cognitive development.
Yes or No?
List the stages of Intellectual Development in Young children.
3.2 Stages of Intellectual Development 3.2.1 Sensori-Motor Stage (0-2 year).
You will recall that we mentioned this term in Unit 6 under motor development.
This is the stage when the child can now begin to sense his action (sensori) and his movement is no longer unconscious -sensori- motor.
Before this stage the child was moving parts of his body unconsciously.
By the age of one, the child has established a clear idea of the part of his body, he can locate his eyes, nose, ears etc.
He can recognize familiar things and he expect those things to be there even when he is not looking.
He can also recognize familiar face of people and to him they continue to exist around him even when they are not there.
He can shake his playing rattle to produce familiar sounds.
The child tends to be experimenting with each new ability as it appears to him.
Gradually in this stage, the child can co-ordinate his hand and eye.
He learns to crawl, walk and talk (motor activities).
He is able to solve the problem of having to stay in one place wherever they put him) unlike before, since he can not move.
.
As the child uses language to communicate and label objects, people or experiences around him (see unit 6), it is easy for him to understand and remember the things happening around him.
3.2.2 Pre-Operational Stage (2-6 or 2-7 years) The child is still self-centered and much like before initiates actions of others especially adult.
He can now talk with considerate sense in what he says.
The child in this stage, can think of idea in relation to words, but he can not understand relationship.
He can not still think rationally.
He treats objects as symbols of another, e.g.
he can take a stick as a car or a gun.
61 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT He passes judgments based on how an object looks alone, a taller thing is also the bigger one.
It is difficult for him to relate two properties, he can only sort objects according to shape or colour or size or part of the whole.
For example, if the child in this stage is asked to pick from two cups containing food drinks, he picks the taller cup, believing that it must contain more than the other.
As far as he is concerned the tallest person is the oldest person, and the biggest thing is the best.
You will hear such a child referring to a taller mate in the school as being older.
Because of the child's lack of rational thinking, he can not adapt to another person's point of view.
Children in this stage also talk through problems, when counting for example, he counts loud while calculating even when he is alone.
He can concentrate on a particular task that he is interested and not allowing any distractions.
By the age of 4, he should be able to differentiate between right and left, count few numbers and name familiar objects.
By the age of 5, he should be able to move according to music, draw or copy shapes, wash part of his body or comb his heir.
Like we mentioned in unit 6, on motor development, this is the period when they have relative control over their muscles, can write and draw simple objects.
This is their pre-primary school age, preparing for primary school proper.
The child ask questions a lot, they want to gather information and get to know the reasons for many things.
They want to know the answers to many things that is like a puzzle to them.
3.2.3 Concrete Operations (6-11 or 7-12years) This is the primary school stage proper, though some children nowadays start primary school earlier.
The children can think sensibly though not of abstract things.
They can now understand relationship to some extent.
They can understand and obey rules and regulations.
They argue a lot with each other, probably trying to test their understanding of things.
They however accept the authority of adult.
They can reason on part of the whole and the whole of something at the same time in this stage.
For example, they can understand sharing things equally, or according to age or other parameter.
There is a lot of difference in their understanding of now than before.
The school can introduce them to different school subjects and games; they have the energy and intellectual development to cope with them.
The child's 62 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT intellectual development at this age is very high, they are very sensitive to the environment and as such many activities can be prescribed for them.
They learn best by participating in skill development rather than being told about them.
Children in this stage need different activities to help them to be able to classify objects people, and events around them.
If you will recollect (see 3.1.2) Bloom said 80% of the individual development of a problem of a person as he attained the age of 17, had occurred between age 0 and 8 years.
It follows then that the intelligence of cognitive character of a child by the time he becomes an adult, is going to have its foundation strongly built in this stage of intellectual development.
What the child learns in this period is therefore very important.
3.2.4 Formal Operations (11 or 12 onwards) At this stage, children can now be seen as big boys or big girls.
They can now think about abstract things.
They can think of ways of solving problems.
They can understand subject like mathematics now and be able to think of solving complex problem.
They try to explore ideas.
They think systematically and rationally now.
They, also think about future, they plan for the future.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Which of these stages do you count as most significant in the intellectual development of the child?
Give reasons for your answer.
2.
In what ways can the knowledge of child’s intellectual development relate to what we ask them to do in schools?
4.0 CONCLUSION Intellectual Development of young children involves understanding the skills and concept needed for reasoning, problem solving, spatial development etc.
Adults and Teachers in particular can help develop this skill even by engaging the children in games from where they can be familiar with meanings of terms.
The duty rests on the teacher to use his/her discretion to know the children his/her care, their age and the kind of activity they can learn effectively from, he should plan for what can give them maximum development.
We should also note that a good intellectual development also allows for healthy serial development.
63 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have treated another major aspect of child development, that is intellectual development.
You are given some simple definitions of intelligence as given by some famous psychologists.
The works of three out of the numerous people who had studied intellectual development in human beings were mentioned as it relates to our topic.
The various stages of intellectual Development in young children were also described, so that as teachers will know what type of activities to plan for the children of each stage.
In the next chapter which is the last chapter of this module, we shall focus on the spiritual development in young children.
There we will talk about the religious and moral development of the child.
The criteria for suitable spiritual study for children will be mentioned and how the children can be taught to pray.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Intelligence is the aggregate of the global capacity of the individual to act purposefully.
OR any other definition provided the name of scholar who propose the definition as given OR any reasonable definition of the term.
Hereditary and environment.
i The diet of the mother during pregnancy ii The diet of the child in his first few months of life.
iii Cultural rearing practices iv Socio-economic status of parent ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Piaget worked on Stages of Intellectual Development and he called it Mental Operations.
The Primary Purpose of Binet Intelligence Text was to reduce the number of students in over-crowded public schools in France during his time to 80%.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Yes The sensori-motor (0-2 years) Pre-operational stage 2-6 or 2- 7 years Concrete Operation Stage 6-11 or 11-12 years.
Formal operation stage (11-15 or 11 onwards or 12 onwards).
64 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Concrete Operation Stage Even from the name 'concrete' this is the stage when children can really think deep what they experience.
They can now understand relationship and can pass reasonable judgment on things.
And according to Benjamin Bloom this is time they develop about 80% of their intelligence when they take to adulthood.
It is like the final stage of foundation of intellectual development in the child.
The time the "concrete" is made.
2.
The knowledge of the child intellectual development guides us to know what kind of activity and environment to provide for the child.
We also know the limitations of the child at different stages-child at different stages.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do we mean by "lack of rational thinking"?
2.
Intellectual development of a child is strongly affected by both hereditary and environment.
Yes ors No?
Give reasons for your answer.
3.
Outline 4 characteristics behaviour of a child in the pre-primary school that or evidences of the child's level of intellectual development.
6.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Akinbote, S., Oduolowu E., Lawal, B., (2001).
Pre-primary and Primary Education in Nigeria - A Basic Text.
Stirling Horden Publishers Nigeria.
Ibadan.
Alhassan, A.B.
(2000).
Understanding Educational Psychology.
Tamaza Publishing Company Ltd. (ISBN: 978 -2104 -28-0.
Ayodele, Araromi, M.A.
Adeyoju, C.A; Isiugo-Abanike I.
(1995).
Methods of Classroom Teaching, Educational Research and Study Group.
Institute of Education, University of Ibadan.
Child, D. (1981).
Psychology and the Teachers, London: Hold Reinchart and Winston, 3rd Edition.
65 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Lee, Catherine (1997).
The Growth and Development of Children.
Longman Group London Margolin, Edythe (1976).
Young Children - their Curriculum and Learning Process.
Macmillan Publishing Company.
Inc. New York: London.
Sokan, B.O.
and Akinade E.A.
(1994).
Developmental Psychology.
Caldop Publication (Nigeria) Limited.
66 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 6 SPIRITUAL DEVELOPMENT IN YOUNG CHILDREN CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Need for Realism 3.2 Spiritual Development in Young Children 3.3 Spiritual Stories for Young Children 3.4 The Young Child's Prayer 4.0.
Conclusion 5.0.
Summary 6.0.
Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0.
References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This is the last unit in this module.
The module focuses on the various types of Development in Young Children.
The last unit before this was on Intellectual Development in Young Children.
There you learnt about what the term 'Intelligence' means.
Some great people who had done a lot of work in intellectual or cognitive development were mentioned.
The various stages of intellectual development were discussed in four divisions.
In this chapter, you are going to learn about the spiritual development of young children.
The spiritual development of young children like the social and emotional development is a thing of the mind, it is not something that can easily be explained, it has to do with behaviour and feeling of the child which must be in agreement with the culture of his People.
You will be given the description and some criterion that you can choose for suitable material to help the child have an acceptable spiritual development 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you should be able to  appreciate the need to help the child to develop spiritually  describe the religious development of a young child  list four criteria for choosing suitable spiritual study materials for the young child  describe the prayer life of a young child.
67 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.1 The Need for Religion People practice religion so as to be able to understand the meaning of life.
Religion is therefore used as a means of making sense of the reality and concerns of human life.
People clearly have a natural need for religions and they find it easy to accept religion because to them it gives them the meaning of life.
The practice of religion may however be in different forms.
We can have the Christian religion, Islamic religion (the worship of Ogun, Ifa.
Oshun etc.
and some other forms of the religion which can best be described by those who practice the particular form of religion.
Christians (followers of Christ) for example believe in a spiritual destiny, that is they believe that their life has a specific spiritual purpose and that there is a Heavenly Father (God) who guards over and guides their actions, i.e.
acting like a guardian and a protector.
The Muslims (those who practice the Islamic religion) also have a similar belief of Allah, the one and the only indivisible Supreme Being who created everything, they believe he sees them everywhere, guards and protects them.
Likewise the Traditionalist believes in one special spiritual being or another as a god that they can lay their wishes and desires to and expect the good to help them out.
The people take religion as a special spiritual way of getting a sense of purpose and peace of mind which they would like to share with their children as part of their cultural heritage (sense of being a member of community who share the same values and beliefs) in order to ensure the same religious certainty for them.
Young children are always looking and waiting for answer to questions because they have a questioning attitude to life.
They want to know and find out about things and are ready to receive answers because they are open to the world, and they are ready to start a relationship with the things and the people in their life, and also with God /Allah a god.
As human beings the children are naturally ready to accept religion and can understand the idea that adults have the Deity or a deity (i.e.
a divine special being).
The way in which religion and its meaning are presented to children therefore has considerable influence on the development and what they think of this idea in their minds.
It also influences their general development to proper maturity .As the children continue to grow socially, emotionally and cognitively they form their own image or conception of God/Allah/ a god.
68 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Adults should note that as young children grow and develop in different aspect of development, they are exposed to many possibilities, so they need help to have spiritual development.
They need adult guidance in the form of spiritual teaching or education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 (1) What is Religion?
Name the forms of religion (2) Give 3 reasons why children, like adults need religion 3.2 Spiritual Development in Young Children It is generally believed that children's relationship with world around them is mainly emotional.
Young children still have very little experience of the word and learn mainly through their body (remember sensori-motor in unit 6 and unit 9), and through their emotional life.
Young children learn mainly from what they can feel within their body system.
Their emotional life (emotions) still dominates their thinking.
Take note that children begins to enjoy stories from age 2, though with little or no meaning to them.
Parents and teachers can begin to read short happy stories for them from this age onward from the Holy Books (The Bible or the Holy Quarans etc).
The three year old, for example have a particular need for security and safety .With this emotional feelings therefore the Biblical or other spiritual stories teachers and parents tell children should have happy ending.
You should not tell them stories that will make them feel more unsafe.
The three year old children again are very much self-centered, (i.e concerned with themselves only) have just discovered themselves as persons in their own right with a separate existence apart from being members of their family.
They are just starting to see things as separate from other things and want to consider each thing in its respective looks.
The three year old child sees God/ Allah /a god as a figure that is like his father.
To such a person if you want him to understand God refer to him as 'God' and not 'Father' because this can be confusing to the child.
Still a child of about three year old; before you can tell such a child about the love of God/Allah/a god.
You must first make him experience love within the family or class.
The concept of love should therefore be made clear to them first as part of the requirement of living in this world.
The young child should also be made to experience trust and belief in their parents or any adult they are used to (i.e.
learn that they can believe and trust them); before one can talk of trust and believing in God/ 69 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Allah/a god.
Therefore by making sure that they experience trust and belief in their parent or adult that they cherish, one can then tell them they are given a sense of God,/ Allah or a god which is better than merely telling them about God/ Allah or a god.
The children’s world must be one of trust and safety.
A good step ahead is for their parent to make them have the feeling that they are safe and secure in the love of God/ Allah or a god.
The father-mother-child relationship must be healthy (i.e.
they must all get on well together) so that the children can believe in God/ Allah or a god.
The children feel the presence of God/ Allah/a god in their parents whom they see around them all the time and they know that their parents realize that they depend on them, just as they the parents depend on God/ Allah or a god.
As much as possible, children should not be made to feel guilty of sins because this can create a bad influence on their spiritual development, so it should be avoided at all costs.
Instead of making them feel guilty, stress the love and forgiveness nature of God/ Allah or a god and not the condemnation.
Children love to copy the actions of adults, even before the age of three, they should be involved in religions activities as much as possible.
They should be called to join adults during activities like family devotions, bible reading or reading from the Holy Quran, performing ablutions, or saying of incantations.
They can also be involved in activities like saying the Lord's prayer, reciting the surat-u-fatia or saying the grace.
They should also be visiting the church, Mosque or shrine.
They copy all these external forms of behaviour, so parents should make sure that such activities take place in a serious way that shows respect for and real faith in God/Allah, a god.
As it has been pointed out, children's relationship with the world is mainly emotional (i.e.
affective type), The sense of serious respect and faith created by such activities has a deep and lasting impression in their minds and this form the basis of their future spiritual development.
Although one might say that young children are still unable to understand the true meaning of prayer and other religions customs and practices, yet they have an important formative influence on their spiritual development.
You may then be wandering, when then do one really begin full and true spiritual development?
The answer is simply that the time can not be determined exactly.
Spiritual development is like love in this regard.
Love should be awakened so also religion.
But unlike love, children should acquire religion by themselves.
Adults can only show the children, way to religion he can not give it to them.
As teachers, we have 70 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT duty to perform, we can still influence the preparation of the children so that proper spiritual development can take place.
Remember, however that spiritual development takes place more easily in one child than another.
As a child advances from age four to five, he gradually becomes more objective, that is, he starts forming an opinion about things based on norms or principles (i.e.
what should normally happen).
Their thought are still global -concrete, but, are rather over simplified.
They now ask why?
Questions and try to find out the purpose of and the relationship between things.
For example, they can ask' 'why does the sun hang in the air?
", they want to know what its purpose is, they don't consider how it could be possible for the sun to hang in the air In these years, fantasy plays important roles in their life.
At first they don't see a difference between living and life less, objects.
A plastic dog can as well bark.
Children's world-view at the age of four to five is still extremely not rationalized (not thinking logically).
They fantasize while playing, dropping down "dead" and coming back to "life" as many times as possible.
With this they don't see anything strange in the Bible recording that the dead came back to life, or that water was turned to wine.
After all in their own plays, water is taking as tea or soft drinks in their "play- house".
They do all these without thinking of religion.
It will therefore be out of place to tell them of the miracles Jesus performed or how Mohammed could expect the mountain to come to him.
It would be better not to include tales about miracles in their religious education at this stage of their life, such stories will just sound like make- believe to them.
The children between the age of six and eight are in their prime age to be absorbed into the culture around them.
The basic values of such children are built on what he is taught or experience from his parents, sisters and brothers and others who transmits cultural views, habits, patterns and norms of the society.
He accepts what he believes in this stage of life as part of him just like his body is part of him.
A child's spirituality is not the same as that of an adult.
Up to the age of eight (8) children do not think of things as right or wrong, good or bad, they accept everything they find in good faith.
71 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT However, these children's questioning attitude towards reality, that is eagerness to find out about things and their natural readiness as human beings to develop spiritually; makes them ready to receive religious education.
By listening to stories in the Holy book they learn to accept their God/ Allah/a god as the most powerful being of all, and they come to know what they do not know before -for example, that God/Allah/ a god created heaven and earth and all the animals, and so forth.
This knowledge gives the children emotional security and self-confidence, because they have learnt to trust someone, just as their parents do.
Since children don't have sense of time yet.
To a child three or four years, even five years at times, "yesterday" may be any day in the past, while "Tomorrow" may mean any day in future.
You don't have to tell them stories, from the Holy Books in any right chronological order.
Mind you, they hardly know the difference between "now" and "then".
Whatever story you are telling them should be related to their world of experience, so that they become aware of those people in the Holy Books like members of their family.
Tell them stories that will strengthen their conception of good so that they avoid doing bad things.
Religious teaching should point at stressing the forgiveness nature of God who still show us love inspite of our wrong doings.
Children think of God in their own conception, they imagine, how he looks like.
They think that God /Allah a god also feels tired, sleep, happy, etc.
When young children ask the question, where is God", don't tell them that "He is in heaven" or In your heart " it can be very confusing to them, they think that this God may be many, it is better to answer simply that" He is always with us, even if we can not see Him ".
Such answer is more reassuring.
They need more reassuring answers than logical answers.
Don't bother to give logical explanations for your answers to their questions Now answer this questions without looking back at the note.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Human beings practices religion in order to understand and unravel the ------- of life.
2.
Three year olds are still very------- and have very recently discovered themselves as persons in their own right who are not just members of the family.
3.
Three years old project the image of ------- onto the image of God/Allah /a god.
72 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 4.
Children should first experience ------- and - ------ parents before they will trust God.
5.
From experience, at what age do you think a child can be ready to begin to appreciate religious stories.
3.3 Spiritual Stories for Young Children While selecting stories that can awaken the spiritual development of a child, take note of the following: Chronological order or time frame doesn’t have to be right.
Stories must be emotionally stable, stories with happy ending, don't tell stories that can even bring fear into the children for the Christian faith, the stories of the New Testament are closer to their world.
Stories on miracles are not appropriate to children below age 6.
The younger ones are in the feeling stage, but the older children can think.
choose stories that focus on people and not on events especially for those of age below 5 years.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Outline four criteria that can be used as guide as you select materials for spiritual development in children.
3.4 The Young Child's Prayer Children learn to pray at early stage, first by copying adults.
A child's prayer is a simple as his world.
They learn to pray further by listening attentively to adult's prayer, though at first they only feel these prayers, it makes little or no meaning to them.
The routines of saying common prayers like the grace, the Lord's prayer, the faith are alright by the children because to them it increasingly assures them of security and stabilizes their emotions.
Children form the image of God/Allah/a god according to the kind of picture presented to them through their spiritual teaching and general education.
They are able to fulfill their natural curiosity about how they are created.
It is necessary to give children the opportunity, because if not, the child can be made to become an unbeliever.
Unbelief can be seen as an improper spiritual development.
73 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
What is the major importance of prayer to children?
4.0 CONCLUSION Children are exposed to the world of many possibilities, where they can also develop spiritually.
They need adult guidance in the form of spiritual teaching or education for this spiritual development to take place appropriately.
Children’s spiritual development takes place naturally through realizing that: Love of the parents leads to love of God/Allah/a god.
Belief in parents leads to belief in God/Allah/a god.
Religious teaching should not be seen as an aspect of mere teaching, instead as an attitude, outlook upon life that sheds light on all other things.
God/Allah/a god should form part of one's daily life through worship, thanksgiving praise, prayer and reverence.
Religion should be a way of life.
Take it that the young children are sowing and not reaping.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt how young children can be led to develop spiritually.
Religious teaching and education are ways by which children can get to have many of the questions they ask that has to do with the relationship between in their life and with God/Allah/a god.
We talk about the progress that can be observed and followed if children gain spiritual knowledge for their development.
The child we were told should be able to experience trust and belief before he can trust and belief God.
Criteria to consider while selecting spiritual training materials were outlined and the child's prayer life also described briefly.
In the next unit, which is the first unit of the other module, we shall talk about Acquisition of identity by the child.
Recall where we said".
The three year olds are very much self- centered, have just discovered themselves as persons in their own right with a separate existence apart from being members of their family" This is the theme of the next units.
74 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Religion is used as a means of making sense out of the reality and concerns of human life.
2.
Religion makes children and adult alike to: (i) believe that they have a spiritual destiny, that there is specific Purpose for their life (ii) have a special way of getting a sense of purpose and peace of mind which they want to share with others (iii) give them the knowledge and assurance that there is a Deity on a particular special and divine being who guard, guide and protect them.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1. reality 2. self –centered 3. their father 4. trust and belief 5. six (6) years old.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERICISE 4 1.
Prayers increasingly assures them of securing and stabilizing their emotions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the religious development of a child in one page.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS University of South Africa (1997).
Early Childhood Development.
Only Study Guide for E.D.T .10 1.
E University of Africa Mucklemeute, Pretoria.
75 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT MODULE 3 Unit 1 Personality Development and Acquisition of Identity Unit 2 Play Unit 3 The Characteristics of Giftedness in Young Children UNIT 1 PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT AND ACQUISITION OF IDENTITY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personality Development 3.1.1 What is Personality?
3.1.2 Factors that can influence Personality Development 3.2 Stages in Personality Development 3.2.1 Basic Trust versus Mistrust (0 – 18 months) 3.2.2 Autonomy versus Doubt or Shame (18 months – 3 years) 3.2.3 Initiative versus Guilt (3 – 6 years) 3.2.4 Industry Versus Inferiority (6 – 12 years) 3.3 Acquisition of Identity 3.3.1 The Discovery of Self 3.3.2 Self Concept 3.3.3 Self Esteem 3.3.4 Self Actualization 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The various stages of child development has been our focus in the past ten units.
Your attention has been brought to the development stages of children in the different types of development.
In separate unit, we consider a type of Child Development process though as I had said earlier, we can not really mark out a distinction between these types of development as we observe them in children.
We have only been discussing them in this way just for clarity sake.
You can always observe emotional characteristics in the social aspect of a child, so also you can observe motor development in intellectual (or cognitive) characteristics.
In what we en even in adult) are about starting, it is still 76 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT another type of development in young children.
This is personality development.
I am bringing personality Development out to begin this module, so that you link it with another aspect of child development as it affects children’s education.
As always said the distinction between the types of development is not really very obvious.
.We are going to treat personality development along with acquisition of identity in this unit.
And in the module we take it, long with play, and giftedness in children.
The child is now to be considered as a person.
The personality of a person is something that establishes itself in a person over a period of time; this is why we regard it as a type of Development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  define personality  list and appreciate factors that affect personality development  identify some stages of personality development  name some of the various concepts that are used within the context to identify acquisition  describe some concepts to identify acquisition like self-concept, self esteem, and self actualization  outline the characteristics of a self actualization of a person.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Personality Development The personality of an individual is a dynamic thing in the relationship of that individual with other people.
It is dynamic because it is not static it can change because of one reason or another; though this is difficult, any way we won’t bother ourselves in this course about whether it is difficult or not.
The development of the personal characteristics of a child is greatly determined by the child’s parent.
But the funny aspect of this is that even the child’s personal characteristics too also influence the parents behaviour.
You can think on this and see whether you agree with it or not.
Let’s now consider what we mean by personality development by first of all considering the definition of personality 3.1.1 What is Personality?
Personality refers to the uniqueness and the distinctive characteristics of person which makes the person different from another Guildford, one of 77 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT the great psychologists, define personality simply as “a stable system of complex characteristics by which the life pattern of an individual may be identified.” There are so many definitions for their term ‘Personality’ but we will not want to bother you with they for now.
The personality of a person includes, the person’s physical appearance, his role in life, the totalness of the person’s qualities or attributes and the person’s general habitude behavior.
A person’s personality is an integration (i.e.
putting together) of the person’s social, emotional, and mental qualities.
It is the combination of self-concept, self –attitude, self-values, ambition and the behaviour disposition peculiar to an individual, which makes the person unique in his own way.
Personality is a growing and dynamic entity.
Every child develops his personalities as he grows and interact with his environment.
The personality of a person can be derived in part through the type of person he is identified with.
For instance you can say a lot about person, though to some extent, by just knowing the type of person he associates with.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is Personality?
3.1.2 Factors Affecting Personality Development Personality Development can be influenced by the following factors.
1.
Home The foundation of personality is set in the home.
The home provides a powerful formative influence on personality development in a child.
The home provide the child with a sense of security, love ,mutual respect for others , sharing responsibilities, feeling proud of one’s parent and one’s home.
The parent must not allow the older children to bully over (abusing or beating them for every wrong action) the younger ones, so that the two of them don’t develop complex feeling.
The young one will develop inferiority complex while the older one will develop superiority complex.
The home must provide 78 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT adequate guidelines of family value system but not unduly restricting the natural exploratory behaviour.
2.
Cultural Factor A child who moved about with his parent, by visiting family friends or traveling or even going to schools comes in contact with people of different culture.
The child learns this new culture along with his own with this he is able to improve upon his social skills and his personality.
A person who is not exposed is sometimes refers to as having poor personality.
3.
Love and Independence Love and Independence, is essential in making one a self-reliant personality.
The feeling of love is a pleasant emotional feeling that facilitates growth and development in young children; it also brings about mental health in the life of an individual.
4.
Crisis in the Life of Individuals The personality of a child can be affected by having crisis in his life.
Such crisis like tragedies birth of a new child in the family, death of mother or father, serious illness, failure success etc.
These may lead to over protection or even under protection.
5.
The School The School provides a relatively objective basis for the development of a child’s personality.
The child finds his bearing among his mates, he is able to assess his capabilities.
The school helps in this regard by providing and maintaining good student- teacher relationship, and healthy environment, also by avoiding unpleasant situations.
The teacher helps by being democratic, friendly, and impartial with the students.
The teacher should acknowledge and respect the achievement of the individual child in any school activities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Mention 5 factors that can have influence on a child’s personality development.
3.2 Stages in Personality Development Erickson, a social psychologist, recognized and described the ego qualities of an individual which emerge in critical periods of development stages.
We think we should tell you that there are many theories on personality and personality development, even the stages we are about to outline for you came out of one such theories.
But we 79 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT would not bother ourselves with such theories in this course.
We are simply concerned with child development and the relevance of this to early childhood education.
The eight stages are: (a) Basic Trust Versus Mistruths (0 – 18 months) (b) Autonomy Versus Doubt or Shame (18 months – 3 years) (c ) Initiative Versus Guilt (3 – 36 months) (d) Industry Versus Inferiority (6 – 12 years) (e) Identity Versus Confusion (12 – 18 years) (f) Intimacy Versus Isolation (g) Generality Versus Self absorption or stagnation (h) Ego integrity Versus Despair.
The First four Stage Span through the childhood period of life, so let’s briefly go through those ones: 3.2.1 Basic Trust versus Mistrust (0 – 18 months) In this period of the child’s life, he develops basic trust or mistrust to others through his relationship with his parent, especially mothers.
If the parents supply all his needs, feelings, sleep, relaxation etc, there would be social trust, and the child will not want the other to leave him, whenever she is far away, the child cries and show signs of undue anxiety.
It is the degree of the parent-child relationship that will determine the level of trust.
if the child does not develop such basic trust, it may lead to unhappiness and considerable personality difficulties in later years of life The parent need to feel and care for the child and also help the child to build an affectionate and warm relationship.
In this way the child will develop a healthy ego and personality.
3.2.2 Autonomy versus Doubt or Shame (18 months – 3 years) You will recall that this is the period when the child begins to do certain things by himself and master tasks.
For example if a child builds up a house using cardboard, or designs a greeting card, if the child in this stage is made to feel that his independent efforts are faulty or wrong through parents or elders, ( Criticism), he will develop a personality of shame or doubt.
But if the parent or other adults around commend his independent effort, the child will develop a personality of autonomy i.e a feeling that he can survive alone.
80 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.2.3 Initiative versus Guilt (3 – 6 years) Children at this stage initiate actions, they don’t wait for others to provide tasks for them.
They ask for help if need be.
If they receive encouragement from adults, they develop positive feelings and would avoid guilt.
If their parents or other adults discourage and criticize or ignore their moves they develop a sense of guilt, and this can cause them to become over-controlled and excessively inhibited i.e not waiting to make further initiative moves again.
3.2.4 Industry versus Inferiority (6 – 12 years) At this stage children enjoy activities involving concrete objects e.g collecting and making of objects.
If such activities or projects are approved by adults followed with worth while praises and reward, the child develops a sense of self worth and positive feelings about becoming involved in activities.
But if the activities are condemned, the child develops a feeling of inferiority and negative feelings about being involved in activities.
The conflict between industry and inferiority becomes strong especially if the child is competing with his mates or peers.
I will leave the explanation of the remaining 4 stages of personality and requisition of identity to when you begin to do psychology in full later in this programme.
Education of the child should be directed to “the development of the child’s personality, talents, mental and physical abilities to the fullest.
It is therefore necessary to have a developmental profile for each child and there is the need to be having periodic measurements of the several dimensions of the development over time.
Where a teacher or parent notice that the child is developing the negative personalities as described above, the next opportunity should be asked carefully to provide remedy so that the positive personality can be motivated.
It means that if for instance you have abused a girl of say 9 years for not tying clothe well, when next she makes a similar move, make sure she is encouraged to the fullest so that the feeling of inferiority can turn to a personality of industry Now try yourselves on the following self assessment questions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Give the stages of personality development according to the Erickson’s theory.
81 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 2.
Mention 4 each of (a) positive (b) negative personalities that children between ages 0 – 12 years can develop.
3.3 Acquisition of Identity The development of an identity by a child forms an aspect of his development process.
The child like any other human being, should be seen as a whole person and not as a separable parts or part of another objects or person.
You will recall that when we were discussing emotional and psychological development, that the child between the age of 0-2 years, feels that he is the most important thing in the world.
He would not mind knocking his head on the floor to draw attention to himself.
A baby is born with feelings and can communicate with the mother as early as the day the baby is born.
He feels them other’s touch, hears her voice and can communicate with his mother.
This helps the baby to grow and develop, right from there, the child begins to develop an idea of who he is, ie his individual self or in closer term, his identity or a personality.
Two key factors that play important role in the acquisition of identity of a child are the parent and the teacher.
However, there are some terms which are usually used to describe individuals as he acquires his/her own identity.
Some of these terms are self-discovery, self-concept, self-esteem and self-actualization.
I will briefly describe each of them for you.
3.3.1 Self Discovery The young child’s discovery of himself is an important event in the life of the young child.
The teacher or adult taking care of such child should not allow the period to go without taking note of it.
The discovery of self implies that the child is able to know himself and his worth, what he can do and what he can not do.
Self-Discovery goes in various phases.
It forms the basis for the forming of a self-concept.
3.3.2 Self - Concept This refers to the picture or image a person has of himself.
It is the sum total of what a person believes about himself, and the importance he/she attaches to the beliefs.
Self-concept can be positive or negative.
A child who believes he is always solving mathematical problem correctly has a positive self-concept, while the one who feels that she/he can not do without the help of another person to do a task, has a negative self- concept.
82 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.3.3 Self-Esteem Self-esteem has to do with how a person feels about himself, whether or not others will accept him or not.
It is determined by the type of development the undergoes, i.e.
closely tied to the child’s family and environment or he child’s background.
When a child is listened to, taken seriously and genuinely cared for, the child’s self-esteem will be high.
3.2.4 Self-Actualization Self-actualization, is the desire to fulfill one’s potentiality (i.e being able to do what you believe you can do).
According to Maslow “what a man can be, he must be”.
The following are the characteristics of a self- actualizing child: (a) The ability to tolerate uncertainty ( such a child will test what he is not sure of working).
(b) The ability to accept oneself and others for what they are (unconditional positive regard).
(c) Spontaneity in thought and behavior (i.e being able to think or act fast immediately there is a problem, not fixing date or another time for thinking and /or acting.
(d) Problem centered rather than self-centered (think of problem at hand and not of self).
(e) Concern for the welfare of others (f) Ability to consider life from an objective point.
A self actualizing individuals, tends to: (a) work hard at whatever they do (b) be honest and avoid pretences (c ) enjoy life (d) try something new rather than sticking to the only secure and safe ways.
The joy of living is derived when an individual is healthy and has the vigour and vitality to want to achieve, this is necessary for the development of children.
A healthy person can respond well to the rigours of life, to frustration, to disappointment and to the needs required in hard work SELF ASSESSMENT EXERICSE 4 1.
Name 4 of the various concepts that are associated with the context of acquisition of identity.
2.
Outline the characteristics of a self-actualizing person.
83 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION The personality of a person involves so many things put together.
All these things include the person’s physical appearance, his role in life, the person’s qualities or attributes and the general habitual behaviour of the person.
It also includes the person’s social and mental qualities like self-actualization.
All these when considered together makes a person unique.
It is therefore necessary for teachers, who are supposed to be working along with a child’s parents, to see to the proper development of these attributes of a person that combines to make the child’s personality.
We should educate children to be able to become someone with rich healthy personality.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have leant about personality development in young children, factors affecting the development of personality and some stages involved in personality development.
You have also learnt about acquisition of identity and some terms or concepts like self-concept, , self-esteem, self-actualization that can be used to describe a person’s acquired identity.
In the next unit we shall talk about ‘play’ and how play can also be used as a form of child development, that is in various aspects of development.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Personality is a stable system of complex characteristics by which the life patterns of an individual may be identified ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Home 2.
Cultural Factor 3.
Love and Independence 4.
Crisis in the life of individual 5.
The School ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Basic Trust Vs Mistrust (0 – 18 months) 2.
Autonomy Vs Doubt or Shame (18 months – 3 years) 3.
Initiative Vs Guilt (3 – 6 years) 4.
Industry Vs Inferiority ( 6 – 12 years) 5.
Identity Vs Confusion (12 – 18 years) 6.
Intimacy Vs Isolation 84 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 7.
Generality Vs Self assumption 8.
Ego integrity Vs Despair.
2.
(a) Trust, Autonomy, Initiation and Industry.
(b) Mistrust, Shame, Guilt, Inferiority ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Self-concept, Self-discovery, Self-esteem, Self-actualization 2.
* The ability to tolerate uncertainty * The ability to accept oneself and others * Spontaneity in thought and behavior.
* Problem centered rather than self-centered * concern for the welfare of others * Ability to consider life from an objective point of view 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How can the teacher help a child to develop positive personality.
2.
Identity can be acquired.
Yes or No If yes, give an outline procedure of how a teacher can help a child in the primary 4 class develop a positive self actualization identity.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Arnold, Caroline (2001).
Early Children Development Programmes and Children’s Right in Early Childhood Matters.
Bernard Van Foundation.
The convention on the rights of the child and young children.
June Edition pp 36 – 39 Margolin, Edythe (1976).
Young Children: Their Curriculum and Learning Process .
Macmillain Co. Inc New York: London.
Oladele, J.O (1987).
Fundamentals of Psychological Foundations of Education.
Johns Lad Enterprises (Publishers).
Sokan, B.O and Akinade, E.A (1994).
Developmental Psychology.
A Basic Text for Colleges and Universities.
The Centre for Development and Population Activities (2001).
Crossroads, - A Teacher’s Guide to Activities in Family Life Education.
85 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 2 PLAY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Play 3.1.1 Some Features of Play 3.2 Functions of Play Exercise 1 Exercise 1.2 Exercise 1.3 3.3 Different Types of Play and their Importance 3.3.1 Types of Play Exercise 2 3.3.2 Stages in Play Development Exercise 3 3.4 Learning through Play 3.4.1 Play Way Method 3.4.2 The Role of the Adult 3.4.3 List of Some Materials and Toys 3.4.4 Selection Guide 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous module in this course, you learnt that the growth and development of children are systematic and progressive.
In the last unit, you also learnt about personality development in young children.
This is an important background knowledge for this unit on the topic of "play".
This is because as the environment of children become bigger, they face greater challenges to overcome.
It has been confirmed by many experts that children learn quite a lot naturally, through play.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit you will be able to:  discuss the meaning of play and state its functions  outline the different types of play and their importance  discuss the stages of play and list examples of play materials 86 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT  prepare a guide for selecting play materials  outline condition for learning through play  outline the roles of the adult in making play more meaningful.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Play Play is the term used to describe any activity engaged in, for the enjoyment it gives without necessarily thinking of the end product.
It is a fundamental characteristic of young children's development.
Because play is such a natural part of children's existence, we tend to take it for granted.
3.1.1 Some Features of Play Many experts on the behaviour of children have shared the results of their studies on the concept of play.
They all agree that children's play has the following features: Describing Features of Play (i) play is basically self motivated (it is intrinsic) (ii) play is free from external constraints (iii) play is carried out as if it is real with the full consciousness of the play, (iv) play is dominated by the player (v) play involves the active involvement of the player.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define play 2.
Outline the features which are common to children's play.
3.2 The Functions of Play As you can see from the above features, play is truly like work to children.
Later on in the unit, you will be able to understand the children's developmental stages in relation to their play.
Now let us explore the values and benefits that children enjoy through play.
87 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 1.
Play aids growth Through play children develop their bodies, energies and skills.
They learn to co-ordinate hand and eye; their muscles and limbs are strengthened through gross physical activities such as running climbing etc.
2.
Play offers freedom of action and speech Children enjoy freedom to choose, their own activity.
Because play is free from external limitations children are able to use their initiative.
Where there is adequate space available, they are also free to explore their environment.
3.
Play provides an imaginary world a child can master Children use any material in the home, garden or school to create their imaginary world.
Using old clothes and other forms of equipment they role-play various personalities and situation.
This period of imaginative play is a vital part of their development and learning.
Play in this way gives children a chance to digest experiences and come to terms with reality 4.
Play has element of adventure Children are naturally curious and have a very great desire to learn as they discover new things.
Play can provide satisfaction to children's curiosity and adventurous nature.
Through play they learn new concepts and understand the world in which they live.
5.
Helps concentration Children's interests are further enhanced during play.
Therefore learning through play helps to prolong the concentration time-span of children.
This is a useful study skill for .future academic activities.
6.
Play encourages language development There is no way a child will be engaged in a play activity that he/she will not have the need to communicate.
Even when he/she is engaged in solo play, the child will still need to think, name objects, and share his/her experiences with others.
Of so doing the child's vocabulary is increased and his ideas expanded to promote his/her language development.
7.
Play is revitalizing Children are refreshed and revitalized after enjoying a time of satisfying session of play.
88 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 8.
Play helps to make learning more permanent Children learn easily when their interest is aroused.
One of the points describing play is that it is self motivating and engrosses the full attention of the player.
As a result a learning activity that is presented to children through play will capture their attention and make it easier for them to learn.
9.
Play Promotes socialization Through play children are able to develop the skills essential for socialization such as co-operation, friendship, consistency, rendering help to others and so on.
10.
Children have the right to Play Article 31, section 1 of the United Nations (UN) Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) has been ratified (i.e.
signed) by many national of the world, including Nigeria.
This confirms that the knowledge about the importance of play has reached a high level world-wide.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 In this exercise, try to imagine that you are watching a video clip on children's behaviour.
The Imaginary Scene A group of healthy and happy 3-5 year old children are in a fairly spacious school garden.
There is no obvious adult presence, but there are various equipment such as frames, ladder, big cartons, boxes, old tires and a bench under a tree.
There are some large picture cards of animals on the bench.
There are also sand through, and a small vegetable patch.
l. In the given imaginary scene, what are the children doing?
Try to put the points down in your notebook.
Compare your points with those on the last page of this unit.
2.
Describe the functions of play under their main headings.
Joke Box The red-head lizard made a successful high jump without being hurt.
He looked around to see if there was someone to praise him.
When there was none to praise or clap for him; he raised himself up, he nodded his head three times and said to himself: 'Well done!
Well done!
89 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT LAUGH Now say that to yourself.
3.3 Different Types of Play and their Importance One educational philosopher, by name, R.F.
Dearden, highlighted on the fact that there are many activities that can be referred to as play because they have the features of play.
However, not all of them are play in the context of children's development.
He summarized them into about six groups.
Let us now see how these will help us to know how to make children's learning more functional.
3.3.1 Types of Play These are: i.
Gross Physical Activities: as in running, climbing, jumping, pushing, pulling, rolling, swinging, sliding, crawling, walking, dancing and most adults' sports and games.
This type of play is basically an out-door play.
ii.
Manipulative Activities: as in moulding, blocks or bricks play, clay work play, tearing, squeezing, blowing, fixing, dismantling, building.
iii.
Dramatization or Impersonation: as in role-playing, imitating, representation (using toys or other objects to represent a personality, an animal or a place), fantacising.
iv.
Rule-governed Activities: as in some adult's games and sports; i.e.
football, Ludo, Monopoly, Ayo, Scrabble, Marble balls.
This type of play is sometimes called social play.
v. Verbal Catches and Teasing: as in riddles and jokes, slogans, jingles, stories, rhymes and songs.
vi.
Childhood Tricks and Pranks: as in surprises, unseeing naughtiness.
You will appreciate the significance of the different types of play when we look at the stages of play in the next segment of this unit.
Then, you will be able to notice that, children's functional play also follow the human developmental patterns which you studied in previous units.
We will be referring to the aspects of development, such as physical 90 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT development, cognitive, emotional and social development.
It will be very important for you to understand children functional play in that context.
This is because you need to apply the knowledge in your teaching practice.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Describe six types of play 3.3.2 Stages in Play Development In your study on the development of the growing child, you will remember that the point was made that development is a step-by-step change in the child.
When you carefully observe children, it is possible to see the changes in the way they talk, think and do things.
These kind of changes brought about by development, can also be seen in the children's play pattern.
As their ability to interact with the environment, increase, so the pattern of their play changes.
Let us see how this point is proved by one expert named Hurlock, E. B.
(1981).
This expert believes certain play activities are common at particular stages for all children.
He suggests that children' s play activities can be grouped under four main headings.
i The Baby Stage (0 -1 year old) He describes this stage as the EXPLORATORY STAGE.
At this stage, babies play consists of looking at people and attempting to grab any object held in front of them.
Thereafter, with gradual development of control of their hands and arms muscles they can grab, hold and even examine things within their reach.
Free spontaneous play is typical of children between the ages of 3 months to about 2 years.
Because the children depends more on their senses (that is: sight, listening, touch, taste, feeling) it is important to provide toys to stimulate their total development.
ii.
Toy Stage (1 -6 years) Children's toy play increase in the first year.
By the time they are 3 years old their play has developed from merely exploratory to a more definite handling and use of toys.
As they increased in intellectual development they see their toys as toys and use them so.
From 3 -6 years their play begin to appear more creative in form.
The increase of their experience and skill make them to use dramatization and impersonation more in their play.
Through the development of their ability to imagine children 91 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT use every equipment or objects available to dramatize and produce an extension to their play.
iii.
The Stage 6 -8 year (The school child) By the time children are in school, their experience in play has increased.
They are more active and constructive in their activities.
At this stage children are also interested in games, hobbies, sports and other more mature forms of play.
This makes them more social in behaviour.
The more reason why, most social development clubs for young children enroll them from age 6.
This stage also marks the formal school age of many nations.
iv.
Daydream Stage (8- 10 year) Late Childhood As children approach puberty (Late childhood) they begin to loose interest in the play activities they formerly enjoyed.
They begin to spend more time daydreaming.
They become very open to new information, skills and techniques to answer many questions bothering them.
They are at the another transition in their lives.
They need support and truthful understanding.
You will notice that the area of our concern only covers stages I -III.
So, pay particular attention to them.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Discuss the four stages of play 3.4 Learning through Play Up to this point you have been exposed to the functions and values of play.
This is because in order to make children grow and develop well, parents, teachers and caregivers, must allow them to play and ask questions.
However, you know as well as I do too, that the spontaneous, unstructured play of young children need to be structured to make learning more effective to them.
Although we do say often that learning and play are the same to children.
However, making play functionally relevant depends on adults.
3.4.1 The Play Way Method Play is natural to children and involves their personal experience.
You have read in the previous segments that children learn best by doing.
More so, when their interest is aroused; you will find children paying attention and concentration for considerable longer periods.
92 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT The success of the play way method depends very much on the following condition (i) Well planned activities both for indoors and outdoors (ii) A loving, understanding and very resourceful adult (parent, teacher or caregiver) (iii) An adequate supply of play materials and toys.
(iv) Safe and secure space (v) Long uninterrupted periods of time (vi) Daily routine The babies need: (1) Encouragement and approval (2) Clean and safe play materials and toys (3) The company of a grown-up to play with them-usually to spark their curiosity and encourage when needed love to be given the privilege to play alone.
3.4.2 The Role of the Adult Your role in helping children to learn from their play includes the following:  Provide the children with a safe, ordered, stimulating environment with adequate facilities, objects and materials for exploration which are appropriate for their age and experience  Observe children and note the appropriate time to present any particular activity  Act as a role model, children will imitate you.
 Encourage children  Play with the children.
Talk with them and encourage them to ask questions  Observe the children's progress and prepare report.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 l. Discuss play as a means of learning 93 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.4.3 Selection of Toys and Play Materials You have seen throughout this unit that children's developmental stages influence their understanding and the way they interact with materials and toys at play.
As a result you should remember that merely providing toys is not what will make children's play functional for learning.
There is need for careful selection based on the ages of the children, their developmental stage and the relevance to the learning activity.
As a result I consider that you will find it useful if you are able to select the play materials and toys effectively.
4.0 CONCLUSION Children learning depend on their maturation and it is important to be able to provide what they need at each stage.
If we give them materials that are unsuited to their age and ability they become bored and frustrated.
We can avoid frustrating them if we understand their behaviour and the things we can do to help them.
In that way will be able to help them live a full healthy and useful life.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learned about "play", an important aspect of young children's behaviour.
You should know that as children play it is possible to observe them and detect quite early the strength and weaknesses in their development for necessary interventions.
In the next unit we shall look at the characteristics of Giftedness in young children.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define play Term used to describe any activity engaged in for the enjoyment it gives without an obvious end result.
Fundamental to children's well being.
2.
Outline the features which are common to children's play  Self motivation  Free from external constraints  Dominated by player  Element of reality  Active participation 94 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Imaginary Scene Children actively play in various groups: jumping; swinging and rolling tyre; climbing; animal sounds with picture cards; sand play.
2.
Describe the functions of play Heading:  Socialisation  Aid to learning  Discovering, thinking  Independence  Language development  Leads to concentration ability ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Describe six types of play  Manipulative  Dramatization  Rule-Governed  Verbal catches Does your description include these points:  Manipulative  Gross Physical activities  Dramatization  Rule-governed i.e.
games and sports  Verbal deche or teasing  Childhood tricks and Pranks Now give yourself the lizard knod.
Well done!.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 1.
Discuss the four stages of play 95 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Four Stages of Play i.
Baby stage ( 0-1 year) Exploratory ii.
Toy stage (1-6years) Discovery iii.
The play Stage ( 6-8years )- The School Child iv.
Daydream stage (8-10 years) -Late Childhood ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 l. Discuss play as a means of learning  Friends from peer group child-to-child  Intentional building or construction of objects from unstructured materials  Regular rotation to prevent boredom  Sensory stimulation of simple, respective activities  Playing with blocks; jigsaw puzzles and other manipulatable toys.
i.
Toy Stage (1-6years) Children's toy play increases in the first year.
By the time they are 3 years old their play has developed from merely explanatory to a more definite handling and use of toys.
As they increased in intellectual development they see their toys a s toys and use them so.
From 3-6years their play begin to appear more creative in form.
The increase of their experience and skill make them to use dramatization and impersonation more in their play.
Through the development of their ability to imagine children use every equipment or objects available to dramatize and produce an extension to their play.
ii.
The Play Stage 6-8 years (The School Child) By the time children are in school, their experiences in play have increased.
are more active and constructive in their activities.
At this stage children are also interested in games, hobbies, sports and other more mature forms of play.
This makes them more social in behaviour.
The more reason why most social developmental clubs for young children enroll them from age 6.
This stage also makes the formal school age of many nations.
96 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT iii.
Daydream Stage (8-10years) Late childhood As children approach puberty (late childhood) they begin to loose interest in the play activities they formerly enjoyed.
They begin to spend more time daydreaming.
Children should be kept occupied with challenging but interesting activities.
They become very open to new information, skills and techniques to answer many questions bothering them.
They are at the other transition in their lives.
They need support and truthful understanding.
You will notice that the area of our concern only cover stages i-i So, pay particular attention to them.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss the four stages of play.
2.
Give examples of play materials and toys 3.
Discuss playas a means of learning 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Deardon, R.F.
(1975).
The Philosophy of Primary Education.
An Institution.
Routledge and Kegan Paaul.
New York: Humanities Press.
97 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 3 THE CHARACTERISTICS OF GIFTEDNESS IN THE YOUNG CHILD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Some of the Concepts Related to Giftedness 3.1.1 Intelligence 3.1.2 Genius 3.1.3 Creativity 3.1.3.1 Elements of Creativity 3.1.3.2 Characteristics of Creativeness 3.2 National Policy Statements 3.3 The Concept of Giftedness 3.3.1 Criteria for Identifying Giftedness in Children 3.3.2 Characteristics of Gifted Children 3.4 Educational Provision for the Gifted Children 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In module two (2) of this course, all the six units there treated the various types of development in young children.
In our discussion on cognitive (Intellectual) development you learnt that children attain intellectual development in stages and that some children attain some stages faster than others.
You can briefly go through the unit on cognitive development again, especially the section on stages of intellectual development.
In the last unit, here in this module 3, you were told that 'play' is another way of developing children.
There we stressed that the process of play is more important than the end result (product), because through play, children learn a lot either directly or indirectly.
In all these processes of play and in development of intelligence or cognitive ability in children it is easy to observe that some children are exceptionally brighter than the others.
This specific attribute of some children’s-Giftedness which is of course, natural, is the focus of this unit.
How do we identify such children, what do we mean by 'Giftedness' and how do we help them to develop this trait of Giftedness in them.
It is believed this aspect of children’s life should interest us in our discussion on child development in general.
98 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe certain concepts like intelligence, genius and creativity  restate government policy statements on giftedness  identify giftedness easily in young children  name the characteristic attributes of giftedness  link giftedness to attributes like intelligence, genuity, and creativity  appreciate the criteria for identifying gifted young children  describe how the gifted young child form relationship  assist the gifted child.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Some of the Concepts Related to Giftedness There are some terms which we would not like you to mix up with giftedness, truly they are related to giftedness, and sometimes they are used when describing giftedness in children, some of these terms like cognitive ability you have come across when we were talking about Intellectual development.
Cognitive ability has to do with thinking tendency.
The other terms are intelligence, genuity (a Genius) and creativity).
3.1.1 Intelligence If a person solves a particular problem more quickly than another person, we say the first person is more intelligent, thereby implying that the former person has something to a greater degree than the latter.
It is this 'something' that is called intelligence.
Intelligence is therefore a kind of mental or cognitive ability which is applied in problem solving.
Intelligence is also referred to as the reasoning ability of individuals.
These reasoning abilities are of many types, namely understanding relations (getting the relationship between two or more things), understanding of sequence or series, completing patterns on the basis of symmetry , and meaningful asymmetry permutations and combinations, drawing inferences, understanding logic, verbal ability etc.
Intelligence therefore, can be regarded as a combination of some psychological traits.
If these traits could be measured with valid instruments, then intelligence can be calculated from the measurement.
Also intelligence can be measured on its own with the use of appropriate instruments.
Any way, this does not concern us for now.
99 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT If intelligence is actually measured well, then we can categorize some people (or children) as more intelligent, some of average intelligence while others are less intelligent.
3.1.2 Genius Genius implies the creation of something new, some major expansion of knowledge or of human sensitivity, something new, some kind of special achievement beyond expectation of a competition.
Like what is so exceptionally good, beyond expectation considering the normal condition.
For example a primary 2 child who accidentally come across a primary 4 mathematical question and with little or no explanation is able to solve some of the problems that an average primary four will still have to think and think.
The child can be called a genius.
3.1.1 Creativity Creativity simply involves development of something new and unique.
However, there have been many definitions given by experts in the area of psychology and education, Mackinon, in his book, said "Creativity is the ability to bring something new into existence, while for others it is not an ability but the psychological processes by which new and valuable products are fashioned.
For still others, creativity ranges all the way from the notion that creativity is simple problem solving to conceiving it as the full realization and experience of all in an individuals unique potentials. "
Creativity is indeed an issue with many faces according to another experts Renzalli.
The diagram below shows the interdependence of three "clusters" of behaviour traits, as it is represented in a three-ring model Three three-ring model of creativity Exceptional Exceptionally high high task general commitment ability Exceptional high Level of creativity 100 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT This means that it is the combination of high ability, high level of creativity and high task commitment that makes a child a creative child.
3.1.3.1 Basic Characteristic Elements of Creativity So as not to confuse creativity with some attributes, here are the features of creativity:  Creativity is a process and not a product i.e.
it is not what comes out but how much work and the steps taken to get it.
 The process is goal directed or meant for a purpose may be for personal benefit or for social group.
 It leads to the production of something new, different and therefore unique Creativity come from divergent thinking whereas conformity and everyday problems comes from convergent thinking  The ability to create depends on the acquisition of accepted knowledge.
3.1.3.2 Characteristics of Creative Children Many psychologists have agreed that a creative child shows the following characteristics: 1.
Over-reaction physically and/or mentally 2.
Annoying curiosity 3.
Forgetful and absent minded 4.
Good sense of humour 5.
Doesn't participate in class 6.
Won't join scouts (because their activities are too much of routine) 7. boys among them read in room while their friends rough it out with sisters.
Playing; creative girls too are also fond of staying in one corner reading or meditating.
8.
Enjoys nature and outdoors 9.
Mind wanders too much 10.
Friends think to be slightly unusual 11.
Sensitive 12.
Likes to work by himself 13.
Grows to an imaginative man 14.
Loves to read 15.
Daydreams, gets lost in thought 16.
Daydream at times watching others 101 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 17.
Feels left out of things 18.
Good only in science subjects or good only in arts and music.
Looking closely at the behaivours outlined, you will see that a creative child will likely not be popular in school since he'll like to work by himself', "doesn't participate in class", forgetful", absent-mindedness".
Being unpopular in class may lead to their problems of adjustment in the school.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Mention 3 human traits that are related to Giftedness 2.
Briefly describe each of the traits National policy statement with Respect To Giftedness in Children Section 8, on special education sub-section 81 of the 1998 revised edition of the National Policy on Education states "There are also the specially gifted and talented children who are intellectually precious and find themselves insufficiently challenged by the programmes of the regular school.
Section 84 (a) states that of education "the Federal and States shall in collaboration with appropriate bodies, provide special programs for gifted children.
The National policy emphases the need to identify the exceptional students, and an, example of such is the Gifted children.
These gifted children can be identified right from the early childhood education.
The policy also emphasizes that this set of children should have right to the type of relevant education.
The policy in part, admits that some children are gifted intellectually precious and they find themselves insufficiently challenged by the programme of the normal school.
The children like this may take to stubbornness and a pathy.
Government has already directed that all children including the gifted must be provided for, under the educational system.
The objective of the government is to provide opportunity for the exceptionally gifted children to develop at their own pace in the interest of the nation's economic and technological developments.
Considering the way "exceptionally gifted" is stressed in the policy statement, it 102 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT shows how important government is aware of the fact that some people are gifted and yet some are more gifted (exceptionally gifted).
Nigeria as a country is concerned with how she (as a country) can tap the potentials of the people especially the youth to produce most of the needs from raw materials by encouraging creativity in the youth that constitute a large proportion of the population.
With this there is increased support for scientific and technical education.
At the same time, there is the need to pay special attention to the children that show leading disability or the opposite that always perform far above the average performance.
To ensure that such children are not wasted away or later be counted as "wasted generation" therefore, we as teachers and adults in general, we need to give such children in our care "special attention".
But before this, how do we identify a gifted child?
3.3 The Concept of Giftedness 3.3.1 Criteria for Identifying Giftedness in Children Giftedness in children can be identified by using the following criteria: i.
He is superior to his age-mates in traits other than capacities that are purely physical; and physiological (normal) functioning of the body system).
.
ii.
He possesses the intellectual powers and qualities essential for success with advanced education and training in general or in the specialty.
iii.
His superior developmental maturation is reasonably consistent from the early years of life to maturity.
iv.
His unusual abilities may be general or specialized, his superior traits may be single or multiple.
.
v. The traits and abilities in which he shows superiority are those that predict unusual achievement or productivity in areas of high social value.
But before one can use these criteria to ascertain whether a child is gifted or not, the child must first be identified through his special type of behaviour, or what we call characteristics of gifted children.
103 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.1.5 Characteristics of Gifted Children According to S. Kirck in his book "Educating Exceptional Children" he stated the following characteristics by which the gifted children may be identify i.
They possess high intelligence quotient which is much higher than those of their mates.
(Intelligent quotient is a measure of intelligence).
ii.
They are often alert mentally, physically and psychologically and respond to situations quickly.
In other words they are very smart at doing things.
iii.
They often ask difficult or previously unthought - or crucial questions i.e.
as pupils they usually ask such questions that the teacher might not have planned for, yet reasonable and meaningful questions.
iv.
They are generally highly creative and original in their ideas.
v. Unlike the earlier view of gifted as being unable to adjust to life with others, they are friendless and unhappy children, no, gifted children or individuals are socially mature, get along well with peers and they show fewer behaviourial problems.
vi.
They read far ahead of others, learn easily and quickly and perform difficult mental tasks easily and they usually finish their studies earlier than the non-gifted children vii.
They reason logically and clearly, recognize relationship and comprehend faster than others.
viii.
They are aware of many things in and outside their environment.
ix.
They are good in many subject areas because they posses high cognitive abilities-above others in their group.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What criteria will you use to determine whether a young child in your class is gifted?
2.
What are the characteristic behaviour of gifted children?
3.2 Educational Provision for the Gifted Children Just as we need to give special attention to the not-so-good or disabled children in a class, so also you need to pay special attention to a gifted child.
If gifted children are not helped to exercise their genuity, power and brain on something worth while, they can become restless, stubborn or even unruly.
They need to be challenged constantly else they will even look down on the teacher .
104 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT For gifted children, enrichment is obviously helpful particularly where primary schools are flexible enough to incorporate this in the daily activities.
Integration, i.e.
teaching them along with non-gifted children, should be practiced with them.
This is in line with the provision of the National Policy which states that Integration is the most realistic form of special education since gifted children are expected to live in the society along with others.
Interpretation will boost the morale of the gifted, It has been noted that the criteria on which separation had been previously based was not clear enough or not competent administrative setting, it is often ethnically based and may lead to violation of civic right of the child.
As Kirk had said in his book; Gifted children are children with high-level intellectual powers in productive and evaluative thinking.
According to him they have the tendency to become future leaders, future problem -solvers, innovators (bring up new things), evaluators of culture, if they are provided with adequate educational experiences.
The gifted child has the superior ability to deal with fact, relationships or ideas (cognitive skills), and reasoning abilities.
These children, if well developed can help in the economic and technological development of the country.
Integration of gifted children with non-gifted is being advocated as a means of providing a more stimulating environment for allemandes.
It will also reduce costs.
From the ethical points of view it is necessary to have them together; the gifted children will also serve as motivator to the non-gifted children.
They only need to be given more exercises and activities to expend their energy on.
Integration of all categories of children.
It is believed, will also help to remove monotony of method of teaching.
In the Nigerian context, some people think of the gifted children as being at a disadvantage.
Actually if the gifted children are not helped to develop their special talents (gift) they become useless, and will truly be at a disadvantage.
The Nigerian society needs to develop and utilize the talents of the gifted members of the society especially children.
Though there is that dilemma whether or not to create separate primary school or schools for the gifted like the secondary school or such children in Suleja, Niger State, established by the Federal Government.
Some people believe that to single out some students for special treatment or training is to give advantage to some and create and elite 105 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT intelligentsia i.e.
special set of genius.
Yet if ability is the major consideration, and not some other factors, like family position; we will really be developing and utilizing needed resources for technological growth of the country .The debate is still on.
One F. Iyayi in an article in the Daily Times wondered how a gifted children programme is elitist" He also wondered how gifted child could be identified in a village school where there are no facilities compared to a school attended by the children of elites.
In addition, Span of Holland, a founder of the European Council for Gifted children observes that the concept of talent (gift) should not only be by intelligence test alone but some other things like self-control.
Span of Holland concludes that "therefore special schools fail to achieve the desired effects as they deprived children of their natural social motivation.
We know as well that gifted pupils benefit most from homogenous (same type) ability grouping.
But in the process some pupils are labelled "better: " than others, then the tendency to succeed sets in all the children will now have more pressure and zeal to succeed, this plays a 'significant" role in society.
Although there is lack of agreement on one strategy, we believe that individualized instruction combined with some joint classroom activities with other pupils may best serve both the very good and the not so good groups.
Towards successful and even implementation of integration, there is the urgent need to provide guidelines and ensure that appropriate curricular changes are completed.
Teachers will need to be very systematic for the changes required ensuring the successful integration.
For example, teachers should be willing to modify their teaching practices to accommodate the requirement of these gifted children.
The teachers should not show sign of not welcoming the additional burdens that such children may place on them, like having to read deeper to prepare for their kind of question and preparing extra learning activities and exercises for them.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Do you think that gifted children should be put in separate school?
Give reasons for your opinion 2.
What are the advantages of integrating the gifted and the non- gifted in the same class?
106 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION A gifted child is a child who is different from other normal children.
The child is exceptionally brilliant among his mates and shows some special qualities and characteristics.
The child therefore needs special teachers or teaching materials and special attention and materials to be used to help him develop the natural special endowment.
If the child is not given special attention like more exercises and more challenging work he will not be able to operate adequately within the same environment that has been prepared for the "normal" child of his age.
Note that a gifted child can be a girl or a boy.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been talking about the characteristics of giftedness in young children.
We started by clarifying certain terms like Intelligence and creativity which are used in describing giftedness in children, which may also be confused with giftedness.
The criteria that can be used for identifying gifted children were considered, along with the characteristics of a gifted child.
How a gifted child may be helped to develop .is also highlighted.
In the following unit, we shall focus attention on school readiness, how a child can be prepared for school, and what the teachers need to do to promote school readiness in children.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Intelligence, Genius, and Creativity 2.
Intelligence is a mental or cognitive ability which is applied in problems solving.
OR Intelligence is the reasoning ability of individuals like understanding of relationships.
Genius: means creating something new, having a special achievement.
Creativity: Developing something new and unique.
A creative person always possesses some specific characteristics.
A creative person must put together exceptional high general ability, exceptional high task commitment and exceptional high level of creativity.
107 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
To be able to say whether or not a child in my class is gifted, must consider whether or not, the child: (i) is superior to his age-mate in traits other than capacities that are purely physical and physiological (ii) possess the intellectual powers and qualities essential for success with advanced education and training in general or in speciality (iii) superior developmental maturation is reasonably consistent from the early years of life to maturity (iv) abilities may be general or specialized, his superior traits single or multiple traits and abilities superiority that can predict unusual achievements, or productivity in high social value.
2.
As we have in section 3.2.2 ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
No.
(i) Schools programmes should be flexible enough to accommodate them (ii) The child (gifted) will still have to live in the society like others (iii) Being taught along with others will boost the morale of the gifted children (iv) Reduce cost of having to set up another school (v) Teaching method will not be monotonous (vi) Gifted child will be deprived of natural motivation 2.
Yes (i) there will be homogenous method of teaching (ii) the gifted child will be made to expend his talent and genuity well (iii) the child can be stubborn and unruly if he is not given enough task relevant to his giftedness.
(iv) There will be specialist teacher (v) The national policy supports this.
3.
The advantage as the answers given under No" in question (i) above 108 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Discuss giftedness in general 2.
What criteria would you use to determine whether a young child in your class is gifted or not.
3.
State three National policy statement concerning the education of gifted children.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Alhassan, B.A.
(2001).
Understanding Educational Psychology.
Tamaza Publishing Company.
Zaria.
Nigeria.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998): National Policy on Education.
3rd Edition NERDC Press.
Institute of Education, University of Ibadan (1980).
Nursery Education Iyayi, F (1988).
Gifted Children Programme is Elitist.
In Daily Times, Dec. l0th, 11.
Kirk, S. (1972).
Educating Exceptional Children.
Boston.
Houghton: Mifflin Coy.
109 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT MODULE 4 Unit 1 School Readiness 1 Unit 2 School Readiness 2 Unit 3 Discipline as Part of Education Unit 4 Task of the Teacher UNIT 1 SCHOOL READINESS 1 CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Preparing Children to go to Formal School from Pre-Primary School 3.2 Readiness for School 3.2.1 Meeting with the Parents 3.2.2 Visiting the School 3.2.3 Visiting the School in Section 3.2.4 Attending School for Part of the Session 3.2.5 Parents/Teacher Attitude toward Separation 3.2.6 Full Attendance without Parents 3.3 Criteria for Determining School Readiness 3.4 Drawing up a Program that can be used to Promote School Readiness 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you learnt about the characteristics of the gifted child.
Intelligence and creativity are terms used to describe giftedness in child.
A gifted child you were told is the child who is exceptionally brilliant among his mates and show some special qualities.
There are some characteristic behavior of gifted children, we stated most of these and ways by which gifted children can be helped in the classroom situation.
In this unit and the next one we shall be considering another characteristics of young children, and that is school readiness.
As the child reaches age two, he has developed motor and language skills to some extent.
Going by his body make up, he is socially and emotionally ready for early childhood education, at least the pre-primary level, where he can learn to control his feeling among his age groups.
Some 110 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT schools don’t want to accept children of this age, they believe that they are too young to cope with them since they are not used natured.
Such children can be put in the preparatory or play group class.
At times teachers fined out that a child is unable to perform some tasks at a particular age, but will be able to perform the task at later age without teaching.
A clear example may be a child who cannot read simple words at age seven or a child who cannot solve a simple arithmetic sum, but who in later age is able to do these tasks.
The inability to read or solve some arithmetic before may not be because of inexperience but because of immaturity.
In this unit, and the next we shall talk about maturation and how to make a child ready for formal school system.
In this unit, we shall be introduced to the topic – school Readiness, since the topic will extend to the next unit as well.
We are going to highlight how children can be prepared to go to formal school.
The steps to be taken so as to get ready for school will also be stated.
The criteria for determining that a child is ready for school is also included along with steps to take to draw up programmes to promote school readiness in children.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you will be able to:  list steps to be taken to make a child ready for school  discuss the criteria for school readiness  draw up a programme that t can be used to promote school readiness.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Preparing Children to go the Formal School from Pre-Primary School The first day at school is something frightening for most children.
Even if a child has attended a nursery school, entering a regular primary school is totally a new experience.
The child leaves the home environment with which he is more familiar.
He is likely to spend longer period at school.
He will meet with few more children in his class; and try to find a place for himself among them.
He will have to cope with for different kinds of attitudes than he had ever experienced.
He needs to trust his teachers to understand him and keep him safe through these new experiences.
111 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.2 Readiness for School Erickson has suggested that the basic tasks in personality development in early childhood is the development of a sense of trust, a sense of autonomy (self-government and sense of initiative).
This kind of feeling arises out of the way a child’s basic needs are met; his experiences, (with feeding, with toileting, etc) the kind of experiences he gets from other people.
It is out of all these early experiences that the child builds a feeling of trust.
Once he learns to trust others, he also learns to have confidence and trust in himself.
The attitude (feelings) of parents are therefore, quite important in building such confidence, because they are the initial and primary set of people he depends upon to satisfy his basic needs.
For a child going to school for the first time, there are two basic tasks.
First he must go and meet a new experience which will help his growth; but which is also uncertain.
Second, he must resolve the conflict of leaving one thing for another.
This means leaving the comfort and certainty of his parents being there for him, and having to now depend on others, who are less known to him.
Some how this means leaving to depend on himself, rather than others certainly children will respond differently to such situation.
But whatever may be the reactions of the child, there is the need for some measures of assurance.
Read an expert in child study suggests five ways by which both child and parent(s) may be helped.
Meeting with the parent(s) This is a pre-school meeting in which the parents or one of the parents discusses with the teacher the policies of the school, fees, health regulations and the process of admission.
The teacher also answers questions which parents may need to ask.
The essence of the meeting is to help the child’s parent(s) to have a clear understanding of what their child is likely to meet at school 3.1.1 Visiting the School The child needs to have a picture of what the school looks likes.
A very good way of doing this is to pay a visit to the school during a non-school period; may be over a weekend or a school holiday.
During such a visit that could be arranged for a time when the teacher is around the school premises will help the child to acquaint himself with school environment.
This could be the week proceeding resumption, or 112 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT just when the school goes on recess, when teachers are available either to round off school activities or preparing for the new school session.
The visit is beneficial to the child in a number of ways.
(a) It protects him from the unpredicted attitudes of other children (b) He enters, into some relationship with the teacher, enjoying his/her personal attention.
(c) He becomes familiar with the physical set up of the school.
For example he knows where the toilet is located and other facilities too.
(d) The teacher learns something about the child; which helps him to understand the child’s needs.
Visiting the School in Session His visit to the school could be repeated during the regular session of the school for a brief period.
The child has an opportunity to form a concept of the school, and can make some contract.
He may even wish to participate in some of the activities, or at least watch what is going on.
Attending School for part of the Session The child begins attending school regularly for part of the day/session.
This begins the process of separating from the parent.
The teacher could plan with the parents the time and method of separation.
The teacher may also visit the child at home to be better acquainted.
Parent/Teacher Attitude toward separation The way parents respond to the child’s going to school has profound influence on the way the child adjusts there.
Parents should not be too anxious about their wards; rather they must encourage them.
For instance, the mother helps a timid child by assuring her ; “I am around”; “ I will not leave” she sits where the child could see her.
The teacher needs to take active part in the process of separation.
He must actively give support to the child.
3.2.6 Full Attendance without Parents When the mother is able to leave the child almost as soon as they arrive at school, and stays away without his becoming uneasy the child is fully ready for school.
113 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Discuss ways to which a child may be helped when he is preparing to go to school for the first time.
3.3 Criteria for Determining School Readiness A number of factors may determine school readiness.
Some of these factors are emotional, social, physical, cognitive and normative.
Physical A child’s physical well being contributes to his school readiness.
A child who has problem of vision for instance, and who is unable to adapt to the chalkboard.
He may have problems adjusting from a far, some may also have hearing impairment, in which case, they may not be able to discriminate between sounds.
Leper and some others who studied some children suggest that children up to the age of five hear many sounds, but thereafter, “there are wide differences in their experiences with sounds and their awareness of sounds”.
The pre-school (or kindergarten) teacher must therefore be alert to such problems, and help the pupil make necessary adjustment.
The state of health of a child and the quality of food he takes also affects readiness for school.
A child who falls sick often and misses a lot of classes, may not be able to cope adequately with school work.
Cognitive Read (recall that this had been mentioned this name in 3.2 of this unit) believe that intelligence is not a single entity.
It is made up of many varieties, and this emerges as they are nurtured by a conducive environment.
The pre-school child, who is at the ‘pre-operational ‘stage of Piaget’s intellectual development can therefore benefit greatly from good nursery school.
The school programme exposes him to sensory- motor activities that widens and broadens his range of experience The child improves his language competence, through dialogue.
This also helps him to articulate his thoughts in words.
Further, the child moves closer to clarity because it is possible for him to clarify his misconceptions.
The child is able to use his imaginations, and so can think about alternatives.
114 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Social-emotional If children are to be happy then they must grow in an atmosphere devoid of emotional and behavioral problems.
As earlier said, in the beginning of section 3.2 of this unit, there is a call for three things; the development of a sense of trust, autonomy and initiative.
From infancy the child must grow in an atmosphere of consistent and sensitive care.
This means that the child’s basic needs are met, and he get attention from people around him, he ultimately builds a sense of trust in people.
Since by experience he has learned to trust people, he gains some confidence in himself; and so begins to act more confidently.
If his earlier experiences had been negative he loses confidence in people and in himself too.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Outline the criteria for school readiness.
3.4 Drawing up a Programme that can be used to Promote School Readiness Recent studies have called for a number of changes in the learning progress that takes place in early childhood.
The new trend seeks with the “tasks” that the child needs to master if he is to make normal programmes.
Two forces that determine these tasks are: (1) the expectations and pressure of society (2) and the changes that occurs in the child as a result of growth and maturation .
Leeper and his group (see 3.3 of this unit) identify the development tasks that exist in early childhood.
There are about seven of these.
1.
Achieving an appropriate dependence - independence pattern At this stage the child learns to act on his own; but at the same time he needs to learn to share the teachers attention with other children.
(a) To help the child, the school has to ensure, a warm and conceptive atmosphere in group.
In order to ensure this the group should be small so that the teacher can give adequate attention.
(b) Provide facilities like toilet, resource rooms, big playing ground etc.
115 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 2.
Achieving an appropriate giving-receiving pattern of affection This is the stage when the child learns to give as much love and attention as he also receives.
He makes friend with other children The school provides occasion to show affection in desirable ways – greetings, playing together in groups.
It is not ideal to compare children at this stage by a stressing the weakness or strengths of each of them in a manner that may lead to hard feelings of others.
Each child must experience a sense of security.
3.
Relating to changing social groups The child at this stage learns to adjust to group rules.
He must develop that sense of belonging; seeing himself for example as member of the school (group) The school may help in the following ways: (a) The child begins to participate in planning and sharing.
(b) Emphasis is placed on co-operative and voluntary effort not on domination.
(c) Opportunities should be created for him to give and receive helpful suggestions; and/ or criticisms as the case may be.
4.
Developing a conscience This is the period when the child learns to identify with societal values.
He learns to take instructions, he learns to obey people in authority; he learns to accept standard behaviours.
The School assists the child by: (a) giving explanations or reasons for actions; which the child should be able to understand.
(b) avoid moralizing (c) opportunities should be provided for making choices within limits.
(d) Providing opportunities to react/respond to directions or to learn respect for authority.
5.
Learning ones psycho-sociobiological sex role Between age 2 and 4 children exchange roles freely.
But after age four they begin to identify with their appropriate sex group.
Boys tend to move closer to their father, and later with men, generally.
Girls do similar with mother and women generally.
Children at this stage begin to learn socially approved sex role.
116 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT The school helps at this stage by: (a) providing for plays that allow girls to feature as mothers , a nurse while the boys can act as fathers, policemen etc.
(b) opportunities are provided for the children to find out the appropriate expectations from these sex roles.
6.
Accepting and adjusting to a changing body The school should help children to adjust these physical changes of their bodies.
Boys need facilities that will help develop their muscles.
Thus games like football, and adequate playing grounds should be provided.
7.
Developing an appropriate symbol system and conceptual abilities The school helps the child at this stage by exposing him through stories, books excursions to nearby institutions or places of interest.
What this means simply is that the teacher in planning his/her programmes should take into consideration the various needs of the pupils.
Just as a child differs, even so does the group.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Draw up a programme that can be used to prepare children from pre- primary school for formal educational tasks of primary school 4.0 CONCLUSION School readiness is the total state of the child that shows that the child can benefit from formal education.
A child needs to be helped by both the teacher and the parent (s) to get him ready for school.
A child is not ready for school just because he is smart or intelligent, other developmental process in the child must also be ready for the child’s new endeavor and experience.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have just been introduced to school readiness in children.
How to prepare a child for school, the role of the teacher and that of the parent is clear in what we have learnt.
117 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT The criteria for determining whether or not a child is ready for school has also been stated.
In the next unit, we shall continue our discussion on school readiness in more detail.
We shall compare school readiness with school maturity and also highlight on the skills a child need to acquire to get ready for formal school learning.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 In your discussion, you should highlight on the following points: 1.
Teacher meeting with the parent(s) 2.
Visiting the school when not in session 3.
Visiting the school when in session 4.
Attending school for the part of the session 5.
Parents/Teacher attitude towards separation 6.
Full attendance without parents.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Physical readiness 2.
Cognitive readiness 3.
Social – emotional readiness ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 There are seven identified developmental tasks that exist in early child education, the teacher must take all into consideration while drawing his/her programme, and these are: (i) Achieving an appropriate dependence – independence pattern.
(ii) Achieving an appropriate giving – receiving pattern of affection.
(iii) Relating to changing social groups (iv) Developing a conscience (v) Learning one’s psycho-sociobiological sex role.
(vi) Accepting and adjusting to changing body (vii) Developing an appropriate symbol and concepted abilities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
For a child to go to school for the first time, he has two basic tasks to overcome, and these are: 2.
Discuss ways by which a child may be helped to prepare to go to school for the first time.
118 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Leeper, Sanahtt, Dales Ruth, Skipper Dora, Withersoopn Ralpph (1968).
Good Schools for Young Children, New York: The Macmillian Company.
Adopting Early Childhood Curricula.
St Louis: The C.V Mosby Company.
Rad, Katherine (1971).
The Nursery School.
A Human Relations Laboratory Philadephia: W.B Saunders Company.
Betty (1971).
I Go To School.
Nashville, Tenn: Broadman Press.
119 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 2 SCHOOL READINESS II CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction.
2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Maturation and Learning 3.1.1 Influence of Maturation on Children Educational Achievement 3.2 School Readiness 3.2.1 Reading as Part of School Readiness 3.2.1.1 Visual Skills 3.2.1.2 Auditory Skills 3.3 Preparing for Formal Learning 3.3.1 Curriculum Adaptation for Different Age Levels towards School Readiness 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION School readiness, is the central theme of this course - child development.
This is because we are interested in child development so as to utilize the natural principles and pattern of development in children to know what to teach them at the various stages of their life.
Children don't have to be forced to do what they are not matured enough to learn or what they are not ready for.
Because of the central role of school readiness in child development as regards to early childhood education, this unit will still be devoted to more discussion on school readiness.
In the unit you learnt some of the steps to be taken by parents and even teachers to prepare children for formal- school work.
The criteria to Identify children that are ready for formal school work will also be highlighted.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the time you have finished going through this unit, you will be able to:  define maturation  identify the difference between learning and maturation  list some of the factors that can help a child to mature for school tasks on time 120 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT  recognize some of the basic training to give a child to prepare him to read and write  recognize some of the curricular activities for the different age range of children in the pre-primary and lower primary classes  explain the difference between maturity and readiness.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Maturation and Learning Maturation is the development which takes place in an individual in the absence of specific experience (i.e.
without being taught).
When we narrow down growth as a biological process to that of the growth of these parts of the body that have to do with learning, then we are talking of maturational factors.
From the experience gathered in child study projects, it is somehow a waste of time teaching a baby to walk, climb or use the potty until when some physical parts of the baby's body are developed for such activities.
This is what is meant by maturation.
Maturation has to do with organic (thing of the living things) factors that we have little or no influence (control) over, and yet it affects our development, but we have much control on what we learn.
Maturation also has limit to some extent but learning has no limit, you can decide to learn to any extent you may choose.
Maturation and Learning are two related concepts that affect people's behavior.
It is however possible to recognize the effect of one against that of the other.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is maturation?
2.
We have control over maturation.
True or False?
3.1.1 Influence of Maturation on Children's Educational Achievement Many motor activities (see unit 5) are greatly affected by maturation.
You will recollect that development was also described in unit three of this course and most of the .units in module two as maturity (development).
Many of the motor activities learned by children are effect of maturation, body co-ordination, sitting, standing, stair- climbing, cutting with scissors, buttoning clothes, walking etc.
But in the case of more complex skills or tasks like rolling ball, dancing, writing, practice and training assume a more important role, whereby children are not left alone to maturation else they will be at disadvantage.
121 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT There is no universally accepted age for a child to be matured for many of the educational tasks.
However from experiences and some reports of child study, it has been concluded that working of simple addition exercises with sums (totals) greater that ten should be given to children with minimum age of seven years while reading should commence with a minimum age of six years.
Although it has also been proved that some children can be made to be ready for arithmetic and reading before the age of seven and six respectively based on some factors.
Some of these factors are previous teaming experience, motivation, quality of school teaching, pupil- teacher relationship and intelligence of the child.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Give 3 examples of activities children perform as (a) result of maturity (b) with some training.
3.2 School Readiness It is one of the teachers task to observe children so as to detect signs of maturity i.e.
growing points in them.
This is usually detected through the children’s spontaneous reaction and .expression of felt interests.
It is not easy to notice or identify the child's first flicker (unsteady sign of movement) of new intellectual or emotional awareness, first readiness to embrace new sets of concepts or to enter to new relations.
The teacher will have to act as gardener while the pupil is the plant, the school then becomes the garden.
In this way the teacher will then be watchful of his plant, ready to feed for growth, ready to weed it when necessary, trying hard to see to it that each child is helped to grow as much as he can.
The gardener should not hurry himself to make all the plants the same but to see to it that every plant grows well so that the whole garden is in peace and harmony.
The teacher can ensure the proper growth of every child by doing the following: (i) Provision of a stimulating environment i.e.
not trying to force any child to go against his pace, but just providing stimulation and closely observing them.
The stimulation here implies the kind of learning activities and experience rather than facts to be memorized or stored.
As much as possible the teacher should provide audio-visual aids, picture, illustrative books, visits to places of interests etc.
These are in form of structured (i.e.
planned or deliberate) environment which then becomes stimulating environment.
The school physical structure are also part of the environment that must also be stimulating.
122 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT (ii) Readiness to observe signs of readiness: the teacher must be on the look out for maturation or growing point in the children through the appearance of interest.
To observe signs of interest in children; you don't just wait passively for the child to show it, you also stimulate it.
For example, to prepare a child for reading you read stories to them, though at age below five, children suppose to play most of the time, but we still find some who come to school with higher expectations, this is why there must still be some simple reading materials.
Some learning theorist, we mean those who formulate theory in learning believe that learning readiness should appear more in children when they are between the age of five and eight.
(iii) Feeding and guiding further growth of the interest: the teacher gives the child more challenging work after noting the appearance of interest in an area, he .gives more guidance to the child and put him in the right direction.
In all ways possible you sustain the interest, so that it even grows stronger especially during the period that the child himself is very interested.
But the danger in this is that if the teacher is to teach what the students are interested alone he can easily forget the order of learning.
The teacher needs to be able to balance between the two.
Reading, writing and some simple arithmetic are the three learning structures that children are usually prepare for: while we look forward to observe signs of readiness for formal school work.
In the next section, we shall talk about preparing a child to read and write, later in the unit we talk about arithmetic readiness.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 (1) To prepare a group of children for formal school readiness, the teacher and the children must act as --------- and --------- respectively.
(2) List the 3 steps to take while preparing children for formal school works.
3.2.1 Reading as Part of School Readiness We are in a reading world and one of the qualities demanded to live comfortably is the ability to read.
Children therefore, need to be ready for school by being ready to read.
A child who can not read becomes backward in almost everything in school.
It should therefore be a great concern for the nursery (pre-primary) and lower primary teacher to 123 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT prepare a child to read because of the great influence this will have on the child’s growth.
The ability to read promotes normal mental health, growth and development in the child, and success in future.
After speech (language) reading is the next major means of communication.
Unfortunately unlike speech, it is not acquired naturally; It is taught and learnt by majority of people.
The earlier it is taught to children the better for them to live fuller and richer lives in the modern living world.
You know will have opportunity to read things.
The age at which a child can be ready to read depends on:  His intelligence  How far the home environment encourages him to read  How well he can speak and understand his own language.
The power of words, concepts and experience (total oral language background) you will recall that in unit 5 we said children acquire vocabulary of words in the process of speech and language development the child needs to draw inspiration for recognizing words from the part of words he has gathered.
For reading and writing readiness, a child should be given training on  Visual skills  Auditory skills  Qral-language development  Emotional factors For now, we will briefly talk about the visual skills and make some clarification of the auditory skills.
The other developmental processes have been taken care of in units 5 and 8 respectively.
3.2.1.1 Visual Skills These include:  Hand -eye co-ordination  Left -right eye movement  Visual memory and imaging  Hand -eye co-ordination.
Reading is usually taught along with writing.
They are sister skills, which reinforce each other.
Skill in visual discrimination is not enough without producing writing.
The child needs to co-ordinate the hand and eye effectively.
He sees with the eye and writes with the hand.
124 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT For reading and writing the hand and eye must work together.
As we mentioned in unit 6 – Motor development, before the age of formal school period, the child is used to some body movement.
But as he now begins to read and write, he needs to make more fine movement, i.e.
definite, systematic movement.
If the child is not well guided, he will complain of sore shoulder after a time.
It will take some time with a lot of practices before the child can make the finely controlled movements with fingers and wrists.
For some children, the training may not be for long, depending on the kind of home training received from other similar activities.
For example, a girl who has been taught by her mother to do simple sewing, knitting, cutting with scissors etc.
would have had some useful manipulative experiences before coming to school.
Similar a boy who has been used to using screws, nuts and bolts while working with daddy.
A child who has not been exposed to some of these pre-school manipulative experiences will rely heavily on the school enrichment programme before he can achieve competence in hand-eye co-ordination.
Left -right eye movement You know reading and writing normally goes from left to right.
It is necessary to prepare a child to read by teaching him how to make smooth and rhythmical eye movements in a left to right direction and to move eye backward at the end of every line.
A child that is not put through to things like this may be confused and make no sense of the order or direction of words in printed page.
A four year old child trying to copy with adult writing on a page of book or a paper may just readily start from right to left, start writing gaily from the bottom and work himself to the top.
A left handed child is more prone to that writing in a right to left direction, who will blame him?, to him that may be the best way to write without having his other hand disturbing him.
The 'path' technique is a good way of teaching children to practice the left to right eye movement.
The child can be asked to trace the route (or path) followed by a bird to his nest, a train from tunnel to a station.
Pictures and stories can also be useful.
Training of visual memory and imaging Teachers should be prepared to face frustrating experience of teaching children new words everyday.
This has to be done with a lot of repetition, use of flash cards, work books, and .other teacher devised 125 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT activities, like tracing, coping etc.
children who are not ready for formal reading can easily be detected.
You find such children recognizing words in flash cards but not in other textual print material like book.
A lot of pre-reading exercises must be given to a child so that he can develop to the fullest of the abilities required to make a good start in learning to read.
3.2.1.2 Auditory Skills Training in auditory skills is also necessary for reading readiness.
You should realize that reading involves decoding, translating visually perceived symbols into sound, so for every skills to be developed for reading, a matching auditory skill should also be considered.
A beginner first read loud to himself, it is only when he hears himself well that he can prove that he can read to others.
You would have noticed that we always tell children names of objects, they themselves are always eager to know names of objects, and they try to pronounce it after the adult.
The child is first taught to listen to words, notice the sound patterns, the similarity and the differences.
He relies much on the three R's listening.
These are repetition, rhythm and rhyme.
A lot of repetition, not only of word, but also of phrases will help the child a lot.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Mention 4 basic training you will need to give a child to prepare him for reading and writing skill.
3.3 Preparing for Formal Learning The general activities, often found in kindergarten curricular (though vary from school to school and from place, to place) usually place emphasis on the pre-academic training i.e.
specific academic readiness building.
About 40 -50% of a typical day is devoted to specific creative activities like art work, model building etc., to music like singing, listening and rhythmic activities and also language based activities like story telling, poetry, show and tell question and answer activities (this is like group discussion in children's own way).
The remaining time of about 50-60% of the day is flexibility distributed for self-care,.
(eating, toileting etc), free play and rest periods.
The flexibility in the kindergarten curriculum enables a good teacher to put in some activities of basic language, mathematics, sciences and social 126 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT studies concepts.
This is where the commitment, genuity, creativeness and initiative qualities of the teacher come to plays.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Suggest activities for the day in a nursery 2 class.
3.3.1 Curriculum Adaptation for Different Age Levels towards School Readiness The following are some activities that pre-primary and lower primary school children can do to prepare them for full and proper formal learning, at the different age levels.
2- 3 years At this age children can do a lot of activities like drawing and painting that will benefit their motor development, and exploration with colour and paints.
Most of the materials to be used must however, be water soluble so they can be washed off easily without the children messing their clothes.
If a child does not want to participate, may be because it is messy or otherwise the teacher doesn’t need to force him, he can however be encouraged to watch others as they do the activities.
3-4 years This is the founding stage of children educational career.
They have great interest and readiness for language vocabulary, use of sentences, capacity to enjoy books, puppets, stories and music.
They are active and enthusiastic.
The teacher helps them by providing rich experiences for them by asking them purposeful questions.
4 -5 years This is the period of children's steady physical growth, so they enjoy activities involving the use of the muscles e.g.
jumping, running, throwing of balls etc.
Pictures can be used to stimulate their interest on any topic to be taught.
The teacher should ask stimulating questions from the picture.
They are in form of "reading readiness".
Games involving matching of objects, letters and simple words should be provided for them.
These will provide them with concentrated skills, the type needed to prepare them for effective reading in books and or charts.
The more enthusiastic 127 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT the teacher is in this case the more responsive the children are.
Cooking, preparing salads, measuring ingredients etc.
expose children and prepare them for mathematics and scientific experiences.
They can do simple classification in this age, with objects like buttons, crayons, pencils etc.
They should only be introduced to materials that are safe to handle e.g.
leaves, flower, water etc.
Children in this age group demands to have concrete and manipulative experiences of nature.
They need to feel, sense, touch, push and pull objects of different characteristics.
The period coincides with the piaget's pre-operational stage (see unit 9), they need first hand experiences of things, those things they have been seeing in pictures or books before now, they want to see them in reality; for example a child of this age needs to make an object with clay before knowing what is clay.
Teachers need to use all the things at their disposal to help the children learn.
The appropriate and proportional amounts of activities to engage in will be determined by the teacher’s experiences and orientation.
6-8 years The language development has improved to a great extent (see unit 5).
The children in this age group are able to perform many physical tasks than before.
They continue to learn best by participating in skill development rather than being told.
They can cope with wide varieties of experiences and can accommodate different learning styles.
Home influence can seriously affect .their learning in this stage.
Teachers need to be interested and show understanding to the students, and should also create and encourage the love of learning into the children.
The maturational readiness of a child is considered within the developmental pattern, where education is geared towards assisting the child in the understanding of himself and his world.
It has been recognized that children have self-regulatory process of learning and growth, it is this awareness that has made education to encourage self-selection, self pacing for children’s educational activities.
The pre-primary school curricula are mostly highly associated with number concepts and reading readiness activities.
The "exposure to experience" technique rather than structural methods are often needed for science and social studies Children have to be exposed to relevant experience if you want them to understand social studies and science.
Health and physical education along with are usually frequent in their curriculum while language, art, music and reading hardly come up.
128 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 1.
Suggest one activity in each case that can be relevant to children of the given age grade, which will also prepare them appropriately for their future educational tasks.
(a) 2-3 years (b) 3-4 years (c) 5-6 years and (d) 6-8 years.
4.0 CONCLUSION School readiness and school maturation are closely connected to Child Development.
As the child is going through stages of development in his system, physical, social, emotional and intellectual, he is also attaining the stage of maturation for some specific school activities.
The organic system in the body must be matured to some certain stages before a child can perform some specific tasks.
Some of these tasks, the child grows to perform them well without teaching while for some he will need to be taught and also have a lot of practices before we can really say "that the child is prepared for the intellectually tasking activities in the formal school system, specifically primary schools.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have learnt that the fact that some children may be slow or weak.
The child may not be matured enough for such tasks.
We compare maturation with learning briefly while mentioning the influence of maturation in the children's educational achievement.
We consider school readiness, and how we can nurture school readiness in children.
The different skills to prepare a child or the purpose of being able to read and write were considered.
The relevant school activities (curricular) that can be used to prepare children for formal learning were also considered at the various age range.
In the next unit, our discussion will be focused on Discipline as part of Education.
We shall mention the need for disciplinary actions on children.
Describe what discipline entails and that the values of discipline.
You will also learn that some factors influence discipline and that there are different disciplinary styles.
Discipline will also be related to punishment.
You are expected to see training of a child to be self discipline as part of child development.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Maturation is the development which takes place in a person in the absence of specific experience like teaching.
False 129 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Sitting, standing, stair-climbing, cutting with scissors, walking, body-co-ordination (ANY THREE) Rolling ball, writing, dancing.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Gardener and Plant Provision of stimulating environment Readiness to observe signs of readiness.
Feeding guiding further growth of the interest.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4  Hand -eye co-ordination.
 Left -right eye movement  Visual memory and imaging  Auditory skills.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Art work Story time Arithmetic Break Music Rhymes Break Play Rest Social student ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 2-3 years - Drawing and painting.
3-4 years - Story time 4-5 years - Physical and health Education activities 5-6 years - Moulding object with clay 6-8 years - Simple Arithmetics.
130 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the difference between the concepts of school readiness and school maturity.
2.
Maturation and - ------- both affect human life by causing------.
3.
The age at which a child gets ready for reading depends on 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Dearden, R.F.
(1975).
The Philosophy of Primary Education.
An Introduction Students Library of Education.
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
London Evans, ED (1975).
Contemporary Influence in Early Childhood Education.
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc. New York.
Grant, Margaret (1976).
School Methods with Younger Children.
Evans Brothers Limited.
Lee, Catherine (1976).
The Growth and Development of Children.
Longman Group Limited London.
Lovell, K (1973).
Educational Psychology and Children.
Eleventh edition.
Unit books Hodder and Stoughton.
Margolin, Edythe (1976).
Young Children: Their Curriculum and Learning Progresses.
Macmillan Publishing Co. Rodger, Rosemary (1999).
Planning and Appropriate Curriculum for the Under Fives.
David Fulton Publishers London.
University of South Africa.
Walker Christopher (1979).
Pre-reading Skills.
Ward Lock Educational London.
131 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 3 DISCIPLINE AS PART OF EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Discipline as Part of the Act of Education 3.1.1 What is Discipline?
3.1.2 The Values of Discipline for the Child 3.1.3 How to Impose Discipline 3.2 Factors Influencing Discipline 3.3.
Types of Discipline 3.4 Punishment 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we elaborated on school readiness as a developmental process in young children.
We discussed the process of getting children ready for school, school maturity and the types of curriculum that can be used to prepare a child for formal schooling proper, in this unit; we are going to discuss discipline as part of the act of education.
Discipline we will come to realize, is not just keeping and maintaining law and order, remaining or quiet and still.
Discipline is a developmental process, a kind of behavior to develop in Young Children.
The different terms of disciplinary styles of teachers are also stated and described.
You will also learn when and how to use punishment as a resort to maintaining discipline.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit, you will be able to:  state the need for disciplinary actions on children  define discipline  describe what discipline entails  list the values of discipline  describe how to impose discipline on children  list the factors that can influence discipline  identify the different forms of discipline  appreciate the most effective disciplinary style  relate punishment to discipline  define punishment.
132 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Discipline as Part of the Act of Education Since the beginning of this course we have been discussing behavioral development of children in different forms.
We as teachers or simply adults taking care of children, have come to realize that children behave in ways that puzzle and concern experienced teachers or adults, but which to the less experienced people, their behavior can be irritating and confusing.
In a child study, cross-sections of adults who had been working with children were asked to list the behaviors of children that trouble them most, two items outnumbered all the others and these are aggression and disobedience.
Other things that they claimed worried them about children again are temper, pestering for attention, lying, stealing, eating problems, lack of .concentrated and personal habits.
Some of the adults in their responses admitted that they felt guilty when they remember their reactions to some of these behaviors from the children.
But at the same time they believed that children should not be allowed to continue to behave as they like, especially when one considers the effect of their behavior on other children, disturbing the group or exposing themselves to danger.
Something has to be done, especially when one remembers the nature of the young children going by all that we have been discussing in their various stages of development.
You will recall that, in our first unit of this course, we started recognizing the nature of the child and showing understanding to the behavior of children as some of the purposes of child study.
(You can go back to read this over again).
As adults we need not allow the behavior of children to trouble us too much, we should also re-examine our selves where we have failed to help these children out.
One of such ways is to teach them self- discipline especially when it comes to emotional matter.
You will recall that we say a three year old child can be loving and responsive, but always wanting to have his own way; and that as a child' approaches age five, he can be boastful.
Also that a child between the age seven and eleven years can be anxious against ineffective adults.
Discipline is therefore a part of the act of education necessary to curb some of the excuses of children's behavior that may not be socially accepted.
You may then wonder, what is discipline?
we believe, the word is a common term to you in your everyday conversation, but since we are now bringing it up as an act of education, we may need to define it and 133 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT relate it to education, especially as it effects the teaching or education in general of young children.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Mention 7 Characteristics behavior of children that worries adults.
Underline the two most outstanding ones.
2.
Children don't just behave badly; it is only natural of them true or false?
3.1.1 What is Discipline?
To some people, discipline is having everybody conforming to some laid down rules and regulations.
But this is more like a military setting where everybody carries out certain duties like morning parade with precision.
This is not the type of discipline we talk about in schools.
A democratic teacher should not control his children by just dishing out orders indiscriminately and expecting the children to obey them passively without complaints.
Some other people believe discipline is being able to live a hard way of life.
To people like this one is expected to live with the barest minimum essentials of life, no luxury of any kind.
To such people, school's midday meal is unnecessary, drama or dancing in schools is a waste of time, and even the use of modern gadgets to teach and learn is indulgence.
To this group of people children will learn no matter the condition of the classroom.
Discipline in school is more than all these things.
It is more than having a quiet and still class, or mere maintenance of law and order in the classrooms.
It is even more than being able to deal with offenders or knowing when to introduce occasional punishment and praises.
Discipline involves the application of those influences which secure or at least try to secure proper conduct of children in schools.
Classroom disciplines is the training giving to children so as to make them self - restraint, orderly, of good-conduct, co-operative and building up the habit of wanting to get the best out of themselves.
Discipline involves intellectual and moral education and not giving out order and instruction.
3.1.2 The Value of Discipline for the Child Discipline should be seen as a means to an end and not as an end itself.
It is valuable in: 134 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Making it possible to every child in a classroom to work free from inter-eruption and disturbance i.e.
having the right opportunity for work Helping the child to learn self-control.
The best form of discipline is to make the child develop a life style of self-discipline and patriotism.
To gradually bring the child to appreciate, to wish to participate in and support the government.
In this way, the child will develop to respect the rights of others, and praise the efforts of other people.
The best form of discipline is self-discipline and sense of patriotism but we should instill discipline, and avoid over pampered of the children.
Children's power of self-control should be developed, and they should be trained to use their self-control.
Children should be trusted to some extent and they should be, made to feel authority and not only seeing authority.
3.1.3 How to Impose Discipline Teachers world have done so much if they can teach pupils to take over the responsibility for their own learning and to carry out their responsibilities.
This can be done in the following ways: (i) Acquaint children with behaviors that is acceptable to the group or society in general, also point out to them behaviors that are not acceptable (remember that this is major discussion in Social development in Unit 7).
In this way you will help the children to establish a code of conduct for themselves.
(ii) In a slow manner, help the children to improve on their standards of code of conduct.
You do this by making them see the advantage of setting high standards for themselves and the disadvantage of setting low standards.
You help to clarify value through questioning and discussions.
(iii) Sometimes you may need to enforce rules as a tool for self- discipline.
By enforcing some rules, it becomes a desirable behavioral habit.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 (1) Give 2 major values of discipline.
(2) Outline the ways you will adopt to maintain discipline in a group of children.
135 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.2 Factors Influencing Discipline Maintaining discipline as it has been so described may not be easy.
Some factors have been recognized to be influential in discipline.
I believe it is proper to state these factors with .
brief description so that this will give you more understanding of the children's behavior and will also help you to appreciate the influence of these factors on discipline.
(i) The school as a society The school is like a society in itself.
The children, the students in the school are susceptible to the force of the public opinion, and they have to go by the tone of the school.
The school as a society in itself is a powerful influence on the children’s character formation.
The tone of each school is likely to be different.
The time for break time for special prayer etc.
differ from school to school, and all these influence the self-discipline of the children.
In each school however, the children are made to feel that they are living in a society where hard work, beautiful things, moral values, muscular skill and fair plays are valued.
These are not only valued by the teachers but by the school as a whole.
Mind you children should also be made to feel as part of the whole school.
Ideal or Model presentation This is from what the children are made to study.
If stories of outstanding people are told to the children's during some subject lessons, they develop interest and appreciate the abilities, work and lives of these outstanding people.
The child will be filled with the desire to follow in the steps of those masters they have chosen as ideals or models and this thus mould the child's character.
It is therefore advisable to tell young children stories of heroes which encourage durable qualities in them.
Interesting work or Motivation Teachers should make the children to realize the value of all school work.
This is to help the children develop their inner satisfaction which makes them to want to do more of the work.
Since they can feel and see the worth of the school work, they want to do more, such that there will be no room for misbehavior.
The interest developed become a disciplinary power.
Keeping all children busy As you would have learnt, children can be restless.
When planning the days work, the teacher should have at the back of his mind these children who will finish so quickly and thus be playing or misbehaving.
136 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT The teacher should make provision for extra educative work not just anything to keep such children busy.
Combining firmness with Kindness The future welfare of the children must be considered.
Whenever a child does something bad, he should be made to realize it.
This should not be by scolding, beating or fussing all the time, else it will be taking as saying of weakness on the part of the teacher or parent.
The children should be convinced that whatever the teacher/parent says, he means it and that he says the most serious thing in a gentle and kind way.
Consistency justice A teacher must be consistent and impartial with his requirement.
It is not good to enforce a regulation on a day and fail to do so the following day.
If a child forgets to bring his literature book to school in a day, and he is sent out to go back home to get it, another child who does the same thing at another time should not be pardoned, the teacher should explain the situation to the class.
All cases of misbehavior should also be examined before meting out punishment.
Whenever a punishment is to be given, the children should be counseled to know why they are being punished consider the example given below: Here is a conversation between a teacher and two boys who stayed away from school the previous day: Teacher: I am glad to see you back.
I missed you yesterday, and I was a bit uncomfortable, too because I would not want any bad thing to happen to you.
You are my friends.
Tell me, sincerely as your friend, what really kept you away from school.
Pupils: We are sorry, sir, but we escorted our friend who was going to Lagos to the railway station.
The train was late to arrive.
We knew we were already late for school, so we decided to stay out for the day.
Teacher: I am happy it was nothing bad like accident or sudden illness that stopped you from school yesterday.
But do you think your reason is a good one?
Or why did you not send a message to me saying you would be late?
Pupils: We are sorry, sir.
Teacher: Do you feel you are wrong or right?
137 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Pupils: We are wrong sir.
Teacher: Now that you know you are wrong to have stayed out of school, I will give you slight punishment so that when you remember the punishment you will not repeat such a thing.
Pupils: We agree, sir.
.!
No harm is done because the boys were made to realize why they were punished.
Cruel and unusual punishment should not be used, and children be given opportunity to explain the reason for their bad behavior before punishment.
Dealing personally with offender It is not good punishing a whole class for the offence of a person or a set of students.
To those who do not carry out the offence, it is an act of injustice, and the children will not be happy about this.
Each child should be made to be answerable to his fault.
However there may be cases of difficulty in discovering the particular offenders, the teacher can then melt out a mild punishment on the whole class.
It should be realized that this kind of punishment is not just for the offence but for the incapability of the entire class to identify the actual offender (s).
This type of punishment should be avoided as much as possible.
There shouldn't be too many school rules and regulations, because the tendencies to forget them are high and as such children can easily go against them.
The school should only introduce rules and regulations that are very necessary probably some children are fond of doing certain wrong things which then suggest coming out with a militant rule against it.
.Rules should be clear and definite; the children may even on their own suggest what should be a rule.
Bad home training and upbringing A child usually spends more time at home than in school.
If the type of home training or upbringing a child receives at home is bad and in contrary to the one in school; the child can be a disciplinary problem in the school.
For example a child who is used to lying at home without anybody scolding him for it, may not see anything bad in lying when he gets to school.
Or a child, whose parents are always quarrelling and fighting, may become aggressive in school, always picking up quarrelling or fighting his mates.
In cases like this, the teacher has to organize a meeting of the parent(s) of such child with the school authority or the teacher himself.
They should talk out away of helping such child.
138 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT The absence of the points raised above, except for the last one, will create obstacle to discipline in schools, so as teachers, we should allow these to guide as.
This is necessary so that the children in our care can develop to becoming, responsible and disciplined citizens in future.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List the factors that can influence discipline in children.
3.3 Types of Discipline Teachers are human beings, with normal human characters, including personality and individual differences.
We are all different in the way we perceive things and extent to which we act on matters can be very different class control and subsequently class discipline styles can be different.
Specialists in Educational management and psychology have being able to identify four categories of teachers in this regard.
we believe it will be proper to let you know this, so that you will know where you belong and see how you can improve upon your self.
We have:  The permissive or take it easy teacher  The authoritarian teacher  The benevolent teacher  The democratic teacher These categories also hold the same respective style of discipline; so we have Permissive discipline This is the type of situation where the teacher believes that children should be allowed .to do or say what they like.
The teacher does not disturb the children in their play or work.
He does not believe in getting up any standard or form of behaviors acceptable.
Neither discourage nor encourage the children to keep to certain standards.
The effect of this is that:  The assertive and stronger children will be bulling the weaker ones.
 The stronger ones want the weaker to be submissive; in this way the weaker ones will come to hate the school system.
 There will be no law and order in such classrooms, and there will be unhealthy rivalry among the children.
139 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT  Those children that are reserved, i.e.
introvert, will be withdrawing from group work, such children will be passive in class activities  The children will hardly engage in team work since everybody does what he likes.
 When an offence is committed by the class, the children as a whole will only be looking for escape goats.
 The children’s morale will be low.
Authoritarian discipline This is like the extreme opposite of the permissive type.
The teacher exercises excessive control on the children, not allowing them to do anything on their own.
The teacher does not believe in the children giving any suggestion when it comes to classroom matters.
He insists on absolute submission by the children.
The effect of this is that The children passively submit to the teachers, order, and they grow to hate the teacher for this.
Children can be irritable and unwilling to co-operate with the teacher.
The children will engage in back-sitting, loosing concentration in class and if possible avoid coming to the class.
The over dependence of the children on the teacher will not encourage creativity and there will be lack of initiative from the children.
The active children find it even more uncomfortable and unpleasant staying in such classroom than the passive children.
The children in a class of this type, lack self-discipline, love and affection, these children may grow to have this type of attitude to life even in future.
The classroom situation in a class of this type is usually under check and there is always tension.
Benevolent autocrative discipline The teacher or adult in this case is a kind absolute ruler.
He enforces his authority but in a kind and cheerful manner.
He can be described as a firm and kind teacher.
Democratic Discipline This is in between the two extremes of permissive and authoritarian discipline styles.
The teacher imposes minimal, defined degrees of control and standard.
He gives room for social, personal, moral and emotional development.
The teacher is considerate and allows the inputs of the children in the government of the class.
He does not allow sarcasm, ridicule and would not punish children unduly and unnecessarily.
The teacher gives guidance and assistance to children when necessary.
He allows children to choose the members of their team 140 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT whenever there are going to be team work.
In a classroom of this type, there will be humour and many, interesting situation will be going on in the class and interaction is cordial and control is child- centered.
The effects of this are the children are less dependent on the teacher; they carry out their activities with the same zeal, with or without the presence of the teacher.
The children grow to like the teacher, because he is sympathetic and interested in their well-being.
 The children are friendly and can talk freely about their work.
 The children will have self-confidence in themselves and they also develop self-discipline love and affection  The children accept and assume responsibility willingly whenever necessary, they also praise one another for their efforts.
 There will be fewer disciplinary problems  Children enjoy and understand their lessons.
 The morale of the children in general is high.
 The children are active; there is room for initiative and creative activities.
 The children in such class could rate high in academics and social learning achievement.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Permissive discipline is not good, and neither is Authoritarian discipline, Discuss?
3.4 Punishment This is the act of making somebody to suffer for an offence.
Punishment refers to what somebody is asked to do as a sign of social disapproval of an undesirable behavior.
Social disapproval in the sense that the behavior is not according to the standards or norms of the society that the offender belongs to.
Remember that we have described a school as asocial setting.
A behavior may be an offence in one school, and yet may not be an offence in another school, which is a different society.
Punishment is supposed to result in personal discomfort or pain.
It is believed that before we conclude our discussion on discipline, we shall mention briefly, what we mean by punishment, since punishment always goes together with discipline.
Punishment is a reward with a negative value.
It is a device through which teachers resort to maintain discipline in class.
We, should however note that, punishment should solely be given as a result of a definite violation of agreed rules and regulations, and should always be administered (given) by someone in authority.
141 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 What is Punishment?
4.0 CONCLUSION Discipline is not being still or quiet in class.
It is not having passive children who are very obedient to teachers and school rules and regulation.
And it is not having a teacher who knows how to use the cane well.
Discipline is having each student (child) in a classroom being self-disciplined and engaging in purposefully activity in an orderly manner without any disturbance.
Every child being of good conduct.
You have been told of the negative effects on children when a teacher adopts a permissive or authoritarian disciplinary approach in dealing with his/her student.
In order to maintain good class discipline a teacher must ensure that his tone of leadership style is clear and he must also be democratic in his dealings with children.
In this way the teacher will be producing a generation of children who can think for themselves and impose self-discipline upon themselves later on in life.
5.0 SUMMARY Discipline we are told is a developmental process, the child need to be trained to be self-disciplined Discipline involves applying all possible influences to make a child secure proper conduct in schools.
You also learnt about the values of and factors affecting discipline.
You were also given some tips on how to impose discipline in Young children.
The different terms of disciplinary styles were also highlighted.
You are able to appreciate that whatever disciplinary style adopted will always have some effects on the children.
Those effects were stated for the respective disciplinary styles.
we believe you would have agreed with us that the best approach is the democratic disciplinary style, though we are aware that we all have our own natural individual differences.
In the next unit, we shall discuss the task of the teacher.
Teacher-child relationship and how the teacher can organize and manage teaching learning materials shall be discussed.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Temper, pestering for attention, lying, aggressiveness, lack of concentration, stealing, disobedience True 142 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Making it possible for every child in a classroom to work free from interruption and disturbance.
2.
Helping the child to learn self-control Acquaint children with behaviors that are acceptable to the group 3.
Slowly help children to improve on the standards of their code of conduct.
4.
Enforce rules as a tool for self-discipline.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
The school as a society 2.
Ideal or model presentation 3.
Interesting work or motivation 4.
Keeping all children busy 5.
Combining firmness with kindness 6.
Consistency and justice 7.
Dealing personally with offenders 8.
School Rules 9.
Bad home training and upbringing ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Permissive discipline is not good because of the following effects .The assertive and stronger children will be bulling the weaker ones.
The stronger ones want the weaker ones to be submissive in this way the weaker ones will come to hate the school system.
 There will be no law and order in such classroom, and there will be unhealthy rivalry among the children.
 Those children that are reserved, i.e.
introvert, will be withdrawing from group work, such children will be passive in class activities.
 The children will hardly engage in team work since everybody does what he likes.
When an offence is committed by the class the children as a whole will only be looking for scapegoat.
 The children’s morale will be low.
143 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Authoritarian discipline is not good because of the following effects:  The children passively submit to the teacher's and they grow to hate the teacher for this, children can be irritable and unwilling to co-operate with the teacher  The children will engage in back sitting, loosing concentration in class and if possible avoid coming to the class.
 The over-dependence of the children on the teacher will not encourage creativity and there will be lack of initiative with the children  The active children find it even more uncomfortable and unpleasant staying in such classroom than the passive children.
 The children in a class of this type, lack self-discipline, love and affection, these children may grow to this types of attitude to life even in future.
 The classroom situation in a class of this type is usually under and there is always tension.
Benevolent Autocrative Disciplinary Style Democratic Disciplinary style It is the best because of the following effects on the children:  The children are less dependent on the teacher, they carry out their activities with the same zeal, with or without the presence of the teacher.
 The children grow to like the teacher, because he is sympathetic and interested in their well-being.
 The children are friendly and can talk freely about their work.
 The children will have self-confidence in themselves and they also develop self- discipline love and affection.
 The children accept and assume responsibility willingly whenever necessary, they also praise one another for their efforts.
144 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is discipline?
2.
What purposes does discipline serve in school?
3.
Punishment is with a negative value: What are the possible reasons for children's problematic behavior The different disciplinary styles are ---------------------------------- 4.
In your own opinion which of the disciplinary styles is the best?
Give reasons.
It is important to use a tone of voice that is ------ yet ---- when disciplining the child.
4.
Discipline is necessary for the ----- of the child.
It teaches the child to behave in a way ------- 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Bello J.Y.
(1981).
Basic Principles of Teaching Education in Africa - A Willey Series Spectrum Book Limited, Ibadan and John Wiley and Sons.
New York.
Callahan, J.F.
and Clark L.H.
(1982).
Teaching in the Middle and Secondary School, Macmillian Publishing Company Inc. Evans, D. Ellis (1975).
Contemporary Influences in Early Childhood Education.
Holt, Binehert and Winston, Inc. New York.
Lee, Catherine (1977).
The Growth and the Development of Children 2nd edition Longman Group Limited, London.
Margolin, Edythe ( 1976).
Young Children: Their Curriculum and Learning Processes.
Macmillan Publishing Inc. University of South Africa (2001).
145 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT UNIT 4 THE TASK OF A TEACHER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Task of a Teacher 3.2 The Young Child 3.3 Teaching and Learning 3.3.1 Teacher - Child Relationship 3.3.2 Teacher - Directed Learning 3.3.2.1 Individual Teaching and learning 3.3.2.2 Group Teaching and Learning 3.3.2.3 Class Teaching and Learning 3.3.2.4 The Independent Learner 3.3.3 The School Climate 3.3.4 Discipline 3.3.5 Curriculum 3.3.6 Evaluation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit we focused on Discipline as a part of educational act.
In the unit, we described what is meant by Discipline and stated the value of discipline in a young child.
There are discussions on how to impose Discipline on children.
Factors that can influence discipline and types of disciplinary styles were considered.
Discipline was also related to Punishment.
It was stressed that the best way to make a child develop well emotionally, socially and intellectually is to train the child to be self-disciplined.
All the while we have been describing the nature of the development process of the young child.
The children will be brought to us as teacher to supplement the training they receive at home, even in most cases or in some cases, the parents and even the society at large expect so much from the teachers.
They want to observe considerable changes in the behaviour of a child who is already attending or has attended a pre-primary or primary school.
146 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT Teaching and learning are two processes that always, go together.
The two process can be very complicated yet simple.
The children that we are going to teach and help to grow according to the dictates of the society, are also members of the larger society.
They are under the influence of the home, the school and the community.
It is therefore the teacher's task to put all these into consideration while organizing the processes involved in teaching and learning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  identify the four main components of the teacher's task  appreciate the nature of the young child  list those factor's that can influence the behaviour of the child  define Teaching  define Learning  relate teaching to learning  mention the attributes that make up the individuality of a child  state the programmes teachers can use to direct learning  give examples of school curricular that group method will be suitable for the task of a teacher.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Task of a Teacher Living and working with children can be very tasking, and for many of their actions we don't always think before reacting, our actions at times, can be spontaneous, i.e.
without thinking.
Our fundamental attitude to children is important so as to avoid dangerous mistakes.
As we have been discussing in the past sixteen units, children’s behavior is particular and characteristic, our knowledge of their various developmental processes gives us insight to the behavior and full understanding of their nature.
If we must contribute to the children's holistic development, then we must be prepared to face the task with a basic attitude of love and honesty.
The task of the teacher, to be prepared for, may not be easy to put into specific areas because the division will only be artificial, teachers task are enormous and countless.
147 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT However, on close examination of these tasks, we can identify four main components namely: 1.
Teaching and learning -having a firm grasp of the general principles of successful teaching and learning.
2.
Organization and management: The ability to organize and manage the teaching and learning environment 3.
Home, school and community: being able to appreciate the educational implication of cordial relationship between school, the home background of children and the neighborhood in which they live in 4.
Teacher as leaner: being prepares to admit self as undergoing life long learning.
Before we take each of these components, one after the other for some brief explanation, let's consider the Young Child, as an individual, after all without the children there is no school 3.2 The Young Child The young child is still developing, his feelings are strong but he is still immature.
Most of a child's behavior is determined by the stage which the child is, in his developmental process.
(Recall the various stages we discussed in each of the aspects of child development (unit 5- 6).
Along with this stage, other influence of the child's behavior is his temperament, his abilities, his health, his family (parent and other sibilings-sisters and brothers), his immediate feeling and his history .The behavior may be normal for his stage of development and it may be that the behavior is the type that shows that the child needs help.
As adult we try to do something positive if the child is found to need help.
In all cases the child needs our constant love and support.
We should note that play is an essential part of children (see unit 12).
They are energetic and full of vitality.
We should try to avoid bottle neck arrangement of furniture and big equipment so that we always provide bigger passage for running, for pushing and pulling playing materials and riding of wheeled toys.
Those things that you think are materials for learning, may turn out to be materials for play to children, but mind you they do their learning through play as well.
In this regard, those things must not be out of reach of the children except those that may be injurious to them.
A child usually has a healthy sequence of play, they start with rigorous play and later quieter play.
There should be opportunities for both type of plays, so that each child can work in his own pace.
When you want children to change the activities they are doing, they must not have to 148 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT wait for too long or too short a time for instance changing from period of toileting, to period of story telling, or time for food.
And there should be warning before the change.
If we take time to study our children we will be able to present them from behaving badly because we would have been able to recognize signs of tension when it is building up in them and as such, skillfully direct their attention to more interesting things.
Children like an act physically, they are born with natural ability to combine very complicated movements.
We still need to help them in this regard.
They are not just to the exercise, we must teach them how to co-ordinate their muscular movement properly.
Children can develop 'bad habits' in walking, running, throwing and even sitting, we shouldn’t think it is only in emotional or social matter that they develop bad habit.
Emotionally, children don't have a standard pattern of development.
A child of about six years old may be so noisy and demanding and at seven he may become quiet, rather shy and sad at times.
By the time he becomes eight, he may become so active again, cheerful and lively.
You wonder as he becomes nine or ten years he may be withdrawing again.
The emotional pattern, is full of ups and downs parents and teachers must therefore be prepared for this and be ready to show understanding.
You will also notice that towards the end of childhood years i.e from age eleven, girls become more interested in toys, they begin to worry about their appearance, figure and complexion, this is closely related to their physical development, they are becoming young women.
The boys are not so interested in girls at this age, they do this later about two to three years after.
The boys will rather avoid the girls in their plays and games.
The intellectual development of the child too is also something to consider.
(see unit 9).
Now let's take each of the components.
One after the other.
But still attempt this exercise below before you continue.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Give six factors that can influence child's behavior.
2.
The classroom should be spacious give major reasons for this.
3.3 Teaching and Learning Teaching and Learning are two different but closely related processes.
Children can learn without a teacher.
This is because children learn many things when the teachers is not teaching.
However, learning is a product of teaching.
Curzon (1991) defines teaching as system of 149 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT activities intended to induce learning, comprising the deliberate and methodical creation and control of conditions necessary for learning to take place.
Learning, on the other hand, according to Smith (1988) is what occurs when a person makes sense out of what he encounters and experiences in interaction with self, other and the environment.
To teach is to help someone acquire skill, attitude, knowledge, appreciating information or ideas, it includes provision of conditions that can promote the building of attitudes, skill development and other aspects of learning.
Unless learning takes place as a result of some efforts, we can not conclude that teaching has taken place.
In the teaching- learning process, both the teacher and learner must be active.
Using the words of Clark and Starr "The mediocre teacher tells, the good teacher explains, the superior teacher demonstrates, the great teacher inspires."
Many people are able to climb the ladder of success because of the inspiration of their great teachers.
For learning to take place there must be observable changes in the behaviour of the learner.
Learning is not mere memorization or verbalization because such behavior is not permanent.
To promote effective learning, teachers should keep the atmosphere in the class informal but polite.
Learning is determined by five factors, namely the curriculum, instructional materials, learning time, teaching time and the learners (child's) learning ability).
The first four being school inputs and process and it is the duty of the teacher and school authority to see to their effectiveness.
It is true that children love stories, legend, fiction but these are fantasy and imagination needed to stir creativity in them.
However, this must not be confused with scientific truth.
The teacher simply needs to know which materials and books are appropriate to certain subject matter that is relevant to the child.
To develop the desired skills, interest and attitude in the children, the teacher should adopt highly motivational teaching strategies by which lessons are presented in such a way that children are carried along to find answers to some questions through their activities.
For effective teaching and learning the teacher must realize that both the teacher and the leaner must be active.
The following are processes or acts that will ensure the effective mutual teaching and learning in early child education: 150 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT  Teacher- child relationships  Teacher -directed learning  The Independent learner  The school climate  Discipline  Curriculum  Evaluation.
We will now go through these factors briefly, but before then check your progress with the next exercise.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What is (a) Teaching (b) Learning?
2.
Learning cannot take place without teaching Yes or No.
3.3.1 Teacher - Child Relationship Can you recollect some of our discussion on personality development and acquisition of identity?.
To raise the self-esteem of a young child the teacher should accept the child as he is, with his differences and uniqueness, his individual background and personal capacities.
Children should not be allowed to see themselves as unsuccessful, the teacher should see to it by helping the child in terms of background experience, willingness to accept teaching, outside school opportunities, emotional states, social development and states of learning should be considered.
We all know that it is only the child that is motivated through intellectually stimulating and emotional content (experience) will most likely make progress.
The teacher within himself /herself should try to attain a peaceful state of mind i.e.
should be emotionally balanced.
This will promote confidence, efficiency and enjoyment in his job.
The teacher should decest from unnecessary anxiety and should not expect too much from the child.
A child's expectation from the teacher is determined by the general experience the child had got about adult.
The child expects assurance of security and friendly atmosphere to which he, the child, responds to with affection and trust.
Older children expect the" teacher to help them develop their intellectual and other abilities, expect the teacher to teach them everything they need to know.
If the child is not getting what he expects from the teacher, he becomes unsure of the importance of school and develops indifference (I don't care attitude) to learning.
Normally young children are eager to learn, they have the zeal for investigation and the desire to acquire the skills adults have.
It is therefore the primary task of early childhood educators to ensure that this attitude does not grow less in the child.
Teaching young children demands special qualities of sensitivity, patience, vision and respect for minds in the making.
It is really a difficult task, but the teacher can 151 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT make it easy by creating time to cultivate rapport (maintaining peaceful relationship) with each child; in this way he gets to know them better on an individual basis.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention those attitudes that make up individuality in children.
3.3.2 Teacher - Directed Learning From all that we have been saying, we would have realized that teaching, for learning is not an easy task, is quite complicated.
Many activities go into it.
Teachers can make their work easy by planning and organizing teaching -learning experiences well.
The teacher in this case, assumes the role of director of learning.
The teacher as the director introduces a combination of programmes such as:  Individual teaching and learning  Group teaching and learning.
 Class teaching and learning 3.3.2.1 Individual Teaching and Learning As concluded in Teacher - Child relationship, the teacher gets to know the children on an individual basis.
The teachers learn about individual interests and talents.
This is to be observed when doing things of their personal choices.
The teacher notes them as the starting points for further development.
Teacher allocates specific time for individual contact time to share in the children's self chosen activities, play etc for normal development.
The teacher must be careful the way he handles the gifted child and the slow learner.
The very capable children should not be held back, they must be helped to go ahead using their full powers, while the teacher plan his/her time to attend to those who will fail if they don't get much of the teachers assistance.
The creation of individual contact-time in the classroom setting is very necessary in subjects like language, mathematics and creative arts.
The individual teaching -learning approach helps to bring out the events of individuality in children.
A child may be slow in learning language and yet exhibits easy understanding of science.
With provision of teaching equipment (material), and freedom for children to use them, an unexpected diversity of strengths and weakness emerges.
152 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 3.3.2.2 Group Teaching and Learning Sometimes it may be economical to give teaching in groups and later follow it up with individual task-assignment.
The nature of the group vary according to the teaching task.
Group teaching can be effective with small numbers of children who are approximately in the same learning stage.
They should not be more than four or six, chronological age of the children is immaterial, background experience should be the major criteria for grouping.
Group teaching usually covers matters as:  Specific instruction in number and mathematical processes  Creative writing  Handwriting  Craft processes  Reading teaching  Investigation (in science)  The introduction of new apparatus, materials or games.
 The use of dictionaries, encyclopedias, maps and reference books 3.3.2.3 Class Teaching and Learning For pre-primary school children, the "together times" as classroom teaching is sometimes called strengthening a feeling of security in the unity of the basic group they belong to in school, the child also feels that he can look for his special needs away from home.
For the primary school child, he may grow interest in a special teacher and carry feeling from classroom teaching to the time of senior secondary school and later.
The period of classroom teaching and learning, however short, gives a sense of order and control to the children, it also foster satisfaction in them.
Three different situations can be identified in classroom teaching and learning process, and these are information, instruction and inspiration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Give examples of school curricular activities that we can use group teaching method to teach.
3.3.2.4 The Independent Learner Children should also be allowed to contribute to their own learning by learning independently on their own.
They can learn from one another.
We should note that it is characteristics of young child to be curious and be interested in his surroundings.
They learn best when active and can 153 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT be quite engrossed in whatever they are doing when emotionally involved.
3.3.3 The School Climate Children need practice in social activities and be trained to live and co- operate with others.
They need to cultivate good community attitudes, respect for others and their work, giving mutual aid and concern for another.
They require a peaceful environment (school climate) where they can have exchange of ideas.
There should be some use of comparative and co-operative approaches to arouse the interest of the children in some school or classroom activities, Training in healthy competition is also required for a better quality of life in future, it really develops the child socially.
3.3.4 Discipline As earlier said in the unit before this one self-discipline is the best form of discipline .Discipline also implies being orderly.
The teacher should ensure that the children in his/her class are self-disciplined and orderly (Go through unit 16 again).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 How can the school climate contribute to teaching and learning?
3.3.5 Curriculum The learning of experience (curriculum) we expose the children to must be carefully selected.
Their curriculum must be relevant too the respective stages in the child's development.
See unit 15, school readiness II, on curriculum relevant for school readiness for the different categories of children.
3.3.6 Evaluation This is a process of checking whether or not the desired objective in any endeavour is achieved or not.
The teacher does this by giving tests and examination.
In this programme, you will still have a full course on measurement and evaluation.
Teachers should however try as much as possible to relate the behavioral objectives stated while planning the lesson to the question(s) to be asked during student assignment.
The teacher uses test to find out why a child is not leaning properly and the results of test can also be used to motivate children to work harder .
154 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION The tasks of a teacher in child development is really a very demanding one.
The various responsibilities of the teacher may not be easy to classified but on close examination, four main components can be identified.
These are the teaching and learning per se, this requires that the teacher has a firm grip, of the general principles, for successful teaching and learning.
Secondly, there must be Organization and Management of teaching learning environment/facilities.
The third is Home, School and Community; the teacher needs to forge a cordial relationship between the three.
Lastly the teacher need to consider himself/herself as a learner and be prepared to accept that he/she is undergoing a life-long learning.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have focused on the teacher and not the child (student or pupil), though most of the discussion still center on the child.
The nature of the young child in general is revisited so that the teacher will be able to accept the task before him/her with love and understanding.
The major task of the teacher were divided into four components.
In this unit only one was fully elaborated upon, and that is teaching and learning, which in fact, is the most vital of the four components.
In the next unit the other aspects of the teacher’s task will be given more attention.
These are organization and management; home, school and community; and Teacher as a learner.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Temperament Abilities Health Family Immediate feeling Background History So that the children can have enough space to play ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 (a) Teaching is a system of activities intended to induce learning, it comprises of deliberate and methodical creation and control of conditions necessary to make learning take place.
155 ECE 121 CHILD DEVELOPMENT (b) Learning is what occurs when a person makes sense out of what he encounters and experiences in interaction with self, others and the environment.
2.
No Learning can take place without teaching.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3  Background  Willingness to accept teaching  Outside school opportunity  Emotional state  Social development  Rates of learning ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Specific instructions in number and mathematical processes Creative Writing Handwriting Craft processes Reading/teaching Investigation (in science) The introduction of new apparatus, materials or games The use of dictionaries, encyclopedia, maps and reference books SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 A school contribute to learning by creating a competitive and co-operative classroom environment for learning.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Teachers must be prepared to face the task of contributing to child's development with a basic attitude of-----and ----- 2.
Give 5 factors that can influence the behavior of children in the classroom.
3.
Naturally young children are eager -- ---, they have the zeal- - --- and the desire -- --- the skills adults have.
4.
Teaching young children can be a complex thing, but because of their nature this can be made simple what particular nature of the children is being referred to?
5.
What is the importance of classroom teaching and learning to a young child.
6.
Give 3 main reasons why we give test to children.
156
