 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: ECE412 COURSE TITLE: Management of Early Childhood Education ECE412 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Course Team Dr. (Mrs) Oyewumi (Developer/Writer) - UI Prof. A.
B. Alhassan (Editor) - OSU Dr. D. N. Ofoha (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii ECE412 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-549-4 All Rights Reserved CONTENTS PAGE iii ECE412 COURSE GUIDE Introduction ……………………………..………………………….
1 The Course…………………………………………..….………….. 1 Course Aims……………………………………………….……….. 2 Course Objectives ………………………………………….……….
2 Working through this Course…………………………….………….
2 Course Materials………… ………………………………..………... 3 Study Units………………………………………………………..… 3 Textbooks and References………..………………………………….
5 Assessment…………………………………………….……..…….. 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment ……….………………………………… 5 Final Examination and Grading…………………………………….. 5 Summary……………………………………………….…………….
6 iv  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Introduction This course consists of 15 units and is divided into three modules.
It deals with the management of early childhood education in Nigeria.
Early childhood education is another term whose popularity is increasing daily.
It emphasises holistic approach attending child’s physical, emotional, social as well as cognitive development.
To achieve these, there is need for proper management education for the personnel who are going to teach, nurture and manage this level of education.
The Course The course intends to expose students to the components of management of early childhood education with particular reference to Nigeria.
Exposing the teachers to this course will equip them with necessary skills required in the management of early childhood education.
Obviously it is the implicit obligation of tertiary institutions producing teachers to provide qualified administrators/teachers to work, and manage the ever-growing number of children’s institutions in Nigeria.
This course examines the concept of early childhood so as to expose the students to various definitions and components of early childhood education in Nigeria.
Also, the knowledge about the evolution of early childhood education in Nigeria will equip students, student with vivid facts on the emergence of early childhood education in Nigeria are treated.
Taking the students through the importance and types of early childhood education will afford the students the opportunity to be familiar and conversant with the benefits of early childhood education services.
Moreover, the knowledge about the developmental milestones in children education would create awareness and give reason why children should be taught or handled in particular ways.
In the same vein, exposing the students to the management structure, equips them with management skills as owners of day care facilities, and private nursery schools request for competent hands to manage their schools.
Furthermore, taking the students through resources in early childhood education will help them in selecting appropriate teaching materials and employing qualified personnel in handling various sections in early childhood education.
1 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Exposing the students to the concept of financing and budgeting in early childhood will give them insight to budgetary activities as well as fund management.
Discussion on curriculum development, policy regulation and responsibilities in early childhood education will expose the students to curriculum contents and legal provisions for early childhood education in Nigeria.
Course Aims The course aims at introducing you to the Principles of Management in Early Childhood Education.
Course Objectives The objectives of this course shall be to: • examine the concept and definition of early childhood education • describe the management structure, policy regulation and legislation in early childhood education • explain the curriculum content and highlight the procedure for professional development in early childhood education • examine in detail the basic principles of finance and budgeting in early childhood education • identify the developmental milestones and problems facing early childhood education in Nigeria.
Working through this Course This is a course that explains to you the effective management of early childhood education.
The content has been painstakingly selected to enable you to be vast in administration and management principles.
The sequence of the topics will provide you with adequate knowledge in understanding the study package.
You will be expected to align your study with practical aspects by visiting early childhood education centres.
You are also advised to avail yourself the opportunity of attending tutorial sessions.
Finally, you would be expected to familiarise yourself with other texts and materials that will further enhance your knowledge in all aspects related to this course.
2  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION The Course Materials Basically, your course material shall consist of a course guide and study units which you will be provided with.
In addition, the course offers you a list of recommended textbooks, which are necessary supplement to the course material.
Study Units The following are the study units contained in this course.
Module 1 Concept of Early Childhood Education Unit 1 Definition and Meaning of Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Historical Development of Early Childhood Education in Nigeria Unit 3 Importance of Early Childhood Education Unit 4 Types of Early Childhood Education Programmes Unit 5 Child Indices Module 2 Management Structure, Roles and Responsibilities in Early Childhood Unit 1 Management of Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Policy Regulation and Legislation in Early Childhood Education Unit 3 Curriculum Development in Early childhood Education Unit 4 Resources in Early Childhood Education Unit 5 Professional Development and Training Procedures in Early Childhood Education Module 3 Financing Early Childhood Education Unit 1 Sources of Financing in Early Childhood and Primary Education Unit 2 Internal Control and Financial Accountability in Early Childhood Education Unit 3 Budgeting Technique and Process in Early Childhood Unit 4 Expenditure Line and Budget Control in Early Childhood Unit 5 Problems of Early Childhood Education Module 1 The first unit in this module examines the meaning and concept of early childhood education.
3 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION The second unit focuses on the historical development and evolution of early childhood education in Nigeria.
The third unit highlights the importance of early childhood education.
The fourth unit identifies and describes the various forms of early childhood education.
It also identifies the various principles of early childhood education.
Unit five explains child indices.
It discusses the developmental milestone and child assessment.
Module 2 Unit one highlights the management structure, roles and responsibility in early childhood education and primary education.
Unit two of this module defines the concept of policy, policy regulation and legislation in early childhood education.
Unit three focuses on curriculum development and analyses the curriculum content in early childhood education and primary education.
Unit four identifies the resources in early childhood education.
It further highlights the duties of various human resources.
Unit five examines staff training and professional development.
It also highlights qualities of personnel working with young children.
Module 3 Unit one focuses on sources of funding and financing for early childhood education and primary education.
Unit two discusses internal control and financial accountability in early childhood education.
Unit three explains budgeting technique and process in early childhood education.
Unit four examines expenditure line, and budget control in early childhood education.
Unit five identifies various problems confronting early childhood education management in Nigeria.
4  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Textbooks and References The following are the recommended texts for further reading.
Ajayi A.O.
(1989).
Basic Concepts of Administration Planning and Economics of Education.
Ibadan: Nigeria Gabesther Publisher.
Akanni J.
A.
(1987).
Management Concepts, Techniques and Cases Ibadan: Julab Publishers Limited.
Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu, O.
& Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria: A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling – Holdens Publishers.
Babalola J.B. (2003).
“Budget Preparation and Expenditure Control in Education”.
In: Babalola, J.B.
(eds.)
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
The Department of Educational Management.
University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
Ozigi, A.O.
(1980).
A Handbook of School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
Assessment There are two components of assessment for this course.
The Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) and the end of course examination.
Tutor-Marked Assignment The Tutor-Marked Assignment is the continuous assessment component of the course.
It attracts 30 per cent of the total score.
Each unit has a Tutor-Marked Assignment and you will be given 4 TMAs to answer.
Three of this must be answered before you are allowed to sit for the examination.
Final Examination and Grading The examination concludes the assessment for the course it attracts 70 per cent of the whole course.
You will be informed of the time for the examination.
5 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Summary This course provides knowledge about the management of early childhood education.
It discusses the concept of early childhood education, importance, resources and management structure.
It also discusses the issue of finance management in early childhood education.
6  Course Code ECE412 Course Title Management of Early Childhood Education Course Team Dr. (Mrs) Oyewumi (Developer/Writer) - UI Prof. A.
B. Alhassan (Editor) - OSU Dr. D. N. Ofoha (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-549-4 All Rights Reserved ii  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Concept of Early Childhood Education ………… 1 Unit 1 Definition and Meaning of Early Childhood Education …………………………………………….. 1 Unit 2 Historical Development of Early Childhood Education in Nigeria…………………………….…… 7 Unit 3 Importance of Early Childhood Education………….
15 Unit 4 Types of Early Childhood Education Programmes….
19 Unit 5 Child Indices………………………………………….
26 Module 2 Management Structure, Roles and Responsibilities in Early Childhood Education ……………………… 33 Unit 1 Management of Early Childhood Education………… 33 Unit 2 Policy Regulation and Legislation in Early Childhood Education Programmes…………………………………42 Unit 3 Curriculum Development in Early Childhood Education…………………………………………….…52 Unit 4 Resources in Early Childhood Education…………… 59 Unit 5 Staff Training and Professional Development in Early Childhood………………………………………………68 Module 3 Financing Early Childhood Education …………… 74 Unit 1 Sources of Financing in Early Childhood and Primary Education…………………………………… 74 Unit 2 Internal Control and Financial Accountability in Early Childhood Education……………………….… 81 Unit 3 Budgeting Technique and Process in Early Childhood Education…………………………….….. 85 Unit 4 Expenditure Line and Budget Control in Early Childhood Education………………………………... 89 Unit 5 Problems of Early Childhood Education…………….
96 iii ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MODULE 1 CONCEPT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Unit 1 Meaning and Definition of Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Historical Development of Early childhood and Primary Education in Nigeria Unit 3 Importance of Early Childhood Education Unit 4 Types of Early Childhood Education Programmes Unit 5 Child Indices UNIT 1 MEANING AND DEFINITION OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Early Childhood Education 3.1.1 Most Commonly Used Names for Early Childhood Education 3.2 Concept of Early Childhood Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The early years of life are crucial and a growing child needs an enriched environment to develop academic skills through activities and direct instruction.
Early childhood (education) provides a solid foundation for the holistic development of the child.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of early childhood education • give an acceptable definition of early childhood education.
4  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Early Childhood Education The field of early childhood goes by various names in different countries as well as within individual countries where different stakeholders may use different terminologies.
The early childhood refers to ages zero to five or six years.
These years are very crucial for the growth and development of the child.
The terms attached to early childhood go beyond mere labels.
They imply different purposes, pedagogical practices, forms of delivery as well as the varying social and economic status of the personnel involved.
3.1.1 Most Commonly Used Names for Early Childhood Education 1.
Early Childhood Education (ECE) is favoured by education authorities or others who are inclined to see early childhood from an education point of view.
Learning is central to this tradition.
2.
Early Childhood Care and Education (ECE) is an expansion of ECE, with the care component added or it can be changed to early childhood education and care to keep the emphasis on education.
3.
There is Early Childhood Care (ECC) without the education component.
In the developing countries, ECC tends to be associated with attention to the child’s health, nutrition and hygiene, while in developed countries ECC is often understood as a social service for working mothers with young children.
Historically, ECC has also been associated with institutionalised social services for disadvantaged children whereas ECE has been considered a service devoted to early learning process.
Given the multifaceted nature of early childhood, the existence of several labels may be inevitable.
The same term or name may be or can be interpreted in different social, cultural, and linguistic levels.
Despite the differences in name, the fundamentals are the same.
These are: a.
The ultimate concern of any childhood programme is the well- being and holistic development of the child.
b.
Regardless of the institutional setting, the programme should involve a developmentally-appropriate practice, which attends to 5 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION health, nutrition, security and learning.
In fact, as long as such a holistic approach is practised, the physical or institutional setting of the programme is of little importance.
c. As children grow, they can move from one educational programme to another that may be named differently or located in different ministries.
d. Provision of assessment methods and opportunities for promotion of active parental involvement in the child’s early education programme.
e. Early childhood programme staff develops relationships with families, which include providing appropriate information on community resources, social services, job training, and opportunities for parents to be involved in decisions about programme operations.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Describe the term early childhood.
2.
What are the most commonly used names for early childhood care?
3.2 Concept of Early Childhood Education In the early years of the child, basic components of the home such as the parents, siblings, relatives, television, radio, physical environment of the home, various play materials and host of others are of paramount importance in the child’s early education.
Children experience life more holistically than any other age group.
Social, emotional cognitive language and physical lessons are not learned separately by the child in the early years.
Adults are most helpful to young children when they interact in ways that indicate that the child is learning from the whole experience and not just part of that experience to which the adults give attention.
Adelodun (1992) posits that the mother especially, is the first educator of the child.
The child learns through observation and imitation in most cases.
These experiences are not organised but some parents are aware of the fact that the child needs to be engaged in order to enable the parents perform their own duties at home.
Early childhood education does not have to occur in the absence of the parent or primary caregiver.
The term early childhood education is sometimes used to denote the education by someone other than their parent or primary caregiver.
6  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION According to National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC), early childhood spans the human life from birth to age eight.
Maduewesi (1999) defines early childhood education or pre-school education as a semi-formal education arrangement usually outside the home whereby young children from about the age of three are exposed through play activities in a group setting to mental, social, and physical learning suited to their developmental age until mandatory age of government approved formal schooling.
In Nigeria, early childhood education programme is offered at Early Child Development (ECD) centers, day care centers, and play groups locally tagged Jelesimi, Ota Okara, Ibviousukumehu etc.
in local dialects.
They are usually for children aged zero to two and two to three years.
The International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) regards it as pre-primary education or nursery school education and the normative age in principle is between three and five.
Early childhood education comprises the entire early childhood programmes including day care centers for children under three and kindergarten or nursery education for older children above three.
Early childhood education or learning focus on children’s learning through play.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain the term early childhood education and state the International Standard Classification of Education’s (ISCED’s) meaning of the term.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit above discusses the concept of early childhood and early childhood education.
The terms commonly used for early childhood education were equally discussed.
5.0 SUMMARY In the unit above, you have learnt about: • Early childhood • Early childhood education 7 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Analyse the fundamentals of early childhood education programme.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Wikipedia, the Free Encylopedia http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/early Childhood Education.
UNESCO Policy Briefs on Early Childhood.
www.unesco.org/education/pdf 8  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 2 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD AND PRIMARY EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Development of Early Childhood or Pre-Primary Education in Nigeria 3.2 Evolution of Primary Education in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION History is always associated with acquisition of facts concerning an event or occasion.
Exposing students to the development and history of education will equip them with adequate knowledge on the transition and transformation in education of young children Education in Nigeria today has been the result of a gradual process which date back to the coming of Europeans.
The European missionaries started formal education in Nigeria because evangelisation was their primary objective.
They needed to train people to read and write in order to help them to interprete the Bible and preach the gospel.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • narrate the historical development of early childhood education • discuss the evolution of primary education in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Development of Early Childhood or Pre-Primary Education in Nigeria What could be referred to as nursery education was that which was organised for the children of early missionaries and British colonial masters who were married and had children in Nigeria.
But as Nigerians were educated and took different jobs with the missions and colonial 9 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION government, they were acculturated to the life of their employers.
This was evident in their mode of dressing, style of living, eating, career etc.
More importantly, they tried to send their own infants to early schools like their masters.
Many of such schools were concentrated in towns and cities where the colonial masters or missionaries resided.
Many of such schools were later established by wealthy Nigerians and missions (Fafunwa 1974, Taiwo 1980, Adelodun 1992).
Having one’s child in such schools was an evidence of literacy or wealth and therefore a privilege.
Children of poor parents could not go to school no matter their age.
Such children served as housemaids to the enlightened and wealthy parents.
In addition, they took care of the house and infants who had not started attending nursery schools when their mothers left for work.
In some homes where there were no housemaids, women resorted to the use of nannies or grandmothers or mothers-in-law who helped in like manner.
Significantly, the introduction of the University Free Primary Education boosted the lives of the poor children and created more problems for the working mothers or rather, the wealthy parents who relied so much on housemaids.
The housemaids were no more available.
At the same time, most aged women preferred better paid jobs than being nannies.
So working mothers had to think of a place to keep their infants till the close of work.
This was the rationale for the rapid growth of nursery schools in Nigerian society.
This aside, it is interesting and pertinent to note that most young children today have exhausted the resources of the modern home long before they are six and some while they are only two.
Their bursting curiosities, growing powers, increasing creative imaginations find less and less challenge in both physical and social environment.
Gans, Steder and Almy (1982) describe the modern middle-class home as one in which most food comes already prepared, clothing is seldom made and laundry is either sent out or done automatically.
They further explain that such a home offers youngsters little opportunity for the manipulation and exploration that appear to be essential for their optimum development.
Thus, the nursery school can, under many circumstances, supplement the home that cannot provide an environment completely appropriate to the young child.
Having realised all the roles of such an institution in the life of a child and in socio-economic development of a nation like ours, most parents now strive towards spending their hard-earned money on their children to acquire better foundation which subsequent levels of education will build upon.
The government encourages the establishment of such schools when the minimum requirements for setting up of such schools in Nigeria are met.
The control of pre-primary education lies in the hand 10  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION of state governments.
Thus, every state has its specific guidelines for establishing nursery schools.
3.2 Evolution of Primary Education in Nigeria In 1842, formal education was introduced into Nigeria by the Methodist Missionary Society, Church Missionary Society, Roman Catholic Mission and the Baptist Mission.
Prior to this time, the entity known as Nigeria existed in small units with an indigenous system of education called traditional education.
The aim of the missionary education was to evangelise and trade through the reading and teaching of the Bible.
Hence, education was used as an instrument of converting people to Christianity and to train them for white-collar jobs (Boyd, 1960).
The Church undertook the business of education not because it regarded education as good in itself but because it felt it could no longer do its own work properly without giving its adherents especially its clergy, as much of the formal learning as was required for the study of the sacred writings and for the effective performance of its religious duties.
In September 1842, the first primary school was established at Badagry by the Methodist Missionary Society.
The establishment of the first primary school marked the existence of formal primary education in Nigeria.
At the initial stage, the curriculum of missionary primary school consisted of singing, catechism, reading, writing, English language, arithmetic, later geography and culture were introduced in order to produce the work force needed by the British administration.
The colonial government was not really interested in education and the smooth running of the primary education was left in the hands of the various missions until 1882.
By 1882, the first educational ordinance was promulgated.
The aims of the ordinance were: a. to set a standard for education b. to provide grant-in-aid to schools c. provision of Board of education to supervise the mission schools.
By 1861, the colonial government of British administration had been firmly established in Lagos.
Missionary activities and the establishment of schools were more rampant in the Southern part of Nigeria than in the Northern part because: a.
The North had a formal system of Qu’ranic education.
b.
Peasant farmers or cattle rearers in the North relied on their children’s labour to survive.
11 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION c. British political officers, chiefs and emirs opposed mission educational endeavours.
d. There were no adequate facilities e.g.
equipment and teachers, to enable them extend their educational activities to the Northern part of the country.
The above points also adversely affected the expansion and development of primary education in Nigeria.
Throughout the nineteenth century, government’s interest in education was mainly on supervision and provision of grants to assist schools.
Around 1899 and 1900, government became more interested in education by establishing the first government school in Lagos.
In 1901, the first government elementary school was opened in Benin (Ukeje, 1978).
By 1912, the missionaries and government had become partners in educational development.
There was slow pace in the development of primary education in the country from 1912 to 1955.
But by 1951 Nigeria was divided into three regions based on the revision of Richard Constitution for political administration.
This made education the responsibility of regional governments.
The regions used the opportunity to enact education laws that served as the bedrock of their educational growth.
The period between 1950 and 1960 was characterised by self-effort and actual conscientisation on the part of the regional governments to bridge the gap between their political advancement and their educational backwardness.
This period marked a significant breakthrough in the development of primary education in Nigeria.
This was done by the: a.
Regional government of West and East embarking on the Universal Primary Education (UPE) scheme.
b.
Affected regions earmarking financial backing of about 30 per cent or more of their annual budget on primary education.
c. Abolition of fees.
d. Increase in enrolment rate in primary schools.
e. Training of more teachers.
The UPE in the Western and Eastern regions did not achieve much of a success.
However, there were noticeable progresses in primary education in these regions.
In the Northern region there was controlled expansion in primary education.
By October 1960, the educational pattern and development in Nigeria was characterised by partnership between government and voluntary 12  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION agencies.
Educational gap between the North and South was widening and the inadequacy of the education provided both in quantity and quality was growing worse, while regional factors became quite noticeable (Aghenta, 1984).
Before independence, the federal government of Nigeria had set up the Ashby Commission to plan education for a post-independence Nigeria.
Though the Commission’s terms of reference excluded primary education, the Commission observed that “the primary schools already have places to supply the recruits the country will need in the late 1960s and early 1970’s”.
The reports of the Ashby Commission and the efficiency of Universal Primary Education in the South led to the establishment of the Old-Man Commission in 1961 by the North.
The Commission came out with the following recommendations: a.
Involvement of Local Education Authorities (LEA’s) and Local Education Committees (LEC’s) in the administration and control of schools.
b.
The establishment of Local Education Authorities.
The government accepted these recommendations with moderations.
The government on the basis of these recommendations accepted and modified its primary education.
The period, 1961-1975, witnessed reexamination of the existing primary school system and the operation of Universal Primary Education in Nigeria in order to ensure the proper implementation of the scheme.
The re-examination exercise revealed that the North had quality primary education without implementing the Universal Primary Education schemes while the East and West regions achieved quantity in primary education through their operation of Universal Primary Education.
By the year 1965, Local Schools Boards were set up in the East working in conjunction with the local government councils.
In 1966, the country experienced a civil war, which revealed the inadequacies and imbalances in the education system.
By 1969, the military government organized the first National Curriculum Conference in the country with the main aim of providing uniform and quality education for all.
In 1973, a national seminar was organised by the federal government to review and modify the recommendations of the 1969 national curriculum conference.
The national seminar adopted the operation of the 6-3-3-4 system for Nigerians which served as the basis of the National Policy on Education (1977).
By 1976 the Universal Primary Education scheme was launched nationwide by General Yakubu Gowon.
The scheme was launched 13 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION during the oil boom period and was aimed at reducing the educational imbalances in the country.
The country witnessed the creation of states during the civil war and this affected the management of primary education.
For instance, in the northern states, some of the states adopted the School Board System.
The southern states operated bureaucratic centralisation.
For example, the ministry of education controlled schools while the Central and Local Schools Boards and Divisional or Local School Boards assisted in administering primary schools.
By 1977, the National Policy on Education was launched by the federal government of Nigeria as a way of clarifying the philosophy and objectives of education.
In section 12, page 49, of the National Policy on Education, government specifies how primary education would be financed.
It reads “government’s ultimate objective is to make education free at all levels.
The financing of education is a joint responsibility of the Federal, State and Local Governments”.
Meanwhile, government and local communities will continue to share responsibility for financing education.
“The traditional sources of revenue for educational establishments, including taxes, school fees, education levies or rates and sometimes donation will continue, but fees will no longer apply in the case of primary education.
However, participation at local level for specific projects will be encouraged.” In October 1979, there was a change in the leadership of the country; the military handed over power to a democratically elected government of Alhaji Shehu Shagari.
The elected government was not really committed to the implementation of the Universal Primary Education and this affected the growth of primary schools in Nigeria.
The period between 1979 and 1983 witnessed a great set-back in the development of primary education in Nigeria under the civilian rule as a result of the following: a.
The 1979 Constitution placed the management and administration of primary education in the hands of local governments.
b.
Austerity measures were caused by the world economic recession.
c. Lack of qualified personnel d. Political factor – The money voted for primary education depended on the whims and caprices of the political party in power in the local government areas as well as the relationship and type of officials in the locality.
There was unstable government in the country between the period of 31st December 1983 to 1985 and this greatly affected the development of primary education.
During this period, the administration and management of primary schools was not uniform because various states 14  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION came out with their own policies of administering, financing and controlling education.
For example, in some states, fees were introduced in primary schools e.g.
Oyo, Ondo and Bendel, now Oyo, Osun, Ondo, Ekiti, Edo and Delta States while in the northern states there was nothing of such.
In the year 1984, the Federal Ministry of Education, Science and Technology provided a uniform curriculum for all primary schools based on subjects.
The National Primary Education Commission was established on 31st August, 1988.
Between 1989 and 1990, the commission revised the subject curriculum and produced curriculum modules; each module consisted of all subjects and educational experiences for specified classes.
In the area of finance, according to the National Policy on Education (1977) “Education in Nigeria is no more a private enterprise, but a huge venture that has witnessed a progressive evolution of government’s complete and dynamic intervention and active participation”.
Federal government of Nigeria is spending huge amount of money on education, particularly primary education.
In 1991 the federal government transferred the management of primary schools to the local government of each state of the Federation because of the following reasons: a.
To ensure sound primary education.
b.
To make adequate provision for proper monitoring and supervision.
c. Prompt payment of teachers’ salaries.
d. To ensure that primary schools are closer to the people.
By 1992, the federal government has made it compulsory for all states of the federation to use mother tongue as medium of instruction.
Between 1990 and 1995, there was a change in the educational policy.
The change was from 6-5-4 to 6-3-3-4 system of education.
This change did not affect primary schools.
The latest policy on primary education is the Universal Basic Education (UBE) launched in 1999 by the federal government by which primary and junior secondary education would be free to all children.
The goals of UBE, according to its blueprint are to: a. Universalise access to basic education 15 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION b. Engender conducive learning environment c. Eradicate illiteracy in Nigeria within the shortest possible time.
Other objectives include: a.
Development in the entire citizens, of a strong consciousness for education and a strong commitment to its vigorous promotion.
b.
Provision of free, compulsory Universal Basic Education for every Nigerian child of school going age.
c. Catering for dropouts and out of school children and adolescents through various forms of education.
d. Ensuring the acquisition of the appropriate level of literacy, numeracy, manipulative and life skills needed for laying the foundation for life-long learning.
In pursuance of the above objectives, the blueprint stated the following action plan for year 2000 and 200: a.
Additional number of pupils to be accommodated for UBE primary one class will be in the region of 1.12 million at the rate of 40 pupils per class.
b.
Teacher training in primary and junior secondary schools should be undertaken by the federal government.
c. In the area of teacher recruitment and remuneration, the funding arrangements are: • Primary schools – Local councils • Junior secondary school – federal and states governments.
d. For the provision of infrastructural facilities, the cost is to be shared thus: • Primary schools – Federal government 75 per cent and state government 25 per cent • Junior secondary schools – federal government 25 per cent and state government 75 per cent.
e. Instructional and learning materials: • Primary schools – Federal government 100per cent • Junior secondary schools – federal government 50 per cent and state government 50 per cent.
To achieve the above objectives, the government is adopting a wholistic approach to ensure success in the Universal Basic Education scheme and successfully laying a solid foundation for tomorrow’s leaders.
16  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the goals and objectives of UBE in Nigeria?
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit above discusses the historical development of early childhood or pre-primary education as well as evolution of primary education in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In the unit above, you have learnt about the evolutionary trends of both pre-and primary education in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Highlight and discuss the factors that aided pre-primary education in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Quadri, K. (2001).
Introduction to Primary Education Studies.
Oyo: Tobistic Ventures.
17 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 3 IMPORTANCE OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Benefits of Early Childhood Education 3.2 Scientific Proposition of Early Childhood Education 3.3 Psychological Proposition of Early Childhood Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The early childhood years represent a critical period for cognitive, social, and emotional development.
It is during these years that children develop readiness for school and life.
2.0 OBJECTIVE At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the importance of early childhood education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Benefits of Early Childhood Education Early childhood education is important because if the needs of children are not met in the early years of life it can lead to behavioural problems and various physical or mental disabilities in later life.
• Childhood education being holistic, focuses on the intellectual, social, emotional, and physical development of children which is of utmost importance for the sound growth of children.
• Early childhood education encourages aesthetic appreciation.
It also encourages independence and creativity by providing the child with sufficient opportunities for self-expression.
• Educating children in the early years will help them cope with the sudden step up on the concepts they will have to learn when they begin school formally and it gives them a head start over other 18  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION children.
It will help them to adapt and cope with new situation much more than their peers who did not undergo early education.
The basic building blocks for language, learning, and literacy are formed during early childhood education period before children get to primary school.
Socialising with their peers will further help them with language development and behavioural norms of social interaction, which will make them more confident and outgoing when they are older.
Early childhood activities like reading, painting, outdoor activities and a lot of free play help in developing the eye hand coordination, and motor development, thus fulfilling the needs of physical development.
“Child is the father of the man”.
Simply put, this is the significance of the early childhood days.
Let us examine the scientific and psychological basis for this aphorism.
The seeds of a man’s character and personality are laid during the childhood stage.
We are used to thinking of the child as a miniature adult’.
But that is not true.
In fact, it is the adult who is the fully developed version of what he was when he was a child.
Every adult owes his character and personality to his early childhood days.
The importance and significance of the early childhood days can never be over emphasised.
There are striking continuities in personality development from early childhood to adulthood.
The early childhood learning and education cannot be reversed.
The best that the adult can do would be to further build on the character and personality traits that he has acquired during his childhood, by acquiring the right skills and knowledge.
But he cannot change those basic traits.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE How does early childhood affect adulthood?
3.2 Scientific Proposition of Early Childhood Education Let us examine what science has to say about those early childhood days.
This will help us understand why those years are so significant, so critical and so paramount in a person’s life.
There is evidence from neuroscience to endorse the significance of the early childhood phase.
Neuroscience teaches that when a child is born, his brain is a mass of tissues.
But based on the stimulus that he gets from his environment, certain connections (neural pathways) get formed; 19 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION certain connections do not get formed.
The connections that get formed during early childhood (specifically the first three years) will remain throughout life.
These form his recurring patterns of thoughts, feelings and behaviour.
It also says that if a connection is not formed during the first three years, then it will be almost impossible to acquire it at a later stage.
For example, if a child is in an environment where parties are the order of the day, then the child is likely to grow up to be an extroverted adult.
However, if during his early childhood phase, the child has not formed the neural pathway of extrovertedness, then it will become very difficult to acquire it when he grows up to be an adult.
This clearly establishes how much the adult’s character and patterns of thought, feelings and behaviour are decided during the early childhood stage.
3.3 Psychological Proposition of Early Childhood Education Psychology and the study of the subconscious teach us that when a child is born it has some instincts and is a psychic being.
It goes through some sensitive periods in its early development during which it absorbs wisdom from the environment.
No one can explain how.
It has only been observed that it does happen.
Moreover, psychology has shown how certain adult disorders and patterns of behaviour are rooted in early childhood experiences.
Therapies such as regression have proved this.
The cure for such disorders for the adult is also dependent on regressing back to the childhood phase and treating the source of the disorder.
There are quite a few personality researches that have been done to investigate this question.
Longitudinal research is the only way such personality continuums can be meticulously tested.
They are hard to conduct but they are the only guaranteed way of checking if this childhood to adulthood continuum exists at all.
Such longitudinal researches have also proved the same thing.
What the child acquires during the early childhood stage is enduring and recurring throughout his life.
So there we have it childhood lays the foundation for adulthood.
The seeds are sown during childhood.
The adult only harvests what has been sown.
It is very important to sow the right seeds during the early childhood stage.
This can be done through early childhood education.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit we have explored the importance of early childhood education, particular attention was given to scientific and psychological proposition of the benefits of early childhood education.
20  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In the unit above, you have learnt that early childhood education is pertinent in overall development of the growing child.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the importance of early childhood education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, R.O.
; Oduolowu, E.A & Lawal, B.O.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers.
Doodles, P. (2008).
The Importance of Early Childhood Education.
Andover.
USA: Helium Inc. 21 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 4 TYPES OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION PROGRAMMES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Various Forms of Early Childhood Education 3.2 Principles Underlying the Guidelines for Early Childhood Education Programmes 3.3 Primary Education 3.4 Purpose of Primary Education 3.5 Needs of Primary School Children 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Early childhood education programmes come in many forms depending on the belief of the educator or parent.
Early childhood programme often accepts children between the ages of zero to six years depending on the country’s educational policy.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify various types or forms of early childhood education • state the various principles of early childhood education programme • discuss the purpose of primary education • list the needs of school children.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Various Forms of Early Childhood Education Early childhood education services are provided using a variety of service delivery models that can be grouped into the following six broad categories.
22  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 1.
Centre-Based-Care This comprises services aimed primarily at 0-5 year olds provided in a centre.
It must be licensed by the Ministry of Health whatever ages being served by the programme.
The licence must indicate state approval to serve those typically referred to.
These are crèche, pre- schools, or nursery schools and play groups.
Educational programmes at these centres are operated by private individuals and groups, religious organisations and some public tertiary institutions.
Educational, care and recreational programmes are provided based on the developmental needs, interests and experience of each child.
Centres typically operate for at least eight hours per day on normal working days, for a minimum of 48 weeks per year.
A mixture of qualified and unqualified teachers and other staffs are usually employed.
2.
Home-Based Care or Family Day Care This is the type of care provided by a close relative such as child’s grandparent, aunt, or uncle either in the home of the relative or that of the child.
The state does not regulate this type of home care.
3.
Occasional Care Comprises services usually provided at a centre on an hourly or sessional basis for short period or at irregular intervals, for parents who need time to attend to appointments, take care of personal matters, undertake casual and part time employment, study or have temporary respite from full time parenting.
Centres providing these services usually employ a mix of qualified and other staff.
4.
Pre-School or Nursery Schools This Consists of services provided by qualified teachers on a sessional basis in designated pre schools.
Pre-school programmes or curricular may also be provided in the center-based day care centers and other 23 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION setting.
These services are primarily aimed at children in the year before they commence full time schooling.
The nursery school in Nigeria often accepts children between the ages of 3-6 and prepares the child for entry into primary school.
5.
Outside School Hours-Care Comprises services provided for school aged children (primarily 5-12 year olds) outside school hours during term and vacation.
Care may be provided on free days such as midterm or when school finishes early.
6.
Other Services Comprise of government-funded services to support children with additional special needs or in particular situation.
3.2 Principles Underlying the Guidelines for Early Childhood Education Programmes The principles underlying the development of early childhood programmes are as follows: (i) The basic elements in early childhood programmes are the same, regardless of their location, funding source and or purpose.
(ii) Early childhood education programmes are designed to meet the needs of children and families within their community as well as reflect the strength of the staff.
(iii) Developing and maintaining quality early childhood education programmes is a collaborative effort requiring many partners and stakeholders, including early childhood professionals, administrative staff from public and private establishments, representatives from institutions of higher education medical, mental health, nutrition, human services, and child care organisations.
(iv) Early childhood education programme improvement is most effective and long-lasting when staff voluntarily engages in systematic process of self appraisal and identifies changes that are needed in order to bring about and maintain a high level of quality.
(v) All staff that implement quality early childhood education programmes will be recognised for their hard work, commitment and achievement.
(vi) Family and early literacy are integral components of quality early education programmes.
24  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Describe three or four forms of early childhood education that you know.
3.3 Primary Education Primary education is the first stage of compulsory education.
It is preceded by pre-school or nursery education and is followed by secondary education.
Primary education is the most popular level of education in Nigeria and other parts of the world.
This is because it is available everywhere in both developed and developing countries as well as in urban and rural areas.
In most countries, it is compulsory for children to receive primary education though in many, it is the right of parents to provide it.
Notably, the word “primary” means “first”, it could also be referred to as the “originator”.
But can one really say that primary education is the first level of education?
No, because we still have nursery or pre- primary education.
Primary education is the first formal level of education where government has direct control and interest especially with respect to the development of curriculum, recruitment and payment of teachers salaries, enrolment of pupils, provision of facilities, equipment, among other things.
You should recall that government does not have direct interest or control over the pre-primary school establishment.
Different words such as elementary, basic, fundamental and universal education have been used in different places and times to mean primary education.
Thus, as a result of this, primary education will be generally described as the education given in an institution to children between the ages of 6 and 11 plus.
The duration of primary education varies from country to country.
Nwagwu (1981) points out that in some countries it is four years some five, some six, some seven and some eight depending on their system of education.
In Nigeria, primary education lasts for six years.
But in countries like Ghana and Kenya primary education lasts for eight years.
Also the entry age into primary school varies from country to country, but it is generally accepted that children should begin primary education 25 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION between the ages of five and seven years.
Whatever the disparity in the duration of primary school in different countries, there are usually some physiological, psychological as well as sociological reasons for fixing either the entry age or duration.
It is thus believed that children at six years of age will have developed physiologically and psychologically to be less dependent on their parents and more able to take care of themselves.
Their brain now allows for higher learning and copes adequately with the rigour of school life.
The muscles and other systems are well developed to perform the actions that are essential for life and effective interaction with their environment.
Not only these, they have acquired enough language skills for the organised school learning and other immediate needs and interests.
Primary education is provided in schools where the child will stay steadily advancing classes until they complete it and move on to high school/secondary schools.
Children are usually placed in classes with one teacher who will be primarily responsible for their education and welfare for that year.
This teacher may be assisted to varying degrees by specialist teachers in certain areas.
The continuity with a single teacher and opportunity to build a close relationship with the class is a notable feature of the primary education system.
3.4 Purpose of Primary Education The primary school is a place where the child gains the fundamental knowledge, skills, thoughts, feelings, and actions which are considered necessary for all citizens regardless of social status, sex, and ability.
An adequately planned and well-executed primary education programme will eradicate illiteracy and ignorance in the society.
This in turn will make it easier for the people to be governed, as a literate society is often relatively easier to govern than an illiterate society.
An effective primary education will not only awaken the intellectual powers of the products but also their social and economic attitude.
After primary education, it is expected that an individual would be able to read doctors’ prescriptions as well as instructions on perishable items with particular reference to dosage expiry date, other information which could be harmful or beneficial on the products.
We are all aware of the terrible but preventable damage done by quack doctors in the society as a result of illiteracy and ignorance.
26  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION A well-structured primary education programme can also provide necessary supporting staff for various qualified personnel and professionals in every sector of the society.
Primary education produces the unskilled workers services that are needed in every organisation in the society.
Such as gardeners, cleaners, messengers, drivers.
In essence, a good primary education will enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of every category of unskilled labour which constitute the bulk of the labour force in any society.
That is why primary education should be made accessible to all citizens irrespective of their home background or special need.
The promotion of good physical and mental health is also another purpose of the primary school.
It is expected that the primary school leavers should have training in the fundamental habits of exercise, cleanliness, eating and sleeping.
3.5 Needs of Primary School Children Before a child can grow well and learn effectively in the school, certain needs are to be met.
These needs are in the following order.
a.
Personal Needs: The child needs love, security, attention, food, good health, recognition, motivation in terms of encouragement and praise.
b.
Educational Needs: The child needs various educational materials suitable for manipulation, active interaction and participation within educational environment, sense of belonging, and adequate learning assistance.
c. Vocational Needs: The teacher needs to emphasise and explain the role of each vocation carefully to allow the child develop interest in a particular vocation as subjects such as agricultural science, elementary science, home economics/domestic science, social studies, should be handled with care by experienced teachers.
These needs if adequately met, contribute effectively to the all round development of the child.
Therefore, the needs require the teachers’ tutelage, identification and supervision.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What are the purposes for primary education?
2.
Identify the needs of a school child.
27 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit highlights the types of early childhood education and the principles underlying the guidelines for the establishment of early childhood programmes.
The concept of primary education and the needs of school children were also discussed.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt: • The various forms of early childhood education programme.
• The principles underlying the guidelines for early childhood education programmes.
• The concept and importance of primary education.
• The needs of a school child.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the general principles that underline childhood education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Arizona Early Childhood Consortium.
www.ade.state.az.us.
Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu, E. & Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria: A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling- Hordin Publishers (Nigeria) Limited.
Orukotan, A. F. & Oladipo, S.A. (1992).
Fundamentals of Pre-Primary and Primary Education.
Lagos: Beulah Publishers.
28  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 5 CHILD INDICES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Child Assessment 3.2 Purpose of Assessment 3.3 Various Assessment Methods 3.4 Developmental Milestones in the Child 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Children change visibly and behaviourally from birth through childhood to the onset of young adulthood.
A considerable amount of changes/events happen as children pass from babyhood into middle childhood.
Some of the striking events or those that are judged to be important are called milestones development.
If adults understand a little about why children behave as they do they will be able to respond to them more freely.
There is need for us as teachers to know about the growth and development so as to understand children’s behaviour much better.
An attempt to watch out for these milestones brought about child assessment/child study.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define child assessment • state the purpose of child assessment • list the methods of child assessment • list developmental milestones in children.
Word study • Indices • Assessment • Milestones • Development • Child study 29 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Indices: A standard by which the level of something can be judged.
Assessment: The ongoing process of gathering, analysing, and reflecting on evidence to make informed judgements.
Milestones: Important events in the development of something Development: The process of gradually becoming bigger, better, stronger or more advanced.
Child Study: The process of observing the children in order to have a good knowledge about their needs, interest and problems.
Developmental Assessment: A process which allows one to understand a child’s competencies and to design learning environments which will help a child to grow to his/her developmental potential.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Child Assessment Child assessment as an early education programme is the process of observing, recording and otherwise documenting the work children do and how they do it.
This information is used as a basis for a variety of educational decisions that affect the child, including planning for groups, individual children and communicating with families.
Appropriate assessment methods are essential if programmes are to provide curriculum and experiences that are age appropriate, developmentally appropriate, and culturally sensitive.
Child assessment addresses all areas of development and learning – physical, social, emotional, linguistic, creative, and cognitive and will include a variety of methods and processes.
3.2 Purpose of Child Assessment Children’s growth in all developmental spheres should be routinely assessed.
Appropriate assessment of children forms the basis for programme planning and implementation, communicating with parents, and identifying children with special needs.
Assessment information is used to plan and revise curriculum and goals for the class and for an individual child.
Information about each child’s growth and development is systematically collected and recorded throughout the programme cycle.
Assessment of the child will provide important indices of his/her overall physical health, and information on access to basic health care and also increase awareness on basic safety, fitness and health care needs of the child.
30  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3 Assessment Methods Developmentally appropriate assessment is an on-going process.
Useful information about the child may be gathered at any developmental stage by using either of these approaches.
The teacher decides on which type of method to be used.
Such methods include: a.
Interview b. Observations c. Anecdotal note d. Rating scales/checklist parent information/home visits e. Cumulative records f. Appropriate standardised tools.
(a) Interview: It can be structured or unstructured.
Parents are asked questions about child rearing practices, the nature and extent of interaction with their child, discipline method and the amount of time spent with the child.
(b) Observation: Observation is a very useful tool in assessing the child especially his/her affective behaviour because most indices of this behaviour cannot be assessed by other means.
Teachers’ observation must be unbiased.
It may be naturalistic or under controlled conditions.
(c) Home visit: The child’s behaviour at home or his relationship with parents can also be assessed by visiting the home.
It is another naturalistic method which may be structured or unstructured.
(d) Anecdotal records: Anecdotal records are useful tools in assessing the child.
Anecdotes are informal records kept by the teacher or other agencies on the learner.
A good anecdote gives complete information on an event, the date, and situation.
It also shows the age, sex, neigbourhood, origin, health status and action of the child.
It is important that the events should be recorded factually without any prejudice and bias.
(e) Rating scale/checklist: This refers to a list of descriptive words or phrases against which the teacher can check and rate the child’s behaviour, ability and progress.
The child can be rated on characteristics such as honesty, fairness, obedience, attentiveness and so on.
(f) Cumulative records: Keeping records of the child’s activities progressively makes reports more accurate than other approaches.
31 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Cumulative records show the trend and growth pattern of the child.
Cumulative record consists of the following information.
• Full name of the child • Date and place of birth • Sex • Name, address and occupation of parents or guardian • Medical information such as hospital records, physical abilities or abnormalities, emotional and social adjustment • Personality trait of the child • Special aptitude demonstrated by the child.
(g) Appropriate standardised tools These are tools that have been determined by the programme to be valid and reliable for the background characteristics of the child/children to be tested.
They provide developmental information specific to the area of concern and measure what the test is intended to measure.
Some assessment instruments are copyrighted and require specific levels of training to administer.
The standardised measure may provide a more complete index of children’s physical health and motor skill development.
An example of this is Vineland Adaptive Behaviour Scale (VABS) that measures four specific domain and eleven ‘sub domains.
• Communication (receptive, expressive and written) • Daily living skills (personal, domestic, and community).
• Socialisation (interpersonal relationships, play and leisure time and coping skills) • Motor skills (gross and fine skills).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What do you understand by child indices?
2.
Describe three or four methods of obtaining valid information about a child.
3.4 Developmental Milestones in the Child During the initial years of life, children experience unparalleled growth and development.
32  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Development milestones are the specific physical and mental abilities such as walking and understanding language.
Milestones are the major focus of child developmental stages in their life.
An example of this would be eye hand coordination, which includes a child’s increasing ability to manipulate objects in a coordinated manner.
Increased knowledge of age specific milestones allows parents and other caring adults to keep track of appropriate development of the child.
The early childhood stage (2-6 years) of development is fun and exciting for both the child and the parent.
During this time, a child goes through many physical, cognitive and social changes.
Physical Development • Growth rate slows down: the average child in this stage grows 21/2 inches in height and 5-7 pounds per year.
• Body fat declines during preschool years.
• Boys have more muscle while girls have more fat.
• Gross and fine motor skills progress rapidly.
Gross motor skills include running, skipping and jumping.
Fine motor skills include turning pages of a book and learning to write and draw.
• The most important physical development during early childhood is the brain and nervous system growth.
• The average preschool child requires 1700 calories per day.
Well balanced meals are important in this stage because their diet affects skeletal growth, body shape and susceptibility to disease.
Cognitive Development • From 2-7 years of age, children form stable concepts and mental reasoning begins to develop.
• From 2-4 years, children develop symbolic reasoning (the ability to picture an object that is not present).
• Egocentrism starts out strong in early childhood, but weakens.
• Magical beliefs are constructed.
• From 4-7 years of age, the child develops intuitive thought (the use of primitive reasoning skills and wondering “why”).
• Starting school is a major landmark for children of this age range.
Social Development As children seek greater autonomy, temper tantrums sometimes appear, though often subside with age.
Discipline and style of parenting is an 33 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION important developmental influence.
The child develops a sense of self around the end of the second year.
• Initiative appears: the child starts making things happen.
• Conscience appears: the child knows right from wrong and is often afraid of being caught doing something wrong.
• Gender identity develops through biological and social influences.
Social influences include parents, peers and media sources.
• Morality develops, influenced by role models.
Peer relations develop, children often want to dress, talk and act like their friends.
• Social development of a child in the early childhood stage is influenced by the type of parenting, economic status of the family and family structure.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What is developmental milestone?
2.
Why is it important to focus on the developmental milestone of the child?
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit discusses child assessment, purpose of child assessment, various assessment methods and developmental milestones in children.
From this discussion, we can see that assessment result can identify both the well developed and least well developed skills of children.
In other words, assessment provides information needed to plan programmes and curriculum that will promote each child’s progress.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have been exposed to the concept and purpose of child assessment.
The unit also highlighted the various developmental milestones in children.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Mention and discuss two child assessment methods.
2.
What are the purposes of child’s assessment?
34  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING Orukotan A.F.
& Oladipo S.A. (1992).
Fundamentals of Pre-Primary and Primary Education.
Lagos: Beulah Publishers.
35 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MODULE 2 MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE, ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES IN EARLY CHILDHOOD Unit 1 Management of Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Policy Regulation and Legislation in Early Childhood Education Unit 3 Curriculum Development in Early Childhood Education Unit 4 Resources in Early Childhood Education Unit 5 Professional Development and Training Procedures in Early Childhood Education UNIT 1 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.3 Definition of Management 3.1.1 Basic Functions of Management 3.2 Management in Early Childhood Programme 3.2.1 Management Structure in Early Childhood Programme 3.2.2 Members of Management Group in Early Childhood Education 3.2.3 Roles of the Management Group 3.2.4 Roles of the Supervisor, Administrator or Director of the Centre 3.2.5 The Proprietor 3.3 Management of Primary Education 3.3.1 Roles of States and Local Governments 3.3.2 Functions of the Local Government Education Authority (LGEA) 3.4 Roles of Government Agencies/Functions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Policy and administration involve people who make decisions and supervision necessary to achieve objectives and ensure maximum 36  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION growth of the organisation.
The degree of success attainable in the organisation would depend on the chief executive and all who possesses authority.
The school as an organisation has specific goals and is composed of staffs whose activities are coordinated by the chief executive.
The chief executive therefore is the head teacher who manages and coordinates the staff and equipment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define management • highlight the management structure in early childhood institution and their functions • explain the roles of governments and other agencies in the management of primary education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Management Management is a process that is used to accomplish organisational goals.
It is a process adopted to achieve what an organisation intends to achieve.
An organisation could be a business, a school, a city, a group of volunteers or any government entity.
Mary Parker Follett 1868-1933 defines management as the art of getting things done through people.
She also sees management functionally, as the action of measuring a quantity on regular basis and of adjusting some initial plans or actions to reach one’s intended goal.
Managers are the people to whom this management task is assigned and it is generally thought that they achieve the desired goals through the key functions of planning, organising, directing and controlling.
3.1.1 Basic Functions of Management Management operates through various functions often classified as planning, organising, leading/motivating and controlling.
• Planning: Anticipating what happens in future (today, next week, next month, next year etc) and generating plans for action.
Planning could include setting of organisational goals.
• Organising: It refers to the way the organisation allocates resources, assigns tasks and goes about accomplishing its goals.
In the process of organising, managers arrange a framework that 37 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION links all workers, tasks, and resources together so that organisational goals can be achieved.
The framework is called organisational structure.
• Leading/motivating: A leader is someone that motivates the employees and guides them to meet the organisational goals.
Managers who want to lead effectively need to discover what motivates their employees and inspire them to reach the stated objectives of the organisation.
• Controlling: Monitoring and checking process against plans which may need modification based on feedback.
It is the process of determining if necessary goals and objectives are being met.
3.2 Management in Early Childhood programme An early childhood service or programme is legally defined as one used exclusively, mainly or regularly for the education of young children between 0-8years.
It can be categorised as early child development centers or day care centers for children 0-3 years and pre-primary (nursery) schools for children 3-5 years.
3.2.1 Management Structure in Early Childhood Programme Early childhood service or programmes operate in different ways.
Some services are community based and stand alone, some operate under the umbrella of a larger organisation while others are privately owned and operated.
Management structures also differ.
Some choose to employ staff and to carry out administrative functions.
In other institutions, the private individual or proprietor carries out the management and administrative functions.
In Nigeria, management of early childhood education programmes is mostly in the hand of private individuals, religious body and employers of labour.
3.2.2 Members of Management Group in Early Childhood Education Management group may include parents and educators involved with an early childhood service, members of the community and/or representatives from umbrella organisation.
This type of group is further divided into subcommittee and/or individual job holders who may then report back to the main management group.
38  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2.3 Roles of the Management Group a.
Supporting the proprietor and sharing the overall responsibilities for the centre.
b.
Ensuring that the goals and policies are consistent with the regulations and other legislation and that the performance of the center is monitored against these goals and policies.
c. Establishing a sub-committee to oversee the appointment of all staff and ratify appointments.
d. Ensuring that the center operates as a good employer.
The management group can achieve this by: a.
Ensuring that those with defined roles in the centre have a job description that gives them a clear understanding of their roles and responsibilities.
b.
Ensuring that there is good communication between the centre, its community, management and staff.
c. Ensuring accountability is maintained between all individuals and groups who have roles in the centre.
3.2.4 Roles of the Supervisor, Administrator or Director of the Centre The supervisor or the director provides professional leadership to the teachers.
This leadership focuses on: a. Curriculum development or adaptation and implementation including the development of policies, objectives, and practices which relate to learning and development.
b.
Ensuring information regarding the programme is effectively shared with parents.
c. Maintaining relationship with other early childhood professionals and groups and keeping the management group.
d. The day-to-day care, comfort, education, health and safety of the children.
3.2.5 The Proprietor The proprietor has the overall responsibility as an individual or on behalf of a management group, to ensure that the requirements of the regulations and other relevant legislation are adhered to.
This does not mean that the proprietor is involved in all areas of management; he/she can delegate many tasks and responsibilities to: 39 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION a.
Others on the management group b. Educators/teachers c. Other employees such as the administrator or directors/ supervisors.
The proprietor has the overall responsibility even though large portions of work are delegated.
He/she must therefore a have a clear understanding of what early childhood education is.
Therefore he or she must: a.
Have a clear understanding of the regulations, relevant legislation, centre management plans and policies.
b.
Maintain a clear understanding of roles of all employees, parents, volunteers and management group members and.
c. Ensure that these roles and responsibilities are carried out in an appropriate manner and to a high standard.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define Management.
2.
What are the roles of a director in the centre for early childhood education?
3.3 Management of Primary Education The management of primary education in Nigeria cuts across the three tiers of government.
The federal government is the principal financier and controller of primary education.
However the reintroduction of the National Primary Education Commission through Decree No 96 of 1993 along with the structure of the State Primary Education Board (SPEB) and Local Government Education Authorities makes these bodies responsible for the management and fund allocation in the primary school.
The National Primary Education Commission performs the following duties: a. Prescribes the minimum standard of primary education in Nigeria.
b. Inquires into and advices the federal government on the funding of primary education.
c. Receives the National Primary Education fund and allocates it to States Primary Education Board (SPEB) d. Collates after consultation with state governments, periodic master plans for a balanced and coordinated development of primary education in Nigeria.
40  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION e. Collates, analyses and publishes information relating to primary education in Nigeria.
f. Publishes a comprehensive list of primary school teachers in each state of the federation and ensures regular personnel audit.
g. Carries out any other activity as the president may from time to time direct.
3.3.1 Roles of States and Local Governments Under the National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) states and local governments have roles to play in the management of primary education through the State Primary Education Boards (SPEB) and the Local Government Education Authority (LGEA).
The roles of SPEB and LGEA in the organisation and management of primary education in Decree 96 of 1993 are: a.
Management of primary schools in the state.
b.
Recruitment, appointment, promotion and discipline of teaching and non-teaching staff on Grade level 07 and above.
c. Posting and deployment of staff including inter-state transfer.
d. Disbursement of funds provided to it from the federal and state sources.
e. Setting up an effective functional supervisory unit.
f. Retirement and re-absorption of teachers.
g. Undertaking new capital projects.
h. Approval, training and re-training of teaching and non-teaching staff.
i.
Assessment and funding of salaries and allowances of teaching and non-teaching staff based on a scheme of service drawn up by the state government.
3.3.2 Functions of the Local Government Education Authority (LGEA) a.
The day to day administration of the primary schools in its area of jurisdiction.
b.
The appointment, posting, transfer, promotion and discipline of staff on Grade 01-06 in its area of jurisdiction.
c. Making recommendation to the education board concerning all the teaching and non-teaching staff on grade levels 07 and above in its area of jurisdiction.
d. Submission of annual estimates, annual accounts and monthly returns to the board.
e. Payment of salaries, allowances and benefits to all teaching and non-teaching staff in their areas of jurisdiction.
41 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION f. Acquisition and distribution of materials and equipment to all primary schools in their areas of jurisdiction.
g. Undertaking general maintenance of primary school buildings and infrastructure in their areas of jurisdiction.
h. Stimulating, promoting, and encouraging communal participation in the running of primary schools in their areas of jurisdiction.
i.
Taking all reasonable steps to ensure full enrolment and attendance in all primary schools in their areas of jurisdiction.
j.
Providing regular feedback to the education board on people reaction to government education measures in their areas of jurisdiction.
k. Supervising all education committees in their areas of jurisdiction.
l. Performing other functions as may be delegated to them by the education board.
3.4 Roles of Government Agencies/Functions Apart from the federal, state and local government, there are some other agencies of government that are involved in the management of primary education.
These are: The Minister of Education He is the political head of the ministry.
He oversees the day to day activities in education ministry and reports to the president with appropriate recommendation.
The minister performs the following specific roles according to the Decree 91 of 1993 in respect of National Primary Education Commission (NPEC).
a.
Recommends to the head of state for appointment, the chairman and other members of the commission.
b.
Receives the annual estimate of expenditure and income of the commission on behalf of the federal government.
c. Receives the annual reports on the activities of the commission not later than 30th June every year on behalf of federal government d. Advices the federal government from time to time on the necessary steps to be taken in respect of the activities of the commission.
The Commissioner for Education The commissioner for education is also the political head of the Ministry of Education at the state level.
Apart from overseeing the day to day 42  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION activities of the ministry, he also performs the following functions with respect to primary education: a.
Recommends to the state government for appointment, members of the State Primary Education Board (SPEB).
b.
Provides the school calendar for all public primary schools in the state.
c. Gives approval for the establishment of new pre-primary and primary schools in the states.
d. Ensures that the successful implementation of primary school curriculum.
e. Provides the necessary master plan for a well balanced and well coordinated programme of primary education in the state.
f. Oversees the activities of the state primary education board and local government education authorities.
The Permanent Secretaries The Permanent Secretary (PS) of education is the chief administrator of the ministry and is directly responsible to the minister.
His/her responsibilities include: a.
General overseeing administration of the ministry.
b.
Coordinating the ministry’s activities.
c. Giving the minister up-to-date information on all important issues and developments in the ministry.
d. Representing the federal minister of education in important events.
e. Residing over meetings of State Directors General of Education.
f. Coordinating the activities of SPEB and LGEA.
The Inspectorate Division This is an arm of the Ministry of Education that is charged with the responsibilities of monitoring what goes on in the schools.
The staff of the inspectorate division are otherwise known as Inspectors.
They are deployed according to their academic and professional qualification to supervise schools and ensure proper implementation of the school programmes.
In addition to the above functions, they also: a.
Supervise primary school leaving certificate examination and common entrance into public secondary schools.
b.
Report the permanent secretary, their findings in the schools in terms of facilities, teachers and general tone of the school.
43 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION c. Investigate all forms of allegations against any school head and make appropriate recommendations to the ministry through the permanent secretary.
d. Advise teachers, parents and pupils on the best ways of ensuring successful implementation of the curriculum.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Highlight the roles of local governments in primary education.
4.0 CONCLUSION This unit discusses the concept of management and highlights the management structure of early childhood programmes and primary school education.
From the discussion, we have discovered that the term management refers to the activities and the group of people involved in four general functions: planning, organising, leading and coordinating resources.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about the roles and functions of the management bodies in early childhood education programmes and primary education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the functions of National Primary Education Commission (NPEC).
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu, E. & Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers.
Quadri, K. (2001).
Introduction to Primary Education Studies.
Oyo: Obistic Ventures.
44  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 2 POLICY REGULATION AND LEGISLATION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION PROGRAMMES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Policy 3.1.1 Policy Statement on Early Childhood/Pre-Primary Education 3.2 Primary Education 3.3 Licensing and Public Regulation of Early Childhood Education 3.3.1 NAEYC’S Principles for Effective Regulation 3.4 Public Regulation of Early Childhood Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education is a great force and a great investment to be made by a nation for the speedy development of its economic; political, and human resources.
The development of coherent policies and plans is crucial to bring about real and sustainable change in education system throughout the world and achieve the goal of education.
Each country has several specific goals.
These goals are translated into policy statements.
Each level of education in Nigeria has its own policy statement.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define policy • highlight policy statements on pre-primary and primary education in Nigeria • discuss policies on licensing and public regulation of early childhood programme.
45 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Policy A policy is a deliberate plan of action to guide decisions and achieve national outcome(s).
Policy may also refer to the process of making important organisational decisions including the identification of different alternatives such as programmes or spending priorities and choosing among them on the basis of impact they will have.
Cochran (2001) defines policy as actions of government and the intentions that determine those actions.
Policies can be understood as political, management, financial and administrative mechanisms arranged to reach explicit goals.
Policies are typically promulgated through official documents.
Policy documents usually contain certain standard components such as: a. a purpose statement outlining why the organisation is issuing a policy and what its desired effect is.
b. an applicability and scope statement describing who the policy affects and which actions are impacted by the policy.
c. an effective date which indicates when policy comes into force.
d. a responsibilities section indicating which parties and organisations are responsible for carrying out individual policy statements.
e. policy statements indicating the specific regulations, requirements or modifications to organisational behaviour that the policy is creating.
A nation’s policy on education is government’s way of realising that part of the national goals, which can be achieved using education as a tool.
No policy on education however, can be formulated without first identifying the overall philosophy and goals of the nation.
Nigeria’s philosophy of education is therefore based on: a. the development of the individual into a sound and effective citizen.
b. the full integration of the individual into the community; and c. the provision of equal access to educational opportunities for all citizens of the country at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels both inside and outside the formal school system.
The national educational goals which were derived from the philosophy, are therefore: 46  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION a. the inculcation of national consciousness and national unity b. the inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society c. the training of the mind in the understanding of the world around and d. the acquisition of appropriate skills and the development of mental, physical and social abilities and competencies as equipment for the individual to live in and contribute to the development of the society.
3.1.1 Policy Statement on Early Childhood/Pre-Primary Education Early childhood/pre-primary education as referred to in this document is the education given in an educational institution to children prior to their entering the primary school.
It includes the crèche, the nursery and the kindergarten (NPE, 2006).
The responsibilities of government for pre-primary education shall be to promote the training of qualified pre-primary school teachers in adequate number, contribute to the development of suitable curriculum, supervise and control the quality of such institutions, and establish pre- primary sections in existing public schools.
The purpose of pre-primary education shall be to: a. effect a smooth transition from the home to the school b. prepare the child for the primary level of education c. provide adequate care and supervision for the children while their parents are at work (on the farms, in the markets, offices, etc) d. inculcate social norms e. inculcate in the child the spirit of enquiry and creativity through the exploration of nature, the environment, art, music and playing with toys, etc f. develop a sense of co-operation and team-spirit g. learn good habits, especially good health habits and h. teach the rudiments of numbers, letters, colours, shapes, forms etc, through play.
Government shall a. establish pre-primary sections in existing public schools and encourage both community/private efforts in the provision of pre- primary education.
b. make provision in teacher education programmes for specialisation in early childhood education 47 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION c. ensure that the medium of instruction is principally the mother- tongue or the language of the immediate community; and to this end will: (i) develop the orthography of many more Nigerian languages, and (ii) produce textbooks in Nigerian languages.
d. ensure that the main method of teaching at this level shall be through play and that the curriculum of teacher education is oriented to achieve this; regulate and control the operation of pre- primary education.
To this end the teacher-pupil ratio shall be 1:25 e. set and monitor minimum standard for early childcare centres in the country; and f. ensure full participation of government, communities and teachers’ associations in the running and maintenance of early childhood education facilities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define policy.
2.
What are the components of a standard policy statement?
3.2 Primary Education Primary education as referred to in this document is the education given in institutions for children aged 6 to 11 plus.
Since the rest of the education system is built upon it, the primary level is the key to the success or failure of the whole system.
The duration shall be six years.
This being the case, the goals of primary education are to: a. inculcate permanent literacy and numeracy, and ability to communicate effectively b. lay a sound basis for scientific and reflective thinking c. give citizenship education as a basis for effective participation in and contribution to the life of the society d. mould the character and develop sound attitude and morals in the child e. develop in the child the ability to adapt to the child’s changing environment f. give the child opportunities for developing manipulative skills that will enable the child function effectively in the society within the limits of the child’s capacity 48  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION g. provide the child with basic tools for further educational advancement, including preparation for trades and crafts of the locality.
These goals will form the basis of primary education in all the states of the federation.
In pursuance of the goals above: a.
Primary education shall be tuition free, universal and compulsory.
b. Curriculum for primary education shall include: (i) Languages: a.
Language of the environment b. English c. French d. Arabic (ii) Mathematics (iii) Science (iv) Physical and Health Education (v) Religious Knowledge (vi) Agriculture/Home Economics (vii) Social Studies and Citizenship Education (viii) Cultural & Creative Arts (Drawing, Handicraft, Music and Cultural Activities) (ix) Computer Education c. The following educational services shall be provided: (i) School library (ii) Basic health scheme (iii) Counselling (iv) Educational resource centre (v) Specialist teachers of particular subjects such as Mathematics, Science, Physical Education, Language Arts (in relation to English French, Sign Language and Nigerian Languages), Librarian, Music, Fine Art and Home Economics.
d. Teaching shall be by practical, exploratory and experimental methods.
e. The medium of instruction in the primary school shall be the language of the environment for the first three years.
During this period, English shall be taught as a subject.
49 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION f. From the fourth year, English shall progressively be used as a medium of instruction and the language of immediate environment and French shall be taught as subjects.
g. For effective teaching and learning, the teacher-pupil ratio shall be 1:35. h. Advancement from one class to another shall be based on continuous assessment; i.
The Primary School Leaving Certificate shall be based only on continuous assessment and shall be issued locally by the head teacher of the school.
j.
With a view to correcting the imbalance between different parts of the country, with reference to the availability of educational facilities and the number of pupils receiving formal education and girls education: (i) State governments shall ensure the integration of formal basic education curriculum into Koranic and Islamiya schools (ii) Special efforts shall be made by all appropriate agencies to encourage parents to send their daughters to schools.
k. Everything possible shall be done to discourage the incidence of dropping out at the primary level of education.
However, if this occurs, provision shall be made in the context of adult and non- formal education to enable such early leavers to continue with their education.
l. Government welcomes the contributions of voluntary agencies, communities and private individuals in the establishment and management of primary schools alongside those provided by the state and local governments as long as they meet the minimum standards laid down by the federal government.
m. In recognition of the prominent role of Information and Communication Technology in advancing knowledge and skills necessary for effective functioning in the modern world, there is urgent need to integrate Information and Communication Technology (ICT) into education in Nigeria.
Government shall therefore provide basic infrastructure and training for the realisation of this goal at the primary school level.
50  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3 Licensing and Public Regulation of Early Childhood Education The National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) affirms the responsibility of states to regulate the early childhood care and education programmes by regulating centers and schools.
The fundamental purpose of public regulation is to protect children from harm from their physical environment and also the harm of long-term developmental impairment.
Licensing rules and procedures should be developed in a context that recognises other strategies and policies that encourage all programmes to strive continuously for higher standards of quality.
Public regulation of early childhood programme facilities, including licensing, represents a basic level of protection afforded to all children in settings outside their family.
Additional strategies and policies along with licensing are needed to support the provision of high-quality services for all families who want or need them.
3.3.1 NAEYC’S Principles for Effective regulation NAEYC offers the following principles for implementation of effective regulatory system.
1.
NAEYC believes that all types of care and education programmes within the child care market should be regulated to provide basic protection for children.
The association believes that programmes should be regulated regardless of sponsorship, regardless of the length of programme and regardless of the age of children served.
NAEYC explicitly opposes programmes sponsored by religious organisations if they do not provide an equal level of health and safety protection for all children.
2.
States should license all facilities that provide services to the public, including all centers, schools or group child care homes, (i.e., grant permission to operate).
Facility licensure should include an on-site visit prior to licensure and periodic inspections to monitor continued compliance.
Licensing rules should focus on the aspects deemed most critical to maintaining children’s safety and their healthy development, both in terms of their immediate physical health and well-being and their long-term well-being in all areas of development.
3.
The skills and qualifications of the individuals working in an early childhood programme are critically essential to creating an 51 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION environment that promotes children’s healthy development and learning.
Establishing licenses for the various roles included in early childhood centres and family child care homes not only protects children’s healthy development by requiring the demonstration of key competencies but also enhances early childhood professionalism and career development.
In addition, individual licensure holds promise for increasing the compensation of staff.
4.
NAEYC recommends that the licensing standards address health and safety aspects, group size, adult-child ratios, and preservice qualifications and in-service requirements for staff (referencing individual licensing standards).
Periodic review and revision (every five years) are needed to ensure that rules reflect current issues as well as the latest knowledge and practice.
Licensing rules should be widely publicised to parents and the public; these groups, along with service providers, should also participate in the review and revision of the rules.
5.
Enforcement is critical to effective regulation.
Effective enforcement requires periodic on-site inspections on both announced and unannounced basis, with meaningful sanctions for noncompliance.
NAEYC recommends that all centres receive at least one site visit per year.
Sanctions should be included in the regulatory system to give binding force to its requirements.
Enforcement provisions should provide an array of enforcement options such as the ability to impose fines; to revoke, suspend, or limit licenses; to restrict enrollment or admissions; and to take emergency action to close programmes in circumstances that are dangerous to children.
When threats to children’s health and safety are discovered, sanctions should be promptly imposed without delayed administrative hearing process.
The vulnerability of children mandates the highest level of official scrutiny of out-of-family care and education environments.
6.
Regulatory personnel responsible for inspecting and monitoring programmes should have training and demonstrated competence in early childhood education and child development, programme administration, and regulatory enforcement, including the use of sanctions.
These criteria should be included in civil service requirements for licensing staff.
7.
Regulatory processes should be coordinated and streamlined to promote greater effectiveness and efficiency.
52  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Rules and inspections should be coordinated between the licensing agency and those agencies responsible for building, fire safety, health and sanitation codes so that any overlap is reduced to a minimum and contradictions resolved.
8.
Consumer and public education should inform families, providers, and the public of the importance of the early years and of ways to create environments that promote children’s learning and development.
9.
States should invest sufficient levels of resources to ensure that children’s healthy development and learning are not harmed in early care and education settings.
NAEYC believes that public regulation is a basic and necessary component of government’s responsibility for protecting all children in all programmes from the risk of harm.
Public regulation is also necessary for promoting the conditions that are essential for children’s healthy development and learning and must be adequately funded.
3.4 Public Regulation of Early Childhood Education An effective system of public regulation is the cornerstone of an effective system of early childhood care and education services because it reaches all programmes in the market.
But for the regulatory system to be most effective, other areas of the early childhood care and education services system also must be in place, These are: a. a holistic approach to addressing the needs of children and families that stresses collaborative planning and service integration across traditional boundaries of child care, education, health employment, and social services b. systems that recognise and promote quality c. an effective system of professional development that provides meaningful opportunities for career advancement to ensure a stable, well-qualified workforce d. equitable financing that ensures access for all children and families to high-quality services and e. active involvement of all stakeholders, providers, practitioners, parents, and community leaders from both public and private sectors – in all aspects of programme planning and delivery.
NAEYC is committed to ensuring that programmes must comply with local zoning, building, fire safety, health and sanitation codes in addition to licensing.
A lack of coordination of requirements can frustrate new and existing providers and undermine the protection over time.
53 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State five NAEYC’s principles for licensing and regulation of early childhood education.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit attention has been given to policy statement, regulation and legislation in early childhood education programmes.
Particular attention was given to Nigerian policy statement on early childhood education/pre-primary education.
In addition, NAEYC’ principles for effective regulation of early childhood education was discussed.
6.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt the meaning of policy and the national policy on Nigerian education system.
You have also learnt about policy statements on early childhood and primary education.
In addition, you learnt about licensing and regulation of early childhood education programmes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the policy statement of early childhood education programme in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu, E. & Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers.
Quadri, K. (2001).
Introduction to Primary Education Studies.
Oyo: Tobistic Ventures.
54  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 3 CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Curriculum 3.2 Factors Affecting Curriculum Development 3.3 Curriculum Contents in Early Childhood Education 3.4 Teachers’ Roles in Curriculum Implementation of Early Childhood Education Programmes 3.5 Primary School Curriculum 3.6 Curriculum Development Agencies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In effective management there are always goals to be achieved.
For effective management of early childhood programme and primary education, the goals can be achieved through the curriculum.
In formal education, a curriculum is the set of courses and their contents.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept ‘curriculum’ • identify factors affecting curriculum development • highlight the curriculum content in early childhood education programmes • analyse the functions of the curriculum development agency.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Curriculum The concept curriculum has many definitions, as there are many experts in the field of curriculum development.
Here are some definitions of curriculum that would enable us to have a good grasp of what curriculum is.
55 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Kerr (1969) defines curriculum as all the learning experiences, which are planned and guided by the school, whether carried out in groups or individually inside or outside the school.
This means that curriculum include all the co-curricular activities which often take place outside the school such as sport, drama, debate etc.
According to Wheeler (1980) curriculum refers to the planned experiences offered to the learners under the guidance of the school.
Tanner and Tanner (1980) define it explicitly, as the planned and guided learning experiences and intended learning outcomes, formulated through the systematic reconstruction of knowledge and experiences under the auspices of the school, for the learner’s continuous and willful growth in personal – social competence.
The World Confederation of Organisation of the Teaching Profession (WCOTP, 1987) clarifies the term curriculum in the different forms.
a. curriculum is what examiners require the teachers to emphasise in their teaching b. curriculum is what should be taught in a particular subject c. curriculum is the totality of the syllabus of a school d. curriculum is a combination of classroom and out of classroom activities e. curriculum is the totality of activities carried out under the umbrella of a school, in response to societal needs f. curriculum is both the process of determining the intents to be taught through instruction and the intent themselves as they appear to guide activities and instructional sequence.
3.2 Factors Affecting Curriculum Development In curriculum development there are some factors that are to be understood.
These factors are therefore to be critically analysed.
a.
The dynamic nature of the society with respect to the culture, goals and interest.
b.
The learners – their nature, interest, and needs.
c. The teachers – their quality and quantity.
d. National goals and objectives.
e. Available resources – human and materials.
f. Global expectations and demands such as the need to eradicate illiteracy, promotion of human rights, and awareness.
A careful analysis of these factors could be made prior to curriculum planning and during the development.
56  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION The school curriculum of a nation is a joint effort by many people (school administrators, policy makers, parents, teachers and various organisations).
3.3 Curriculum Contents in Early Childhood Education Programmes A high quality early education programme stimulates learning in all developmental areas-physical, social, linguistic, creative, emotional and cognitive.
It places much emphasis in the process of learning and on the contents.
It capitalises on children’s natural curiosity to promote their growth as language users, thinkers, and problem solvers.
It provides a wide variety of planned experiences that enable children to learn through interaction, exploration, manipulation and self-discovery.
The early education curriculum supports the development of the whole child.
It offers young children support and encouragement as they strive to become confident and competent social beings, problem solvers, decision makers and composers.
Above all, it gives children recognition and respect as they endeavour to act on, understand, and expand the world which they already know.
The curriculum encourages children to be actively involved in the learning process, to experience a variety of developmentally appropriate experiences and materials, and to pursue their own interests in the context of life in the community and the world.
The curriculum is sufficiently broad to enable the teacher to meet the needs and enhance the strengths of children with varying levels of maturity and ability.
Curricular themes or topics reflect the children’s interest and experiences as well as spontaneous events that have meaning for children (e.g.
a new baby, a visit to the doctor, or a discovered bird’s eggs) are culturally relevant.
Recognising that young children learn most effectively through play, each program will have to identify, and set aside blocks of time daily for uninterrupted, spontaneous, child-initiated play.
Children’s self-directed experiences are facilitated through the use of indoor and outdoor learning areas which might include but are not limited to: • Dramatic play • Arts (not limited to painting) • Library (listening and reading) • Reading/writing • Mathematics • Sand/water 57 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • Games, puzzles, manipulatives • Woodwork • Music, nursery rhymes and science.
Activities and materials in each learning area are to enable children explore their current interests and natural curiosity, contrast experiences, demonstrate what they know, and experiment with new ways of thinking.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Analyse the curriculum contents in early childhood education programme.
3.4 Teachers’ Roles in Curriculum Implementation of Early Childhood Education Programmes • Teachers write plan to reflect an integrated approach, which incorporates all developmental areas throughout the session.
• Teachers should explain how each day’s plan addresses children’s developmental levels, enhances their strength, contributes to their understanding of a concept or project, and promotes continuity with previous learning experiences.
• Teachers should explain how each day’s plan encourages discovery, promotes domain specific development and stimulates higher – order-thinking skills.
• Teachers involve children in planning curricular activities by asking questions and identifying areas for future investigation.
• Teacher-directed learning is presented in the context of the child’s world and relates in a meaningful way to the child’s real- life experiences to enable each child be an active participant.
• Teacher-directed learning helps children develop creatively, emotionally, physically, socially, linguistically and cognitively.
Curriculum is designed to address individual children’s needs and interests, and build on their strengths in all developmental areas.
3.5 Primary School Curriculum The Primary School Curriculum as the name implies conjures up thoughts and many features that make it worthy of proper study in relation to the education of the young children.
Traditionally, the curricular activities of primary schools in Nigeria include physical training, development of character, respect for elders, peers, intellectual training, vocational training, community participation 58  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION and promotion of cultural heritage.
The methodologies include participation, observation, imitation miming, reward and punishment.
A formalised primary school curricular was initiated and developed by (CESAC) Comparative Education Studies and Adaptation Center (CESAC) and Nigerian Educational Research Council (NERC).
These two bodies contributed a lot to the development of primary school curriculum in Nigeria.
The primary schools nationwide have the following curricular activities.
a. Inculcation of literacy and numeracy b.
The study of science c. The study of agriculture d. The study of social Studies e. The study of health and physical education f. The study of religious and moral education g. The study of aesthetics h. The study of creative and music i.
The study of local craft j.
The study of domestic science k. The study of norms and values.
3.6 Curriculum Development Agencies The following organisations or agencies have contributed in one way or another to the development of curriculum in Nigeria.
The Agencies are: 1.
NERC – Nigerian Educational Research Council 2.
CESAC – Comparative Education Study and Adaptation Centre 3.
NERDC – Nigerian Educational, Research and Development Council 4.
NETC – National Education Technology Centre 5.
IENU – Institute of Education in Nigerian Universities 6.
Subject Association 7.
NBDC – National Book Development Council 8.
JCCE – Joint Consultative Committee on Education 9.
NUC - National Universities Commission 10.
NBTE – National Board for Technical Education 11.
NCCE – National Commission for Colleges of Education 12.
NCE – National Council on Education.
In order to promote proper and better understanding, there is need to clarify the distinctive function of some of the above agencies.
59 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council (NERDC) This Council was established by Decree 53 of 1988 through the merger of NERC, CESAC, NBDC and the Nigerian Language Centre.
The responsibilities of the Council include: a.
Research on special aspects of education at all levels b.
Developing instructional materials for pre-primary, primary and secondary schools.
These instructional materials are subjected to approval by the National Council on Education and JCCE c. Development of Nigerian languages.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Identify the teachers’ role in the implementation of early childhood education curriculum.
4.0 CONCLUSION In order for a school to achieve its goals, it has to fashion a programme of learning grouped by subjects.
Thus curriculum refers to the educational experiences and activities that all children are required to participate in the school.
The teacher is in a key position in regard to the realisation of the curriculum.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about the concept of curriculum and the factors affecting curriculum development.
The roles of teachers and NERDC in curriculum development were equally discussed.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Define curriculum b.
What are the factors affecting curriculum development in early childhood education?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, R. O.; Oduolowu, E. A.
& Lawal, B. O.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers Ibadan.
Kerr, J. F. (1969).
Changing Curriculum.
London: University of London Press.
60  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Quadri, K. (2001).
Introduction to Primary Education Studies.
Oyo: Tobistic Ventures.
Wheeler, D.K.
(1978).
Curriculum Process.
London: Macmillan.
61 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 4 RESOURCES IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Human Resources in Early Childhood Education 3.2 Roles/Duties of Various Personnel in Early Childhood Education 3.3 Material Resources in Early Childhood Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Effective teaching and learning process in education demand interaction of materials and human beings.
Educational resources or school resources are important facilities that help teaching and learning in school.
Human beings and materials or devices are thus classified as resources.
They are assets which are used for the attainment of educational objectives and allow smooth and effective teaching and learning in school.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define resources • distinguish between human and physical/material resources • discuss duties of various human resources in early childhood education • list various learning materials • classify the learning material to outdoor and indoor equipment.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Human Resources in Early Childhood Education Resources are things that can be used to help achieve an aim; such include books, equipment, materials.
In the classroom situation 62  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION resources are materials, equipment or devices, which are used to facilitate teaching.
In this course, resources will be classified into human and material resources.
Human resources in early childhood refer to the personnel which include teachers/caregivers, nannies/nursery helpers, administrative officers, accountants, clerks, typists, cleaners, gardeners, volunteer workers and parents.
Material resources refer to various instructional materials, aids or equipment in early childhood education centers or nursery schools.
They can also be classified into outdoor or indoor equipment.
3.2 Roles/Duties of Various Personnel in Early Childhood Education Head Teacher The head teacher is the administrator charged with the responsibilities of managing the available financial, human and material resources of the center.
He/she is supposed to be an important coordinator.
Hence he/she must be an educational leader, executor of policy, a supervisor and a decision maker.
The duties are as follows: a. managing and maintaining the centre building, ground, equipment and facilities b. coordinating the activities of teachers c. organising school time table and seeing to the day to day activities of the centre/school d. maintaining good working conditions for staff and establishing high morale among them e. supervising co-curricular activities of the school f. maintaining discipline among the teachers and pupils g. receiving, purchasing and distributing materials in the centre/schools h. managing the school finance i. organising and supervising auxiliary services for pupils such as the health service, transport, nutrition, guidance and counselling etc j. keeping statutory records such as: • attendance register • admission register • school record and diary 63 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • scheme of work • time table • cumulative record • cash account book • store ledger/stock book • log book • visitors’ book • minutes of P.T.A • planning the curriculum in accordance with the stated aims, objectives, regulations and guidelines • encouraging teachers to use the available teaching facilities effectively • planning the center/school duties and assigning them to the teachers • supervising the instruction activities of teachers • helping and encouraging teachers to grow professionally through attendance of conferences, in-service trainings, workshops etc • establishing methods for evaluating, examining and reporting pupils’ progress.
Nursery Teacher Early years/nursery teachers’ work in pre-school, nursery and reception classes with children aged between three and five.
They are responsible for developing and implementing work schemes and lesson plans in line with the requirements of the foundation stage.
This involves organising and developing the nursery learning environment and resources in order to facilitate learning.
Early year/nursery teachers foster the understanding, social and communication skills of the children.
They develop and maintain relationships with parents/guardians to further support pupils.
Early year/nursery teachers record observations and summarise the children’s achievements.
They focus on optimum child development and preparation for a successful transition to primary school education.
Typical Work Activities Early-year teachers teach all areas of the foundation stage, which is focused on helping the children to achieve early learning goals.
Typical activities include: • motivating and stimulating the children’s learning abilities, often using play activities 64  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • interacting with and supporting children, providing them with a secure environment to learn • devising and producing visual aids and teaching resources • organising learning materials and resources, and making imaginative use of resources • assisting with the development of children’s personal/social and language abilities • supporting the development of children’s basic skills, including physical co-ordination, speech and communication • encouraging children’s mathematical and creative development through stories, songs, games, drawing and imaginative play • developing children’s curiosity and knowledge • working with others to plan and coordinate work • sharing knowledge gained with other practitioners and parents • observing, assessing and recording each child’s progress • attending in-service training • ensuring the health and safety of children and staff is maintained during all activities, both inside and outside the nursery/school • keeping up to date with changes in the curriculum and development in best practice.
Nursery Assistant Early childhood educator assistants perform the following duties: • conduct and monitor programmes designed for young children • lead children in activities by telling stories, teaching songs and preparing craft materials • prepare and serve snacks • arrange rooms and furniture for lunch and rest periods • assist with proper eating, dressing and toilet habits • submit written observations on children to supervisor • attend staff meetings to discuss progress and problems of children • assist supervisor in keeping records • maintain day care equipment and assist in housekeeping duties.
The cleaner undertakes the following duties: • removal of dust, dirt, gravel, paper clips, staples, confetti, waste papers, litter and other debris, with no build up in corners, under furniture etc • removal of dirt on ground by regular scrubbing • spot cleaning of wall surfaces (graffiti, dust bins) • spot cleaning of doors, handles and push plates, to remove fingerprints, sticky marks etc 65 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • removal of dust and dirt on window panes, accessible horizontal surfaces (including exposed pipe works), and fittings • spot cleaning internal window glass (refer window cleaning) • removing chewing gum, litters from classroom • dusting furniture, clocks, wall decorations, pictures, etc.
• removal of shoe marks • cleaning of sinks, hand wash basins, taps and other fittings • removal of all organic or inorganic materials e.g.
food scraps, broken stationery • empting rubbish bins daily and replacing bin liners when needed, including bins on covered deck area • turning off lights where needful at the completion of the cleaning • relocking of doors where security pads, cards or keys are used.
Parents Parents are encouraged to participate in the education of their children through individual discussions with the appropriate teacher (s) and/or head teacher through participation as volunteers, and/or through participation in the Parent Teacher Association.
Parents can support the educational process and success of the school/centre by: • reinforcing the school/centre goals and mission • cooperating with the discipline policy of the school/centre • reviewing communications, and returning requested information promptly • participating in school activities such as parent teacher conferences, parents meetings, fund raising, etc • notifying the school office of any changes in contact information • treating faculty and staff with respect and courtesy at all times.
• notifying the school when a child is absent and following up with a written excuse • meeting financial obligations to the school on time • keeping teachers informed of any concerns about children’s progress.
Volunteers • volunteers provide an important resource to the children and to the school and provide an opportunity for involvement in the education of the students • volunteers work under the direction and supervision of teachers.
Volunteers can be parents who have children in the school/centre or non-parents of children attending the school.
They can serve as a resource persons, or community visitors.
66  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Accountant His/her duties are to oversee: • the development of a draft of yearly budget • the production of monthly accounts • the collection of fees including the issue of receipts • regular banking of all money • organisation and administration of petty cash • annual auditing of accounts • production of annual financial statement, which is made available to, parents, or governing body • maintenance of the required asset inventory.
Clerk/Typist The clerk or typist can serve as the secretary in the centre/school.
His/her duties include: • developing meeting agendas in consultation with head teachers and or management board • preparation of the necessary documents for staff meeting, attend all meetings and keep accurate minutes of proceeding • distribution of management/staff meeting minutes appropriately.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Define resources in early childhood education.
2.
Identify the duties of a nursery teacher.
3.3 Material Resources in Early Childhood Education The following learning materials are a small sample of those available as resources for early education programme.
The materials should represent a variety of diverse cultures, styles and tradition.
Centre Materials • Library/media centre • Pictures and photographs • Books • Magazines, newspapers, catalogs • Chart stories made with children • Children’s original poems and stories, chairs, pillows 67 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • Doll dresses • Chalkboard/white board • Puppets/dolls male and female • Book display racks • Writing equipment (chalk, pencil, markers, crayon) • Erasers (pencils, markers and chalks) • Paper of all kinds, lined and unlined • Alphabets blocks, alphabets cards moveable letters • Pattern cards, card boards • Tables and chairs • First aid kit • Word cards with words and picture, alphabet and word games.
Print models (poems, chartstories, word list).
• Functional print/story books • Book jackets, posters • Low shelf for organising materials and supplies and cabinet • Bulletin board for children to display their works • Mirrors, brushes, combs • Visual discrimination games.
Various subjects learning materials A.
Mathematics learning materials • Number blocks and cubes • Beads and strings • Collections (buttons, stones, straws) • Measure cup and spoons • Rulers and tape measures • Pegs and peg boards • Balance/scale • Rods of graduated sizes • Geometry shapes of various sizes • Coins/paper money • Math concept books and puzzles • Maths games • Magnetic numbers, number lines • Plastic containers of various sizes, funnels • Association games • Concept games • Attribute games • Matching games 68  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION B.
Fine Art learning materials • Crayons/coloured pencils • Water colours, finger paints • Paint brushes of various sizes • Various type of papers • Sand papers, wrapping papers • Washable markers • Play dough or clay • Blue, paste, tape • Blunt scissors, staplers • Hole punch, string sponges • Yarn, fabric craps • Paper towels • Cardboards • Gloves • Clothes pins, push pins • Art posters • All materials should be non-toxic.
C. Music instruments • Drums • Rhythm sticks • Cymbals, tambourines • Bell, xylophones • Shakers, rattles Outdoor Equipment • Plastic or metal ride-ons • Realistic ride-ons such as cars, trucks, horses • Structures with potential for role playing activist • Climbing structure with various moving parts (swing, bars, ladder) • Slides • Small seesaws • Balls for kicking, throwing, catching.
4.0 CONCLUSION Resources in education cover all those materials human and non human that help pupils in learning.
There are numerous types of learning 69 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION resources in early childhood education, which are to make learning more meaningful.
7.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about types of resources available in learning.
Resources have been classified into human and material resources.
Attention was given to roles and functions of various personnel in early childhood education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT a.
Mention five personnel in early childhood education centre.
b.
Identify the duties of the nursery assistant.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu, E. & Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria: A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling- Hordin Publishers (Nigeria) Limited.
Quadri, K. (2001).
Introduction to Primary Education Studies.
Oyo: Tobistic Ventures.
70  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 5 STAFF TRAINING AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Quality of Early Childhood Education Personnel 3.2 Professional Development and Training of Early Childhood Personnel 3.3 Principles for Promoting Professional Development for Early Childhood Education Personnel 3.4 Programme Administration and Qualification 3.4.1 Programme Administrator Qualification 3.4.2 Teacher Qualification 3.4.3 Assistant Teacher Qualification 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Staff training and professional development play an essential role in successful education improvement.
Professional development serves as the bridge between where prospective and experienced early years educators are now and where they will need to be so as to meet the challenges of guiding all children in achieving effective learning and development.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the qualities of personnel working with young children • identify the type of staff training preparation requirement of early childhood educators.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Quality of Early Childhood Education Personnel Working with children requires a lot of energy especially in their formative years.
The work is activity oriented and you will need stamina to keep up with the needs of a large group of young lively children.
71 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Creative skills such as music, arts and crafts are advantageous.
Apart from this, people working with young children should possess the following qualities: • respect and fondness for children • excellent communication skills • good listening skills • the capacity to learn quickly • excellent organisational skills • ability to inspire and enthuse young children • energy, resourcefulness, responsibility, patience, and a caring nature • an understanding of the needs and feelings of children • ability to work independently as well as being able to work in a team • a sense of humour and the ability to keep things in perspective.
3.2 Professional Development and Training of Early Childhood Personnel The Nigerian government recognises that the most effective way of ensuring the establishment and maintenance of high quality programmes for young children and their families is to provide high quality pre- service training programme as well as ongoing opportunities for personal and professional development for all personnel involved in the early childhood field.
Hence, early childhood care has been included in the bachelors’ degree curriculum of faculties of education in about 12 Nigerian universities.
Many of these universities also offer Masters/Ph.D.
in early childhood care or pre-primary and primary education.
Plans are under-way to integrate the concept of early care education in colleges of education nationwide though there are some colleges that have primary education departments.
In-service training on the early education concept and learner centered pedagogy for handling young children is continually provided to teachers/caregivers in public early child care/pre-school facilitates.
Furthermore, it is recognised that such development is a continual life long process.
The provision of dynamic, training for all concerned with the education of young children is recommended.
72  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Some Universities offering Early Childhood Education at Bachelors Degree in Nigeria • University of Uyo, Uyo.
Akwa Ibom State.
• College of Education, Port Harcourt (Affiliated to University of Ibadan).
• UDU, Usman Danfodio University, Sokoto.
• AAUA – Adekunle Ajasin University, Akungba Akoko.
Ondo State.
• University of Ibadan, Ibadan.
Oyo State.
• AAU – Ambrose Alli University, Ekpoma.
Edo State.
• DELSU – Delta State University, Abraka.
Delta State.
• OSSCE – Osun State College of Education, Ilesa.
(Affiliated to University of Ibadan, Ibadan).
• UNAD -University of Ado-Ekiti,Ado Ekiti.
Ekiti State.
• OOU - Olabisi Onabanjo University,Ago Iwoye.
Ogun State.
• Ibrahim Babangida University, Lapai.
Niger State.
• TASUED – Tai Solarin University of Education, Ijagun, Ijebu- Ode.
Many Colleges of Education nationwide also have primary education departments.
They award National Certificate in Education (NCE) for teachers to teach in both primary and pre-primary schools.
3.3 Principles for Promoting Professional Development for Early Childhood Education Personnel 1.
The provision of in-service training should be incorporated into child care regulations and all relevant awards.
2.
Professional development and training of early childhood personnel needs to be available at various levels and provide opportunities for personnel to have access to an on-going career path.
3.
A coordinated and integrated approach between all training, in- service and higher education providers is essential to ensure the most effective staff development.
4.
Recognition of relevant in-service training and professional development needs to be negotiated in order for personnel to gain status towards qualifications through a variety of pathways such as distance learning, study leave with pay or without pay, sandwich programmes etc.
5.
Content of training programmes should: i. include knowledge, skills and attitudes required by those training to work or working in the range of early childhood programmes.
73 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION ii.
reflect the needs of qualified and unqualified staff, paid staff, volunteers (including management committees, parents, gardeners, cooks, community groups).
iii.
provide an expanded knowledge base and skill development for all early childhood personnel working with children of varied abilities and children with special needs which includes issues relating to gender, class and other areas of inequality and bias.
6.
Training and professional development programmes should provide opportunities for: a. collaborative critical analysis b. learning about current trends, issues, improvisation of learning materials c. enhancing knowledge and understanding of cognitive, emotional, physical, spiritual and moral development of the children d. expanding awareness and understanding of physical, socioeconomic and cultural environment as these relate to the overall development of children e. addressing the needs of family with young children in a complex and ever changing society f. establishing support and professional networks g. enhancing interpersonal relationships between team members, parents, other early childhood programmes, the community, management committee, licensing and funding bodies h. personal development.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Highlight the qualities of an early childhood education personnel.
3.4 Programme Administration and Qualification The early education programme is expected to be supervised, and administered by qualified early childhood education personnel.
3.4.1 Programme Administrator Qualification 1.
A graduate degree in early childhood education/child development or a related field (e.g.
developmental psychology, early childhood education, early childhood special education).
2.
Expertise in education or certificate in programme administration such as human resources and/or financial management.
3.
An ability to work successfully with families, organisations and agencies representing diverse cultures and lifestyles in the community served.
74  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 4.
Active and on-going participation in professional development plan designed to meet the above-mentioned criteria if the administrator is employed prior to attaining minimum qualification for the position.
3.4.2 Teacher Qualification 1.
Bachelor’s degree in early childhood education/child development or National Certificate in Education in early childhood education/child development or early childhood special education.
2.
An ability to work successfully with families, organisations and agencies representing diverse cultures and lifestyle in the community served.
3.
Active and on-going participation in a professional development plan designed to meet the above-mentioned criteria if the teacher is employed prior to attaining the minimum qualification.
3.4.3 Assistant Teacher Qualification 1.
An associate certificate or teacher’s grade 2 certificate in education.
2.
An ability to work successfully with the children and families in the community served.
3.
An active and on-going participation in a professional development plan to meet the above mentioned criteria.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the professional requirements needed by early childhood education personnel?
4.0 CONCLUSION The quality of the teacher determines the output of the school.
This unit stresses the importance of continuous, high quality professional development of early childhood education professionals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have learnt that apart from academic qualification and training the early childhood education personnel has to possess some qualities.
Various institutions offering bachelor degree in early childhood education/nursery education have also been identified.
75 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the necessary content of professional development programme for early childhood education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu E. & Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers.
Quadri, K. (2001).
Introduction to Primary Education Studies.
Oyo: Tobistic Ventures.
76  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MODULE 3 FINANCING EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Unit 1 Sources of Financing in Early Childhood and Primary Education Unit 2 Internal Control and Financial Accountability in Early Childhood Education Unit 3 Budgeting Technique and Process in Early Childhood Unit 4 Expenditure Line and Budget Control in Early Childhood Unit 5 Problems of Early Childhood Education UNIT 1 SOURCES OF FINANCING IN EARLY CHILDHOOD AND PRIMARY EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Sources of Fund 3.2 Financing Early Childhood Education Project 3.3 Financing Primary Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Financial utilisation and efficiency is pertinent in achieving set educational goals.
Early childhood educational programme requires adequate funding because it is a capital intensive establishment.
It makes huge financial demands on the supply and maintenance of structures, equipment and facilities.
Money is the greatest tool needed in the development of a good educational plan.
Recruitment of excellent teachers, purchase of fine instructional materials and educational equipment involve huge amount of financial resources.
Almost everything needed to implement an exemplary early childhood education programme needs funds to survive.
Money is never enough, good administrators must bear this reality in their minds at all times.
This unit will provide insight for administrators in early childhood education on how to survive and be successful in the implementation of early childhood education goals.
77 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify various sources of funding for early child education • discuss financing of early childhood development project • state the sources of funding in primary education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Sources of Fund In looking at financing/sources of funding in early childhood education, we have to talk about those involved in the provision and the main types of providers.
Those involved in the provision are: a. Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs), private individuals, the civil society including religious organisations, higher institutions of learning etc.
b.
Public (federal, states, local governments).
c. Local communities However with the introduction of Universal Basic Education (UBE) the federal government of Nigeria awards 5 per cent matching grants are for the education of children age 3-5 per quarter in all 36 states of the federation.
The main sources of financing are.
1.
UBE intervention fund from the federal government of Nigeria consolidated revenue fund.
2.
Complimentary funding from states and local governments.
3.
Funds or consolidated contribution in form of federal guaranteed credits.
4.
Local/individual/corporate as well as international door grants such as UNICEF, USAID, etc.
5.
Contributions from privately owned ECCD centres, nurseries, and pre-primary schools, by communities, NGOs and private individuals through school fees, and other levies charged.
3.2 Financing Early Childhood Education Project These are development activities of expansion, renovation or staff development to improve the services provided by early childhood education centre.
78  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION a.
Regular Government Budget The most common source of financing for Early Childhood Education (ECE) programmes in most countries is the regular budget of the government.
The parts of the budget from which support for ECE programmes is drawn vary considerably, depending on the type of programme, the main target group, interest and negotiating power of people in different sectors.
The most common lines of support are in the education budget and social welfare budgets.
Occasionally, governments assign funds for ECE programmes through budgets provided for such areas as health, communications, women’s programmes, rural or urban development.
In countries where education and other social programmes are decentralised, the power of local governments to obtain funds through local taxation is often weak.
So funding may still depend largely on the central government budget on the basis of which transfers to the states are distributed.
b.
Special Taxes ECE programmes also receive funding from earmarked taxes – specific taxes for ECE programmes or a fixed proportion of a more general tax.
The effectiveness of different taxes in financing ECE programmes depends mainly on their adequacy, stability, and growth.
Adequacy, because a financing method must provide the money needed to operate the system satisfactorily.
Stability, because funds cannot fluctuate widely without adversely affecting an ECE programme.
And growth, because funds for ECE programmes must grow to meet the increased demand for programmes that usually accompany a natural population increase and to continually improve quality.
c. Families and Communities Much emphasis is being placed on cost recovery from participants; families and communities contribute to ECE programmes through fees as well as through donated labour, materials, and buildings.
Although this emphasis on cost recovery needs to be tempered by considerations of ability to pay.
Every family can contribute something, no matter how small, to cover the costs of a programme that provides valuable services.
Indeed, it may be wise to require at least a token contribution from all users of an ECE service.
79 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION d. Trust Funds and Philanthropy Trust funds have been established worldwide for education since Roman times.
In modern times, people who have amassed large fortunes have also set up foundations to support education, but only a few have been established for ECE programmes.
e. International Organisations International lending organisations have provided funds for ECE programmes as part of their general support for education and other social services, and their emphasis on early childhood care and development has increased during the 1990s.
Although the funds from these organisations are small in comparison to total expenditures in the sector, they provide much needed capital investment and seed money for experimental projects.
3.3 Financing Primary Education UBE legislation signed by the president on May 27, 2004, provides for funding of UBE from the following sources: (i) Block grants: In the form of federal government’s matching contributions to state financing of primary education (ii) Funds or contributions in the form of federal guaranteed credits and loans and (iii) International donor grants.
For any state to qualify for UBE grant funds, it must contribute not less than 50 per cent of the total cost of projects as a cost-share.
Sources of Fund for Primary Education • Federal account • State’s own account • Local capital • Education Tax Fund • Universal Basic Education • State Primary Education Board • Local Government Education Authority.
Federal and State Governments Capital expenditures (buildings, books and furniture) come from the federal and state government’s share of the federation account.
The federation account holds all federally collected revenues.
The funds are 80  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION divided among the three tiers of government according to a formula determined by the National Assembly.
Funds in this account accrue form (13%) of which is refunded to the states, apportioned on the basis of the state’s original contributions.
Thereafter, 15 per cent of VAT revenues is distributed to the Federal government, 50 per cent to state government and 35 per cent to local government of the funds remaining within the federation account, 54.7 per cent goes to the Federal government, 24.7 per cent to state governments and 20.6 per cent to local governments (RTI, 2004).
State Governments State governments allocate minimal proportions of their recurrent and capital budgets to primary education.
Averagely states allocate 3 per cent of their recurrent costs and 1.5 per cent of their capital costs to primary education (RTI, 2004).
Local Governments The local governments share of the federation account results in two types of local funding for education.
First, at the state level, a percentage of the local share called “first charge” is set aside for primary school teachers’ salaries and allowances.
Local governments may then use a part of what remains for direct assistance to primary schools.
They also contribute own-source revenues to primary education.
Other National Sources of Fund for Primary Education 1.
Universal Basic Education (UBE) programme: This body also provides money for capital expenditures in primary schools.
2.
The national Education Tax Fund (ETF): This body transfers funds directly to benefiting institutions for specific capital projects.
Allocations are made according to pre-agreed percentages for primary (20%), secondary (30%) and tertiary (50%).
Disbursements for primary education are made on the basis of “equal amount, irrespective of the number of primary schools it has or its primary school enrolment.
The money is transferred directly to the SPEB (State Primary Education Board) in each state.
Despite the criterion that 20 per cent of total ETF revenue be allocated to the primary level, ETF allocations to SPEB that are dedicated to primary education have declined over time (RTI (2004); Akinbote 2001).
Further, the total percentage of naira, actually distributed to SPEBs has been continuously lower.
This has resulted to negative consequences for school environment, in areas such as overcrowded classrooms and inadequate furniture.
81 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Other Supporting Hands There are other supporting hands (sources of fund) in funding of primary education which actually complement the various efforts of government and national bodies already discussed.
International organisations such as UNICEF, UNESCO and the World Bank have in various ways assisted directly or indirectly in the funding of primary education in Nigeria.
The contributions of these organisations are seriously felt in the area of research, provision of learning resources and evaluation.
For instance, UNICEF, UNESCO and federal government carried out a research on assessment of learning achievement in primary 4 and 6 in the year 2003.
The result was released in the year 2004 (ESA, 2004).
Parents, through individual donations or through the Parent-Teacher - Associations (PTA) have done much in terms of funding primary education.
Parents or the PTA in various parts of the country, engage in the provision of classroom blocks, books, uniform and sometimes furniture for their children.
Schools’ internally generated revenue is also another source of funding for primary education in Nigeria.
Though this might form very small proportion of the funding, it has to be recognised.
Schools have various sources of generating revenue with which they can meet some of their urgent expenses.
These include proceeds from the sale of farm products, handicraft products, inter-house sports, cultural displays, rents from school facilities such as halls, bus, chairs and tables, money generated from end of years party among others.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the major sources of financing primary education?
4.0 CONCLUSION Education being a major responsibility of the government competes with other sectors of the economy for finance.
At the same time demands for education keeps increasing from time to time and consequently increased enrolment.
Combination of these requires increased expenditure.
This unit focuses on the sources of finance/funding of early childhood and primary education with a view to providing clues for administrators to explore the available funds for education.
82  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In the unit above you have learnt about sources of funds for early childhood and primary education.
You also learnt about financing early childhood development project.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify various sources fund for financing early childhood education project in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Morakinyo, S. O.
(2005).
“Historical and Policy Analysis of Some Aspects of Basic Education in Oyo State”.
Unpublished PhD Thesis.
Nigeria Education on Sector Analysis (ESA): (2004).
Monitoring of Learning Achievement Project 2003.
NESA, Federal Ministry of Education.
Abuja.
Olusegun, A.; Esther O.
& Basiru, L. (2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden.
RTI Publications (2004).
Understanding Public Finance of primary Education in Nigeria.
Available Online at http://ww.rti.org/pubs/financing Education Nigeria.
Pdt.
Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC): (2004).
Federal Government Funded Projects.
Available Online at www.skills4industry.com 83 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 2 INTERNAL CONTROL AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Measures of Internal Control 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Internal control are what the management committee should implement to ensure effective and smooth running of the centre so as achieve the set goals.
The administrator/centre manager is responsible for all that is going on within the establishment.
Financial accountability is the bane of any organisation.
It demands for checks and balances, accurate accounting, proper planning and optimal utilisation of funds.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • highlight various measures for financial accountability • discuss internal control and procedures for early childhood education centres.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Measures of Internal Control Measures of internal control for financial accountability in early childhood education are listed below.
1.
Receiving Fees a.
Approved staffs who have been assigned the procedure are to receive fees from parents.
b.
Fees should be paid in advance.
c. Receipt is to be issued to parents at the point of payment.
d. Parents have a legal right to a receipt for any payment.
84  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 2.
Banking a.
All cash/cheques must be paid into a bank at least weekly.
b.
Cash held at the centre must be secure at all times.
c. All cheques must be entered into the appropriate duplicate bank deposit form.
d. A record of each parent’s payment is to be entered into the cashbook, which must reconcile with the individual child’s payment card.
3.
Petty Cash a.
Keep a separate, lockable petty cash box with enough cash in it to cover about a week’s purchase of small items.
b.
Keep a notebook in cash box to record payments.
c. Place all receipts in an envelope.
Record the month on the envelope.
d. Enter in the book each time cash is paid out.
e. Cash a cheque to reimburse the petty cash box.
The cheque amount must equal the cash paid out and also the amount recorded.
f. If the petty cash box float is short, investigate immediately.
4.
Purchasing Order a.
An approved purchase order must accompany every purchase by staff or management.
5.
Invoice a.
An invoice should always be checked to see that it has the same items on it as the purchase order.
b.
Hand the invoice to the person who puts it in order and get the person to sign it so as to verify that it is correct and payment can be made.
c. The purchase order should be attached to invoice.
6.
Payment of Accounts a.
When receiving invoices or bills for payments make careful checks such as: • Are all the goods and services charged?
• Is this what we ordered or agreed to pay?
• Are the prices correct?
• Was the expense properly approved before it was incurred?
85 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • The accounts clerk/bursar is to write out the cheque and ensure that the invoice amount is the same amount in the cheque.
• Two people are to sign cheque.
• Blank cheques should not be signed.
• Note on the invoices the cheque number.
• All cheque supporting paper work must be documented.
• Vouchers must be filled in cheque number order for audit purpose.
• Signatory should not sign cheque to self.
7.
Assets Register a.
An asset register is a vital record of all equipment as well as a requirement for annual financial reporting.
• Maintain an inventory which records all the equipment in the centre including large items such as computer, fridge, and television.
• It must be updated every time new items are purchased.
• At least once a year a full audit of assets is undertaken.
8.
Payment of Wages a.
A record must be kept of employees wages.
b.
Each staff member should have a separate page in the wages book.
c. Each staff member is to receive a pay slip stating out the calculation of pay whenever his or her pay alters.
d. Deduct PAYE and other deductions such as union fee, tax etc.
9.
End of the Year Financial Audit a.
Each centre is required to prepare annual financial statement and to have them audited by a member of the Institute of Chartered Accountant.
b.
There audited accounts must be made available when needed by management board.
c. Records that the audit officer checks are: • Centre attendance register • Proof of fees paid • Accounting records • The auditor equally checks the attendance records against monthly claim and ensures that sessions are claimed correctly and temporary absences are made.
86  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 10.
Fees a.
Fees should be set at a realistic cost based on the fees of other centres in the community and the differences between the bulk funding and expenditure plus a realistic profit/contingency for emergencies and future development.
4.0 CONCLUSION An examination of variety of forms of financial control has important implications for smooth running of any organisation.
The administrator as final accounting officer needs to monitor and regulate income and expenditure properly.
Therefore, the unit above discusses the various measures for internal control for financial accountability of early childhood institutions.
7.0 SUMMARY In the unit above you have learnt about internal control procedure as well as measures for financial accountability.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and discuss five measures of financial accountability in early childhood institutions.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu, E., & Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Stirling-Horden Publishers.
Quadri, K. (2001).
Introduction to Primary Education Studies.
Oyo: Tobistic Ventures.
87 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 3 BUDGETING TECHNIQUE AND PROCESS IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Budgeting 3.2 Basic Concept and Procedure in Budgeting 3.3 Developing Educational Plan 3.4 Accounting Documents 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION No organisation can survive or carry out its functions effectively without adequate financial resources at its disposal.
Budgeting is the process of organising finances to get desired result of the institution.
It is necessary for educational institutions to carefully and explicitly define their purpose and goals before effective resource management plan can be developed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define budget • state purposes and importance of budgeting • explain the basic concepts and procedure of budgeting • draw up a budget • identify accounting documents.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Budgeting Budget could be described as a document listing proposed receipts and expenditures.
It simply means the expected total revenue and expenditure for each year, based on estimates of the income accruing to the organisation.
The estimated expenditure is based on the expected 88  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION revenue but the actual revenue may be more or less than the amount estimated.
In education, budget consists of educational plan, spending plan and financing plan.
The preparation of budget takes some time as it involves so much elaborate working out of all the estimated revenue and expenditure item by item and section by section.
It is the practice in Nigeria to start the new financial year on 1st January and the details of the budget must be worked out before then.
This means that all the units of government department must prepare their budgets early enough for submission to the ministry headquarters for coordination purpose.
In some non-governmental institutions the procedure for preparing the budget may differ but the principle on the basis of expected revenue in essentially the same.
In many early childhood education centers, the budget is prepared by the bursar or the school administrator/head teacher to be submitted to the proprietor who can be an individual, organisation, higher institution or the community.
Originally, the basic purpose of the budget process had little or nothing to do with either the prudent use or careful reporting of funds.
The budget process can be seen as a tool for strengthening the organisation in the following ways.
a.
Providing a coordinated and comprehensive understanding of the educational programmes.
b.
Furnishing the management body with reasonable accurate forecast of anticipated data (receipt, expenditure) enrolment, programme etc, during a given period (cost and benefit analysis).
c. Enabling those responsible for providing funds to ascertain through accepted accounting procedure, that the funds had indeed been used for the purpose originally intended.
3.2 Basic Concept and Procedure in Budgeting Sound budgetary principles and practices constitute the most important aspect of effective resources management Vasecky (1957) makes a comprehensive study and argues about the budgetary process as follows: a.
The budget document is usually the result of the cooperative efforts of all that are responsible for educational policy formulation and implementation.
89 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION b.
Budget preparation is a continuous process and the annual budget is part of a long-range plan and programme.
c. The first step in the preparation of the school budget is to formulate a definite plan and/or policy.
d. The second step in budget construction is to prepare the spending plans, which should show the plan of expenditure and sources of revenue.
e. It is the responsibility of the management to present and interprete the budget to the appropriate body or board.
f. The budget will be adopted before the beginning of the fiscal year for which it is to serve.
g. After adoption, the budget will be accurately and carefully recorded and monitored.
h. There should be provision for the continuous appraisal of the budget document and the budgetary procedure.
The above statements are the principles and criteria that should be used in preparing and appraising early childhood education budgetary procedure.
They constitute valid guides for developing sound budgetary policy and the procedure should be adhered to.
3.3 Developing Educational Plan Educational plan is a useful tool in preparing the budget.
It must be specific enough in essential details such that budget estimates can be prepared in a manner that will reflect the educational plan adopted.
Therefore educational plan should include: a. enrolment for at least five years b. incremental ratio of sites, building, equipment, materials and personnel that would be needed to cope with projected enrolment c. estimated student/pupil load per teacher d. teacher’s qualification (required minimum teaching qualification e. provision for exceptional children f. provision for recruiting, training and maintaining teachers g. provision of special teachers (arts, music, physical and special) h. provision of health services i. provision of nutrition services and j. provision of guidance counselling services.
3.4 Accounting Documents Accounting can be defined clearly as the record keeping required to provide necessary information about income and expenditure, showing the net deficit or surplus.
90  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION There must be a balance in the amount of money received and the amount spent.
The following documents are useful in ensuring accurate accounting: a. Departmental vote book b.
Item allocation books c. Purchase order for books d. Payment vouchers form e. Register vouchers form f. Revenue receipt book g. Imprest expenditure book h. Travelling and mileage forms i.
Salary vouchers j.
Insurance forms k. Bank tellers.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Review budgeting and state the purpose of budgeting in early childhood education.
4.0 CONCLUSION Budget is the most widely used technique of organisational control.
It assists in setting the desired standard for performance, emphasises coordination between various units needed to ensure attainment of goals or objectives of the organisation.
This unit has given insight to budgeting techniques and process in early childhood education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have discussed the meaning and purpose of budget process.
We have also discussed the basic concept and procedure in budgeting as well as developing educational plan and accounting procedures in early childhood education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the basic principles of budgeting 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ajayi, A.O.
(1989).
Basic Concepts of Administration Planning and Economics of Education.
Ibadan: Gabesther Publishers.
Ozigi, A.O.
(1980).
A Handbook of School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
91 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 4 EXPENDITURE LINE AND BUDGET CONTROL IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Expenditure Line 3.2 Budget Implementation in Early Childhood Education 3.3 Administrative Coping Strategies for Budget Implementation 3.4 Budget Control in Early Childhood Education 3.5 Conditions for Effective Budget Control in Early Childhood Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Early childhood education is capital intensive.
It demands huge financial resources for maintenance of structures, purchase of equipment and facilities.
Hence, expenditure line is the breakdown and analysis of services and goods, equipment and materials procured to contribute either directly or indirectly to teaching and learning in early childhood institutions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify various items of expenditure in early childhood education institution • explain budget implementation and control in early childhood education.
92  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Expenditure Line a. Renovation/Maintenance of Existing Facilities Renovation refers to making major repairs such as replacement of roofs, floors, replastering of walls and replacement of legs, top or back of broken chairs and tables.
On the other hand, maintenance refers to the type of work undertaken in order to keep the facilities in good working condition (or standard).
This is what is popularly referred to as servicing of equipment.
They may not necessarily be in bad condition but in order to prevent their going bad, there should be regular maintenance such as patching small portions of a structure, replacement of damaged parts and cleaning to remove dirt etc.
In order to do a reasonable renovation or maintenance work in the school, there must first be survey of the existing facilities.
This will enable the school authorities to know the exact condition of such facilities.
It is only when the condition is known that costing can be done and the necessary renovation or maintenance work carried out.
b.
Extension of Existing Facilities As the school develops, the demand for more office or classroom spaces may arise.
This may therefore require an extension of an existing building where the required space is already available.
In this regard, experts should be invited to inspect the available facilities, assess the extent of additional structures that could be constructed and make recommendations to the school authorities.
Sometimes, such experts may be in a position to do the costing of the extension work required.
c. Construction of New Schools The construction of a new school may be informed by the desire to have a school in an area where there was none before.
It may also be necessary as a result of increase in population of an existing school without sufficient space for extension or expansion.
Whatever may be the reason for the construction of a new school, there must be proper planning, costing and construction in order to have an educationally useful life span for the buildings.
There are usually available in the Ministry of Education and/or Ministry of Works and Housing approved school building guidelines, which may vary from one geographical zone to the other.
93 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2 Budget Implementation in Early Childhood Education In order to prevent financial waste there is need to control operations or expenditure so as to direct capital and efforts into the most profitable channels that would be of benefit to the programme.
Hence, there is need to examine the issue of budget implementation from the angles of problems of control and cash management in early education.
Problems that can be associated with budget implementation include: a. dependency on the revenue structure b. budget distortion by the administrators c. price inflations which renders cost estimates unrealistic d. budget indiscipline e. deregulation of the currency which introduces risks and uncertainty into budget implementation.
3.3 Administrative Coping Strategies for Budget Implementation The following strategies can be used by the administrators to cope with the problem identified in 3.2. a.
Extra budgetary activities Extra budgeting is a process of shifting from the annual budget to other methods of funding.
This can lead to an administrative problem in the sense that it can hide the sending behaviour from scrutiny because it can be abused in a number of ways.
Fund may be directed to projects that have outlived their usefulness or those that do not exist.
b. Earmarking Earmarking is also used to cope with the uncertainties associated with normal budgetary process.
This involves allocation of certain percentage of revenue for a particular project.
As a result, funding for certain activities is ensured while uncertainty is reduced.
c. Supplementary budgets These are additional or extra provisions for the use of more resources within a budget year.
94  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION d. Realistic or flexible budget The conception of a realistic or flexible budget is essential for effective implementation of the budget.
To implement the budget, appropriate measures should be adopted to quicken the execution and minimise distortion of approved budget.
In order words, there should be awareness on the part of the management or administrator of the need to mobilise the entire funds for effective and timely execution of projects or expenditure enumerated in a budget.
3.4 Budget Control in Early Childhood Education Budgetary control is a review and control system which ensures that educational performance conforms to the budget.
1.
Audit control of educational expenditure: There are three aspects in this area.
a.
The statutory aspect: This involves the verification of the conformity of expenditure with the legislation governing it.
That is, whether the administrator/head teacher has in fact allocated funds for the purpose under consideration.
Statutory audit is interested in verifying whether transactions are arithmetically correct and whether payment have been on the correct due date.
b.
Value for money aspects: This is to control extravagance and inefficiency.
The auditor will examine whether there was any necessity to spend the money in the first place.
He or she may want to find out whether valuable economies are being made by coordinating the purchasing requirement of separate authorities to secure better terms from suppliers for bulk orders.
The use of premises and equipment may also be questioned.
Should a piece of material or equipment be bought or hired for example.
Father Christmas apparel which is not frequently used can be borrowed.
Auditors may want to know whether there was over provision or under provision or utilisation of resources.
Norms such as average teaching class size, average contact hours, average teaching hours may be carefully scrutinised before building a new classroom.
c. Internal and External Audit Both internal and external audits are essential for audit control in education.
The internal auditor checks the details such as accuracy of cheques.
The external auditor reviews the methods and procedure of 95 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION expenditure and income.
The external auditor is expected to review and comment on the work of the internal audit section.
2.
Monitoring of Expenditure Monitoring of educational expenditures focuses on what the institution spent during a financial year.
There should be an updated “running” account of expenditure and receipts of all proper account should be kept.
In case there is overspending in the centre, the following measures can be taken: a.
Cutting back funds and introducing direct control over borrowing.
b.
A cash limit might be placed and the central body can draw back an amount equivalent to the sum over spent by reducing the following year’s grant settlement.
Equally, if there is under spending in critical areas there is need to refer to statutory enforcement of quotas or minimum standards of spending.
3.5 Conditions for Effective Budget Control in Early Childhood Education The following conditions must be considered and created in order to evolve an effective budgetary control system.
1.
Top Management Support A budgetary system will be an utter failure if not supported by top management.
Top management must understand the nature and characteristics of budgeting and be convinced on what is to be done in the centre.
In early childhood centre the proprietor is the top management and must be convinced on the expenditure of the administrator or the head teacher.
2.
Provision of Clear and Realistic Goals The goals of the centre must be clearly stated because absence of clear of goals will result in wasted effort of both the employee and the management.
Institutional objectives and budget goals should be realistic, reasonable and attainable.
96  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.
Establishment of Effective Communication System Communication is the process of transmitting thoughts or information from one person to another.
A sound system requires effective communication of the institution’s objectives, budget goals and means of implementing the budget so that efforts will be geared towards the accomplishment of those objectives and goals.
4.
Laying Emphasis on Flexibility The importance of flexibility in a budgetary system is borne out of the need for the budget to take advantage of all opportunities that arise from time to time and not covered in the budget.
Inflexibility or rigidity impairs initiative and freedom of administrators in making decisions.
5.
Preparation of an Organisational Chart The organisational chart if properly designed has the quality of defining the functional responsibilities of each staff.
Thus, each staff is made aware of his or her position in organisation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Highlight the coping strategies for budget implementation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Budget spells out revenue and outlines specifically, expenditure line for organisations such as early childhood educational institutions.
Budget preparation and implementation is one of the basic foundations of school administrator.
He/she is concerned with management of funds and facilities.
This unit discusses expenditure line and budget implementation in early childhood education as well as coping strategies for budget implementation by administrators.
The unit equally examines the conditions for effective budget control in early childhood education.
8.0 SUMMARY In the unit above you have learnt about various expenses in early childhood education.
You have also learnt about budget implementation and control.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and explain five conditions for effective budget control in early childhood education.
97 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akanni, J.
A.
(1987).
Management Concepts, Techniques and Cases.
Ibadan: Julab Publishers Limited.
Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu, O.
& Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling – Holdens Publishers.
Babalola, J.B. (2003).
“Budget Preparation and Expenditure Control in Education”.
In: Babalola J.B.
(eds.)
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
The Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
98  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 5 PROBLEMS OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MANAGEMENT T IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of Early Childhood Education Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The problems of early childhood education in contemporary Nigeria are multifarious; they range from lack of adequate control to inadequate planning and management.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify the problems of early childhood education • suggest possible solutions to these problems.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problem of Early Childhood Education Management Despite government policy and regulation on nursery/pre-primary education more control are still needed to ensure quality in the provision.
It is a known fact that many illegal mushroom centers/institutions spring up in both urban and rural areas which are operated in private homes, garages, sheds etc.
Many are cited near mosques, markets, industrial areas, churches, heavy traffic routes or railway lines.
The problems facing early childhood education management are summarised below.
a.
Insufficient indoor, outdoor equipment learning facilities and play materials.
b.
Lack of medical and health facilities.
99 ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION c. Prohibitive cost and commercialisation since most centres are established by private individuals who are out to make profit.
d. Poor staffing and or lack of qualified staff.
In attempt to maximise profit, the proprietor employs staffs that are unqualified to handle children.
e. Most schools that are situated in an accessible area are overcrowded and lack adequate infrastructural facilities such as libraries, good toilets, firefighting equipment, sickbay, fans, staff room, chalkboard etc.
f. Poor method of teaching.
Children are taught mainly through rote learning.
Despite being stated in the policy that the medium of instruction should principally be the mother tongue or language of the immediate environment; most schools do not follow this.
The children are taught in English language.
Many are punished if they dare speak in their language (vernacular).
g. Lack of adequate supervision and support by the government and its agencies in terms of well informed, sound, consistent and firm professional advice.
h. Some centres/institutions are illegally established.
i. Paucity and lack of affordable textbooks and culturally balanced reading materials.
j.
Some proprietors/proprietresses have no educational background and they do not employ qualified and competent administrators or directors to manage the centers.
k. There is no longitudinal study on what happens to the children whose parents invest so much money on in childhood by sending them to private nursery schools.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit above discusses the problems associated with early childhood education management in Nigeria.
There are many other problems which you may have noticed in your area that are not discussed because they are too numerous.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt some of the problems associated with early childhood /preprimary education management in Nigeria.
9.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify and discuss five major problems in early childhood education management.
2.
How can the problems be solved?
100  ECE412 MANAGEMENT OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akanni, J.
A.
(1987).
Management Concepts, Techniques and Cases Ibadan: Julab Publishers Limited.
Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu, O.
& Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria: A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling – Holdens Publishers.
Babalola J.B. (2003).
“Budget Preparation and Expenditure Control in Education”.
In: Babalola J.B.
(eds.).
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
The Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan, Nigeria.
101
