 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: ECE222 COURSE TITLE: DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE ECE222 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE Course Team Dr. Olusegun Akinbote (Developer/Writer) Dr. Osuji, U.S.A (Editor) - NOUN Dr. U. M. Okonkwo (Programme Leader) - NOUN Dr. Osuji, U.S.A (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA iiiECE222 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria E-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2006 Reprinted 2011 ISBN: 978-058-866-3 All Rights Reserved Printed by: Simon Printers Limited iv ECE222 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction....................................................................................... 1 The Course ........................................................................................ 1 Course Aims ..................................................................................... 2 Course Objectives .......................................................................... 2 Working through the Course ............................................................. 2 The Course Material .......................................................................... 2 Study Units ...................................................................................... 2 Textbooks and References.................................................................. 3 Assignment File ................................................................................. 4 Presentation Schedule ........................................................................ 4 Assessment ........................................................................................ 4 Final Examination and Grading.......................................................... 5 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) ..................................................... 5 Course Marking Scheme ..................................................................... 6 Course Overview ................................................................................ 6 How to Get the Most from this Course .............................................. 7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials........................................................ 9 Summary .......................................................................................... 10 vECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE Introduction Teaching as a profession is gradually gaining some popularity and recognition in Nigeria.
Unlike some other professions such as law and medicine, teaching has always been an all comers job.
However, with the establishment of The Teachers’ Registration Council of Nigeria (TRI), teaching will cease to be an all comers job.
Before or by the end of this decade, anybody without a professional qualification in teaching will no longer be allowed to teach in any school (both public and private).
As at now, the Nigeria Certificate in Education (NCE) is the minimum teaching qualification in Nigeria.
This therefore means that teachers must be always develop themselves so as to become more professionally skillful and competent.
The difference between a professional teacher and a non-professional teacher is centred on the skillful way(s) through which the professional teacher helps to make the learner a complete person.
This is unlike the non-professional teachers who are always out to develop a particular skill in the learners.
The exposure of teachers to disciplines such as Educational Psychology, Sociology of Education and Philosophy of Education in addition to the various methods of teaching has really made them conversant with the working of the human mind among other things.
Thus the professional teacher knows when and how best to help the learners learn and develop themselves to the best to help the learners learn and develop themselves to the best of their abilities.
Therefore, the essence of teaching which all professionally qualified teachers should aim at is to help the learners learn how to learn.
The Course This course guide tells you in brief what to expect from reading this material.
As you will discover in the material, teaching as a profession has come a long way in Nigeria.
From the early Christian Missionary Era of limited access to education to the present era of universalization of access to education, the teacher’s work has become more challenging.
As you begin the course with the study of the meaning and characteristics of a profession, you will discover some of the reasons why teaching was once not as popular as some other professions.
In the same way you will learn in this course how teachers could develop their sills and become more professionally confident and competent.
52 ECE222 MODULE 2 Course Aims The aims of this course to provide a comprehensive view of teaching as a profession and what teachers could do to further improve on their professional skills and competence.
Course Objectives After carefully studying this course material, you should be able to: • Explain the meaning and the characteristics of a profession • Justify the categorization of teaching as one of the professions • Enumerate the personal qualities of a good teacher • Discuss the job expectations of a good teacher • Explain how and why a teacher should adequately plan his lessons.
Working through this Course This course demands that you will have to spend much time reading it.
Although, the content of this material has been written in a simple and easy to read format, yet you will need to devote sufficient time to reading it.
I should therefore like to encourage you to study the material regularly and also attend the tutorial sessions where you could interact with some of your course mates.
The Course Materials You will be provided with the following materials: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units In addition, the course comes with a list of recommended textbooks which you may consult for further information.
It is not compulsory for you to acquire the books.
Study Units The following are the study units contained in this course: Module 1 The Teaching Profession Unit 1 Meaning and Characteristics of a Profession 53ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE Unit 2 The Act of Teaching Unit 3 The Place of Teachers in the Society Unit 4 The Beginning of Formal Teaching and Teacher Education in Nigeria Unit 5 The Goals of Teacher Education in Nigeria Unit 6 National Policy on Teacher Education in Nigeria Unit 7 Problems of Teaching and Teacher Education in Nigeria Module 2 The Teacher in the Classroom Unit 1 Qualities of a Good Teacher Unit 2 Behavioural Job Expectations for Teachers Unit 3 Learner Characteristics and Teacher Interaction Unit 4 The Teaching Learning Process Unit 5 Planning to Teach Unit 6 Teachers and Pupils Questions Unit 7 Keeping Up to Date in Teaching Textbooks and References Akinbote O.
(2001).
Problems of Poor Quality in Primary School Teacher Preparation: A Case Study of Nigeria’s Colleges of Education.
African Journal of Educational Planning and Policy Studies; 1(1) 23-39.
Akinbote, O.
(1983).
An Introduction to Teaching in Press Akinbote, O.
(1999).
NCE Teacher Education Programme for Nigeria primary Schools: Expectations for the 21st Century in Abimbade, A.
(Ed).
Teaching and Teacher Preparation in the 21st Century, Ibadan: Department of Teacher Education, University of Ibadan.
Akinpelu, J.A.
(1981).
An Introduction to Philosophy of Education London: The Macmillan Press Ltd. Berns, R.M.
(2004), Child, Family School Community, Socialization and Support.
Belmont: Thomas Learning Inc. Dodd, W.A.
(1978).
The Teacher at Work.
London: Oxford University Press.
Ezewu, E. (1983).
Sociology of Education Ikeja: Longman Nigeria Ltd. Fafunwa, A. Babs (1991).
History of Education in Nigeria History Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NPS Educational publishers.
54 ECE222 MODULE 2 Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC.
Osokoya I.O.
(1987).
6-3-3-4 Education in Nigeria: History, Structure, Issues and Problems.
Lagos: Bisinaike Educational Publishers.
Ridgway, L. (1976).
Task of the Teacher in the Primary School London: Ward Lock Educational.
Samuel, T. (1996).
Teacher Education in Lagos State: A Proposal for the 21st century.
The Beagle, Journal of Primary Education Vol.
1, No.
1&2, pages 8 – 16.
Taiwo, C.O.
(1982).
Nigeria Education: Past Present and Future.
Lagos: Thamas Nelson (Nig) Ltd.
Assignment File There are twenty one assignments in this course.
That is, one assignment per unit.
This is to be sure you really understood the unit.
In this file, you will find all the details of the works you must submit to you tutor for marking.
Remember your assignments are as important as the examinations.
Presentation Schedule The presentation schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates in the year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember that you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
Assessment There are two aspects to the assessment of the course.
First, are the tutor-marked assignments; second, is the written examination In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during this course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total course mark.
55ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of not more than three hours’ duration.
This examination will also count for 70% of your total course mark.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for meeting special education needs in early childhood will not be more than three hours duration.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review yourself, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your set books, reading, studying units and the Internet.
However, it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it, together with a TMA (tutor-marked Assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reached your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Presentation Schedule and Assignment File.
If, for any reasons, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
There are twenty-one (14) tutor-marked assignments on this course.
You only need to submit 6.
This carries 10 marks each.
Your score will be converted to 30% as continuous assessment.
The final examination course information form all parts of the course.
56 ECE222 MODULE 2 Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 14 6 Assignment, best 3 =30% Final examination 70% of overall course marks Total 100% of course marks Table 1: Course Marking Scheme.
Course Overview This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take to complete them and the assignments that follows them.
Unit Title of Work Weeks Assessment Activity (end of Unit) Course Guide 1 Module 1 The Teaching Profession 1 Meaning and Characteristics of A 1 1 Profession 2 The Act of Teaching 1 2 3 The Place of Teachers in the 2 3 Society 4 The Beginning of Formal 2 4 Teaching and Teacher Education in Nigeria 5 The Goals of Teacher Education in 3 5 Nigeria 6 National Policy on Teacher 3 6 Education in Nigeria 7 Problems of Teaching and Teacher 1 7 Education in Nigeria Module 2 The Teacher in the Classroom 1 Qualities of a Good Teacher 2 8 2 Behavioural Job Expectations for Teachers 3 Learner Characteristics and 2 9 Teacher Interactions 4 The Teaching/Learning Process 3 10 5 Planning to Teach 6 Teachers’ and Pupils’ Questions 3 11 7 Keeping up to Date in Teaching 3 12 57ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning the study units replace the University lecture.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecture.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study units tells you when to read your set books or other materials, and when to undertake computing practical work.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives allow you to know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to your study.
When you have finished the unit, you must go back and check whether you have reached the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this you will significantly improve your chance of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you though the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from your set books or from a reading section.
Some units require you to undertake some work in the library.
You will also be directed when you need to use a computer and guide through the tasks you must do.
The purpose of the computing work is twofold.
First, it will enhance your understanding of the material unit.
Second, it will give you practical experience of using programs, which you could well encounter in your work outside your studies.
In any event, most of the techniques you will study are applicable on computers in normal working practice, so it is important that you encounter them during your studies.
Activities in form of Self-tests are interspersed throughout the units, working through them will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignment and the examination.
You should do each self-test as you come across it in the study unit.
There will be some examples given in the study units; work through these when you come across them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor or post the question to him.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
58 ECE222 MODULE 2 Read this course guide thoroughly.
• Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the ‘Course overview’ for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester will be made available to you.
You need to gather together all this information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your dates for working on each unit.
• Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that make students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor now before it is too late for help.
• Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
• Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the ‘Overview’ at the beginning of each unit.
You will always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your set books on your desk at the same time.
• Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the unit you will be instructed to read sections from your set books or other articles.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
• Keep an eye on the course information that will be continuously posted there.
• Well before the relevant due dates (above 4 weeks before due dates) take the Assignment File and your next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
• Review the objectives for each study unit to confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study materials or consult your tutor.
59ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to pace your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
• When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When an assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also the one written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any question or problem.
• After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in this Course Guide) Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 8hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutor- marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: • You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings • You have difficulty with the self-tests or exercises • You have a question or problem with an assignment, with your tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
60 ECE222 MODULE 2 You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
Summary This course ECE222; has introduced you to the meaning and characteristics of a profession, the difference between teaching and the other professions, teaching and other acts such asdrilling, training etc,the importance of teaching and teachers, formal teacher education, the meaning, goals and importance, the national policy and implementation, the problems of teaching and teacher education, qualities of a teacher, job expectations of a teacher etc.
61ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE MODULE 1 THE TEACHING PROFESSION Unit 1 Meaning and Characteristics of a Profession Unit 2 The Act of Teaching Unit 3 The Place of Teachers in the Society Unit 4 The Beginning of Formal Teaching and Teacher Education in Nigeria Unit 5 The Goals of Teacher Education in Nigeria Unit 6 National Policy on Teacher Education in Nigeria Unit 7 Problems of Teaching and Teacher Education in Nigeria The following are the study units contained in this module The first unit of this module discusses the meaning and characteristics of a profession.
It also discusses the differences between the teaching profession and other professions.
It further introduces you to the body responsible for the registration of teachers as professionals in Nigeria.
The second unit introduces you to the act of teaching and the differences between teaching and other acts such as drilling, instructing and training.
The third unit discusses the importance of teachers to the overall growth and development of the individual and the country generally.
It further explains why teachers are not accorded much respect like other professionals In unit four, you will learn how formal (School) teaching started in Nigeria.
You will also learn how and when the formal teacher education programme started in Nigeria.
In the fifth unit, you are introduced to the meaning, goals and importance of teacher education in Nigeria.
The sixth unit discusses the National Policy on Teacher Education and its implementation.
The last unit focuses on the problems of teaching and teacher education in Nigeria.
62 ECE222 MODULE 2 UNIT 1 MEANING AND CHARACTERISTICS OF A PROFESSION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of a Profession 3.2 Characteristics of a Profession 3.3 Teaching as a Profession 3.4 Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria 3.5 Differences between Teaching and other Profession 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The word profession has been used by different individuals and groups to describe what they do for a living.
It is therefore common to hear people saying, l am a professional driver, bricklayer, engineer, teacher, lawyer, nurse and so on.
However, not every occupation can be referred to as a profession in the real sense of it.
This unit discusses the major characteristics of a profession.
It distinguishes teaching profession from the other professions such as law and medicine.
It also discusses the roles of the Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria as a body responsible for the professionnalization of teaching in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of a profession • enumerate at least five characteristics of a profession • identify the differences between teaching and any of the popular professions such as law and medicine in Nigeria • explain the roles of the Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria.
63ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of a Profession A profession may be defined as an occupation/vocation that involves some branch of learning which requires both highly specialized skill and intellectual effort for the job.
3.2 Characteristics of a Profession According to Ezewu (1983) for any employment or training to warrant the name of a profession, it must meet most, if not all of the following characteristics: (a) The members have to be specially prepared for their jobs by a prolonged cause of training.
That is, for any occupation to be regarded as a profession, those engaged in it must have undergone a specialized training for a relatively long period of time, usually in an educational institution.
Therefore it is not possible for anyone who has not received that specialized training to practice the particular profession.
Infact anyone without such an adequate preparation or training for the job is usually referred to as auxiliary staff as in the case of teaching and quacks in other professions.
(b) The members have to practice their profession freely, but in accordance with the existing laws.
This means that members of a profession must be free to put in to practice such specialized knowledge they have acquired in the best way they can and with some degree of confidence and competence.
(c) The practice of the profession has to be guided by a code of conduct prescribed by members for themselves.
That is, there must be a professional association with laid down rules and regulations for members to follow so as to preserve the honour and prestige of the profession.
Any member who violates any of the rules and regulations could be sanctioned by the association.
Such a member may be banned from practicing for a period of time or forever depending on the type of offence committed.
(d) There should be well spelt out conditions of service.
A member of any profession has to operate under certain conditions as may be specified from time to time by the professional association and or the employer.
For example, the regular payment of salary and allowances, for services rendered, hours/place of work etc.
64 ECE222 MODULE 2 (e) The members of the profession have to be united under one organizational form known as a Union or an Association.
There must be moral/emotional/financial attachment or commitment to the profession through the Association.
In Nigeria today, there are many of such Professional Associations or Unions.
Mention two of them that are very popular in Nigeria (f) The members of the profession have to be seen by the public as enjoying a prestige comparable to other professions.
One of the things that make a profession and its members popular and respectable is the recognition given it by members of the public.
There are some professions which are held in high esteem by members of the publics for various reasons.
For example, the entry qualification for the training, the length of training and the specialized duties performed by members of the profession go a long way in determining the amount of respect that will be accorded them by the general public.
3.3 Teaching as a Profession As you were told at the beginning of this unit, a profession requires a relatively long period of training which requires a high skill and great intellectual effort.
If we relate this to teaching, we can say that it is true to some extent.
For instance, there is a period of training in an educational institution ranging from one to four years either in a Teachers College or the University.
In other words, the high skill and intellectual effort acquired through the professional training received in the College or the University gives the necessary training for the teacher.
This means that in countries where all teachers have been professionally and academically trained and licensed before their appointment, teaching there could be regarded as a profession.
However in Nigeria, this has not been so.
There are many people teaching at the various levels of education both in the public and private schools that have not received the professional skill in teaching.
Until very recently, the different categories of people teaching in our primary and secondary schools according to Ezewu (1983) and Osokoya (1987): include: i.
Primary six first school leaving certificate holders without any training in a teachers college.
ii.
Modern III school leaving certificate holders without training in a teachers college.
65ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE iii.
People who spent at least four years in a secondary school (S75) without training in a teachers college.
iv.
People who completed Secondary School Education with or without a Certificate.
v. Grade III Teachers Certificate with two years of training in a Teachers College after Primary School Leaving Certificate.
vi.
Grade II Teachers Certificate after the following: (a) Primary School Leaving Certificate with 5 years of Training in a Teachers’ College.
(b) Modern III Certificate with Three years of training in a Teachers College (c) Full Secondary School Course without obtaining the Certificate with two years of training in a teachers college.
(d) School Certificate holders with one years of training in a Teachers College.
vii.
Grade I teachers Certificate for the Grade II teachers with at least two subjects at the GCE Advanced level and at least English Language at the GCE ordinary level.
viii.
Grade II Teachers’ Certificate holders and the Associateship Certificate in Education obtained after a year of professional studies in a Faculty or Institute of Education of Nigerian universities.
ix.
The Nigeria Certificate in Education after three years of professional and academic study in a College of Education with West African School Certificate or Grade II Teachers Certificate as entry qualifications.
x. B.A.
or B.Sc.
degree certificate without professional training in education.
xi.
B.Ed, B.A.
Education, B.Sc.
Education degree with both professional and academic training.
xii.
B.A.
or B.Sc.
degree with a Postgraduate Diploma/Certificate in Education obtained after a year of professional study in education in a Faculty of Education.
66 ECE222 MODULE 2 From the list of the different categories of teachers given above, those who do not have any professional training include I, II, III, IV, and X.
At the primary school level such people are usually regarded as auxiliary teachers.
However at the secondary school level, they are referred to as teachers even without any professional qualification in teaching.
The only thing that actually distinguishes them from those with professional teaching qualification is that such people are not allowed to become principals of secondary schools until they have got the professional qualification.
As regards other characteristics of a profession which we listed earlier on, teaching is yet to meet all the conditions in Nigeria.
Although teachers are free to teach the way they think it is best for their pupils, there is yet to be a code of conduct to guide their activities.
In other professions like Medicine and Law there are codes of conduct prescribed by their associations.
Any member who violates any of the codes of conduct will be tried and if found guilty will be sanctioned accordingly by their association.
The only regulation guiding the conduct of teachers in Nigeria are the general civil service regulations and the laws of the country.
This is who we have not heard of any teacher being sanctioned by the Nigerian Union of Teachers (NUT).
You must have heard from the radio or television or read in the newspapers that the Nigerian Medical Association NMA) or the Nigerian Bar Association (NBA) has suspended some of their members from practicing for a period of time as a result of their professional misconduct.
However, there is a teachers association called the Nigerian Union of Teachers with branches in all States and Local Government Areas.
There is also the condition of service for teachers now clearly specified in their letters of appointments by the state Primary Education Boards or the teaching service Commission as the case may be in the various States of the Federation.
3.4 Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria The Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria was established by Act 31 of 1993 to perform the following duties: (a) Determining who are teachers for the purpose of this Act.
(b) Determining what standards of knowledge and skill are to be attained by persons seeking to become registered as teachers under this Act and raising, those standards from time to time as circumstances may permit.
67ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE (c) Securing in accordance with the provisions of this Act the establishment and maintenance of a registrar of teachers and the publication from time to time, the list of those persons (registered).
(d) Regulating and controlling the teaching profession in all its aspects and ramifications.
(e) Classifying from time to time members of the teaching profession according to their level of training and qualifications.
(f) Performing through the council established under this Act the functions conferred on it by this Act.
The TRC is now trying to make teaching a profession and to stop it from being used or referred to as a bridge occupation, a stepping stone, an all comers occupation etc.
According to the council, all teachers in Nigeria have been given up to the end of the year 2006 to acquire the necessary teaching qualification and get registered with the Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria.
This implies that as from the year 2007, nobody without a professionally recognized teaching qualification will be allowed to teach in our schools.
All unqualified and unregistered teachers will not be allowed to teach in our schools.
In a way, we can say that teaching is gradually becoming a profession with a body responsible for the enforcement of discipline among its members.
Like other professions such as law and medicine, no professionally unqualified person will be allowed to teach in the primary and secondary schools again.
The present situation whereby anybody can be employed to teach in our public and private schools will soon become a thing of the past.
Teaching will therefore become a respected profession and teachers can raise their heads in the society like their counterparts in the other professions.
3.5 Differences between Teaching and other Professions There are some differences between teaching and other professions in Nigeria.
Some of the differences have often made people to look down on teachers while they give much respect and recognition to other professionals like medical doctors, lawyers, pharmacists, engineers, and so on.
These differences are shown in Table 1.
68 ECE222 MODULE 2 Table 1: Comparison of Teaching with Medicine and Law Profession Length of Professional Code of Public Professional Training Association Conduct Image Practice Teaching 1– 4years NUT without None Low Open to all the power to sanction members.
Law 4– 6years NBA with the Available High Open to power to only sanction Registered members members Medicine 5– 7years NMA with Available High Open to power to only sanction Registered members members SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
List five characteristics of a profession 2.
Mention three categories of teachers without any professional training in Nigeria.
3.
Identify the major differences between the teaching profession and other professions like law and medicine in Nigeria.
4.
Find out when and why the N.U.T.
was established.
4.0 CONCLUSION In order for teaching to become a respectable profession in Nigeria, all teachers must acquire high academic and professional skill in teaching.
They must also be registered with the Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • A profession involves some learning which requires both a high skill and intellectual effort.
• A professional occupation can be distinguished from a non- professional occupation by a number of characteristics such as, length of training, freedom of practice, code of conduct, condition of service, professional association and respect of the public.
69ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE • Teaching differs from other professions such as law and medicine in Nigeria in certain respects.
• The Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria was established to make teaching a prestigious profession like law and medicine in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain five characteristics of a profession.
2.
Do you think the Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria will be able to make teaching a profession that will be comparable to the other professions in Nigeria?
Give reasons for your position.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ezewu, E. (1983).
Sociology of Education.
Ikeja: Longman Nigeria Ltd. Fafunwa, A. Babs (1991).
History of Education in Nigeria History Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NPS Educational publishers.
Osokoya I.O.
(1987).
6-3-3-4 Education in Nigeria: History, Structure, Issues and Problems.
Lagos: Bisinaike Educational Publishers.
70 ECE222 MODULE 2 UNIT 2 THE ACT OF TEACHING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Teaching 3.2 Criteria for Teaching 3.3 Other Activities that are used to make People Learn 3.4 Differences between Teaching and the other Ways of Importing Knowledge 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we discussed teaching as a profession.
We discussed the characteristics of a profession and compared teaching with some other professions.
We also discussed what is being done to make teaching a prestigious profession in Nigeria.
In this unit, you are going to learn what teaching is and the difference between teaching and acts such as drilling, instructing, training and indoctrination which are often misunderstood for teaching.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept teaching • enumerate the criteria by which we can distinguish teaching from what is not teaching • distinguish between teaching and other concepts such as drilling, instructing, training and indoctrination.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Teaching Teaching has been described by Akinpelu (1981) as the conscious and deliberate effort by a mature or experienced person to impact information, knowledge, skills, attitudes and values to an immature or less experienced person.
71ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 3.2 Criteria for Teaching As you will agree with me, teaching cannot just take place.
There must be some conditions that must be present before we can say teaching is taking place or that someone is teaching Akinpelu (1981) has identified five of such criteria which we are now going to discuss.
(a) There must be a person who is consciously and deliberately doing the teaching.
This actually tells us that teaching is an activity that depends upon relationship or interaction between two persons or parties.
The intention of the interaction is to bring about a change in the behaviour of the persons involved.
As the learner benefits from the interaction, the teacher also benefits from the interaction with his learners in one way or the other.
Can you explain how the teacher benefits from the interaction with his students?
(b) There must be another person who is being taught: Anybody who claims to be teaching must have another person who is the learner.
It will therefore not be correct for a teacher to say he/she is teaching but he/she is teaching nobody.
The learner could be any body else or even oneself as in the case of self- teaching or self-learning.
(c) The third criterion is that there must be some content or material, information, knowledge or principle that is being taught.
It is not logically reasonable for someone to claim to be teaching nothing.
Therefore, as long as there is someone teaching, there must be something being taught.
It may however be possible for the teacher to be teaching the learners something that is wrong, meaningless, or bad.
The fact still remains that, to teach must of necessity involve teaching somebody something.
(d) The fourth criterion is that there must be at least an intention on the part of the person doing the teaching that the recipient should learn.
Naturally when someone is teaching, he or she is with the intention that learning will take place in the learners.
It may however be possible for one reason or the other that learning may not take place in a particular teaching situation.
This may be as a result of the poor presentation of the lesson by the teacher.
For instance, if a teacher does not use the appropriate methods or learning materials, or the topics are too difficult for the learners, learning may not take place.
On the other hand, it is possible for the teacher to present his/her lessons very well and the learners 72 ECE222 MODULE 2 may not be learning.
This may be as a result of ill health, lack of interest in the subject or the teacher and some other reasons.
In other words, learning is an activity which can only be carried out by the learner himself.
No one can do it for another person.
Therefore, the only thing for the teacher to do is to stimulate the learners by making his lesson interesting.
He cannot really force the learners to learn.
(e) The last criterion is that, for an activity to be regarded as teaching, it must not just include the intention that learning should take place, but also involve methods or procedures that are morally sound and acceptable.
That means that, in the educational system, it is not enough for the teacher to just be teaching the learners good or relevant topics.
The teacher must also employ methods that will be morally and socially acceptable to the parents, the public the learners and the employers.
In other words, the teacher should not force, Cajole, use drugs or hypnotize the learners to learn.
Learning is a voluntary thing which only the learners can decide whether to learn or not.
When a person does any of these things to force the learner to accept or learn certain ideas or doctrines, then some other act which cannot be regarded as teaching is taking place SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
In what ways can a teacher benefit from his classroom interactions with his students?
2.
Why must the teaching done by school teachers be morally acceptable?
3.3 Other Activities that are Used to make People Learn The various criteria discussed in the proceeding section are peculiar to teaching.
There are however some other activities which may resemble teaching that are not really teaching because they cannot meet the criteria of teaching.
Although, the use of such acts may bring about some form of learning on the part of the learners, yet, they are not teaching.
Let is discuss some of such activities as explained by Akinpelu (1981).
(a) Training This is often aimed at the successful development of a special skill in the learner and not the whole personality of the learner.
As long as the individual can perform that skill well to the satisfaction of the trainer, he is not interested in his moral or social life.
For example, when a coach 73ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE trains a boxer, swimmer or footballer, all he expects is proper performance of that skill in which he has been trained.
Thus like Akinpelu (1981) once observed, what the individual does with the acquired skill outside the field in the case of a footballer or boxing ring in the case of a boxer is not of concern to the trainer.
This is unlike teaching which tends to develop the whole personality of the child.
For example teachers expect pupils to behave well always in addition to passing their examinations.
In the past, you probably must have been hearing teacher about training colleges but now you are hearing about Teacher Education, Teachers College or College of Education.
This may be because what goes on in the Teachers Colleges is mere than the mere acquisition of a specific skill.
That is to say, what teachers receive in their colleges is an all round education which prepares them for their teaching roles.
(b) Drilling You must have heard people use the word drilling to refer to the military and other Para-military institutions method of “teaching” them to acquire specific skills.
In the same way, some teachers often use drilling in the teaching and learning of mathematical tables in the primary school.
An important feature of drilling that differentiates it from teaching is that it involves frequent repetition of words, movements and other activities which often result into habits or regimentation in behaviour.
Therefore, the drilling results into a kind of mechanical way of doing things.
That is things that could be said or done with little or no thinking on the part of the individual concerned.
For example, as a result of drilling in the multiplication tables, all that the teacher needs to say is, recite multiplication table 2 and like a parrot the learner recites the table without having to think about it.
In the same way, when a soldier meets a superior officer, he salutes without having to think about how to do it.
At their parade ground, they only need a command to perform certain actions automatically.
These actions on the part of the learners and soldiers have been registered in their memory as a result of frequent repetition of such activities.
They do not often know or understand the meaning of what they say or do.
(c) Indoctrination Indoctrination unlike teaching does not give room for rational and critical thinking on the part of the learners.
The one who is indoctrinating merely presents his/her own (one sided) views or opinion to the learners as if they are not open to doubts or errors.
The learners do 74 ECE222 MODULE 2 not usually question the rationality of the ideas presented to them.
They only have to accept such ideas or views dogmatically without asking questions.
Such learners often become fanatics and this is very common in politics and religion.
They hold on to the given political ideology or religious belief dogmatically without seeing anything bad or wrong with it.
3.4 Differences Between Teaching and the Others Ways of Imparting Knowledge From the discussion on the other ways of learning such as training, drilling and indoctrination, it is clear that teaching differs from them in many ways.
Let us now look at the differences in a tabular form.
This will help you to see at a glance what makes teaching different from or superior to the other ways of making people know or learn certain things.
You can add to the list as this is not in anyway the final list of the differences.
Teaching Training, Drilling and Indoctrination 1 It is aimed at the Aimed at developing a particular skill development of the in the learner.
Not aimed at all round complete person development.
2 It gives room for rational No room for critical or rational thinking on the part of the thinking.
The learner must not disagree learners.
Learners may with the views of the master.
disagree with the teacher.
3 Teachers always give Whatever view, and ideas that are various ideas or views presented must be accepted and allows the teachers to dogmatically.
choose what to acceptor reject.
4 The teacher does not Sometimes the learners are forced to force his ideas on the accept the views of the master.
learners.
5 Every topic is open to There is sometimes mechanical discussion in the class repetition of ideas, activities that do not require much thinking on the part of the learner.
6 The teacher views his The same way of passing information methods to meet the we use from time to time without needs, ability and interest giving room for methods.
of learners.
75ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What is teaching?
2.
Explain the criteria by which we can distinguish teaching from what is not.
3.
Discuss with relevant examples the differences between teaching and any of the following (a) Training (b) Drilling (c) Indoctrination 4.0 CONCLUSION There are many ways by which we can make people learn or acquire new knowledge skills, attitudes and values.
However, only teaching tries to develop the whole personality of the learner.
The others merely focus on the development of a particular skill in the learners.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Teaching is a conscious or deliberate effort by a more mature or experienced person to impact information, knowledge, skills, attitudes and values to an immature or less experienced person.
• There are five basic criteria by which we can distinguish between an immature teaching and other ways of making people learn or acquire new skills, knowledge, attitude and values.
• Only teaching aims at developing the complete personality of the learner while others just focus on the development of one special skill.
• Teaching also encourages rational thinking and variation in the method of teaching to suit the learners age ability, interest and needs, others are often rigid in their method and they do not give room for critical thinking in the learners.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the differences between teaching and drilling, training and indoctrination.
2.
What are the criteria for teaching?
76 ECE222 MODULE 2 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, O.
(1983).
An Introduction to Teaching in Press.
Akinpelu, J.A.
(1981).
An Introduction to Philosophy of Education.
London: The Macmillan Press Ltd. Dodd, W.A.
(1978).
The Teacher at Work.
London: Oxford University Press.
Ridgeway, L. (1976).
Task of the Teacher in the Primary School London: Ward Lock Educational.
77ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE UNIT 3 THE PLACE OF TEACHERS IN THE SOCIETY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Who is a Teacher?
3.2 The Importance of Teachers in the society 3.2.1 Manpower Development 3.2.2 Teachers as Nation Builders 3.2.3 Teacher as Socializing Agents 3.2.4 Teachers as Leaders 3.3 Factors Responsible for the Poor Image of Teachers in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You have just learnt in the last unit that teaching is different from other ways by which we can make people learn or acquire new knowledge, skills attitudes and values.
You also learnt the five criteria or conditions that must be present before you can refer to any activity as teaching.
In this unit, you are going to learn the place of the teacher in the society.
You will learn how important teachers are to the overall growth and development of the individual and the country generally and why they are not accorded much respect like other professionals.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain how important teachers are to any nation • identify some factors responsible for the relatively poor image of teachers and the teaching profession in Nigeria • suggest ways of improving the public image of teachers and the teaching profession in Nigeria.
78 ECE222 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Who is a Teacher?
In the last unit, you were told that teaching is a conscious and deliberate effort by a mature or experienced person to impact information, knowledge, skills, attitudes and values to an immature or less experienced person.
From this definition of teaching, we can infer that a teacher is an experienced person who consciously impacts knowledge, skills, attitude and values to the learners with the intention of bringing a positive change in them.
3.2 The Importance of Teachers in the Society Education is regarded as the key that unlocks the door to modernization, but the teacher holds the key to the door (Samuel 1996).
In other words, no appreciable progress can be made in the task of nation binding economically, socially scientifically and technologically without good teachers.
The importance of teachers in any educational enterprise has been further stressed in the National Policy on Education (2004).
In the document, it is stated that no system of education can be above the quality of its teachers.
This implies that the quality of teachers determines the quality of the school products.
We can therefore agree with that popular saying that as the teacher is, so is the school and as is the school so is the society.
Let us now discuss in some details, Why teachers are important to the society.
3.2.1 Manpower Development The teacher is the most important manpower needed to develop other manpower.
All the successful men and women in the various professions managing or controlling the various sectors of the economy are products of different educational institutions.
From the pre-primary to the university level, they were taught by teachers.
Therefore, in the words of Lewis (1978): Whatever the financial resources that may be available, an education system cannot function without men and women to serve as teachers in the schools and colleges.
(p1).
If there are no good teachers in our schools, colleges and universities, no matter how well funded or the good facilities available, it will be difficult if not impossible to train the various professionals there.
79ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 3.2.2 Teachers as Nation Builders A great educator once asserted that nations are built in the classrooms and not in either the army barracks or the parliament.
This statement may sound strange or difficult to believe if we consider the roles of the army in the defense of the nation or the parliament in law making.
The truth however remains that all those who contribute in one way or the other to the development of the nation are products of an educational system.
Therefore, be it the military officers or the law makers, or any other group for that matter, they are products of the school system where they were taught by teachers.
For instance, no illiterate person can become a parliamentarian or a top military officer in modern societies.
3.2.3 Teachers as Socializing Agents The Importance of teachers as socializing agents can best be illustrated in a statement credited to Sophocles in Berns (2004) that: The ideal condition would be, that men should be right by instinct, but since we are all likely to go astray, the reasonable thing is to learn from those who can teach (p. 249) Berns (2004) went on to assert that the most powerful socializing influence of the school is in those who translate goals into action that is the teachers.
In as much as teachers organize the environment for children’s learning and understand their needs, interests and abilities, they easily influence the attitude and values of their learners.
Thus, teachers help their learners to deal with those in position of authority, to cooperate with others, cope with and solve problems as well as achieve competence.
Children generally see their teachers as Mr. Know all, a role model and someone who is always right.
This is why children often tell their parents and others helping them to do their home work; things like: That is not how our teacher taught us; our teacher said we should not do this or that etc.
This is common among primary school children in particular.
However, teachers at other levels of education have been found to have great influence on the general attitude of their students.
3.2.4 Teachers as Leaders As we have just discussed under the last point, teachers do direct, guide and set examples for their learners.
This often affects the way such learners behave in and out of school.
In some rural communities teachers are seen and respected as knowledgeable people who can help them in various ways.
Since teachers often advise, guide or direct not only their pupils but also their parents on the best things to do in any 80 ECE222 MODULE 2 given situation, they are seen as great mentors that could lead them to achieve their goals.
We must however realize that, the teachers’ leadership style often influence the learning environment in the classroom.
You will learn more about leadership and leadership styles in your Educational Management Course.
What is important for you to know here is that teachers with good leadership styles promote the achievement of their learners.
In other words, such teachers help their pupils realize and reach their full potential.
On the long run, such children whose capacities have been helped to grow through the leadership styles of the teachers become leaders and managers in key positions in the society.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 In what ways would you say the teacher is an important factor in National development?
3.3 Factors Responsible for the Poor Image of Teachers in Nigeria One of the Holy Books Says that if a man is diligent in his work, he shall stand before kings and not before ordinary people.
This means that any person who is competent in his or her chosen occupation will be respected in the community.
One of the reasons why the primary school teachers in particular are not being accorded much respect is what Taiwo (1982) refers to as the poor quality and the low output of teachers produced from the various teachers colleges.
Many of the teachers have been found to be very deficient in both their oral and written expressions in English Language which is the medium of instruction in schools.
As a result, they do not command the respect of the parents and sometimes even their pupils.
This is unlike in the past when teachers were respected and admired by both the pupils and their parents.
Those teachers according to Akinbote (1991) were not only of good quality in the academic and professional areas but were also dedicated.
Only the good products of the schools were then allowed into the teachers colleges.
This is unlike now where most of the entrants into the various teacher education institutions are the reluctant, left-over and the rejected candidates for other courses.
The solution to this problem is to improve on the admission requirements for Colleges of Education.
As at now, a candidate needs only three credits at the GCE ordinarily level or equivalents to gain admission.
In some cases, candidates with lower credits are allowed to go through the pre – NCE programme run by many of the colleges.
This definitely leads to the poor quality of teachers produced by the colleges for our primary schools.
Therefore, if the admission requirement is 81ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE raised to at least five credits and the candidates are given proper screening before admission, good quality teachers will be produced for our schools.
Another reason for the poor image of teachers in Nigeria is the fact that, teaching is regarded as a no man’s land.
That is, anybody at all could be recruited to teach in our schools as long as that person has an academic qualification.
In many parts of the country, secondary schools leavers, university or polytechnic graduates with no teaching qualifications are recruited to teach in both public and private schools.
Infact, many people see teaching as a bridge occupation.
That is, something that you can be doing till you get a better or the right job.
The various free education programmes which did not give adequate time and attention to effective planning before implementation often led to this trend since there were always shortage of professionally qualified teachers, the only option left was to recruit anyone to fill the classrooms.
This cannot happen in other professions such as Medicine, Law, Engineering, Pharmacy, among others.
All these professions have very strong Associations that would not allow unqualified people to practice it.
Thus, such professions enjoy and command the respect of the people.
The teaching profession is gradually moving towards this direction now.
With the Teachers Registration Council now in place, very soon only qualified and registered teachers with be allowed to teach in our schools.
In this way teachers will start enjoying the same type of respect and dignity hither to reserved for the popular professions like Law, Medicine, Engineering and a few others.
Another factor responsible for the poor image of teachers is their personal appearance and low self esteem.
Many teachers in the primary schools do not dress in attractive and fashionable way.
This is sometimes due to their low self esteem as being poorly paid workers unlike their counterparts in the civil service or some other professions.
This has often led to parents and the general public and even their own pupils looking down on them.
Some people have even gone to the ridiculous extent of asking friends why they dress like teachers?
Some comedians or advertisements often depict teachers as people who dress in some peculiar old fashion ways.
The solution to this problem is for teachers to stop looking down on themselves.
They should see themselves as professionals without whom the nation cannot make any appreciable progress in all aspects of life.
Right now that teaching is being professionalized there is no basis for their being regarded as inferior to others.
82 ECE222 MODULE 2 The last factor we are to consider is the poor working environment of primary school teachers in Nigeria.
There are many primary schools without good classroom, chairs and tables for both teachers and their pupils.
A visit to some public schools in both the urban and rural areas will reveal the poor working conditions teachers are subjected to in the country.
This has in many ways contributed to the low self esteem of teachers and the resultant poor image in the society.
The solution to this problem is to improve on the facilities in all public schools.
The classrooms, the Headteachers offices, the chairs and tables and other facilities should be made both learner and teacher friendly.
This will somehow affect the morale of teachers and improve their self esteem and attitude to work.
We all know that the environment where one works tells much on the level of job satisfaction and the respect to be accorded by the workers.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Identify five ways through which the teacher is very important to national development 2.
Why are teachers often looked down upon in the society?
3.
Suggest ways of improving the image of teachers in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION The teacher is the most important manpower needed to develop other manpower in any country.
However, for various reasons, teachers are not accorded much respect like most other professionals in Nigeria.
Some steps must be taken by the government and the teachers themselves to improve their public image.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • The teacher is the most important worker that we need to develop other categories of workers in any country.
• Teachers are nation builders, socialization agents, and leaders.
• There are some factors militating against the popularity and public image of teachers in Nigeria.
• That the government and the teachers themselves can do much to improve the image of teachers.
83ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why is the teacher regarded as the most important manpower needed to develop other manpower in any country?
2.
Identify five factors responsible for the relatively poor public image of teachers in Nigeria.
3.
How can the teachers enjoy the respect of members of the public like other professionals in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Berns, R.M.
(2004).
Child, Family School Community, Socialization and Support.
Belmont: Thomas Learning Inc. Dodd, W.A.
(1970).
The Teacher at Work.
London: Oxford University Press.
Samuel, T. (1996).
Teacher Education in Lagos State: A Proposal for the 21st Century.
The Beagle, Journal of Primary Education Vol.
1, No.
1&2, pages 8 – 16.
84 ECE222 MODULE 2 UNIT 4 THE BEGINNING OF FORMAL TEACHING AND TEACHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Coming of the Christian Missionaries 3.2 The Beginning of Formal Teaching and Teachers/ Education in Nigeria 3.3 Admission into the Teacher Training Colleges 3.4 Teacher Education in the Decade before and after Independence 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Teaching as an act has been explained in unit 2 of this module.
You learnt there that teaching is a conscious or deliberate effort on the part of a mature or experienced person to impact knowledge to the less mature or experienced person.
You should however note that teaching can take place anywhere and at anytime.
This means that teaching can take place inside the school or outside the school.
Teaching that takes place in the school is referred to as formal teaching while the teaching that takes place outside the school system is informal teaching.
In this unit, you are going to learn how formal (school) teaching started in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • discuss the origin of (formal) Western Education in Nigeria • explain how teachers were recruited and trained in the early years of western education in Nigeria • identify the minimum teaching qualifications in Nigeria before and after independence.
85ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Coming of the Christian Missionaries The coming of the Christian Missionaries cannot be separated from the beginning of formal schooling and teaching in Nigeria.
This is why it is necessary for us to first discuss the coming of the Christian Missionaries to Nigeria.
We shall from there trace the origin of formal teaching in our schools.
As you must have learnt or read from various sources, the first attempt to introduce both Christianity and western education by the Roman Catholic Portugese Missionaries in the 16th century was not successful.
It was the second coming which was spearheaded by the Methodist and Church Missionary Society (CMS) Missionaries that succeeded in planting both Christianity and Western Education in Nigeria.
The Christian Missionaries established the first school in Badagry in 1843.
According to Fafunwa (1991), the major reason why they established schools was to convert Africans into Christianity.
Thus, with the establishment of schools, it became necessary for teachers to be recruited.
In the next section of this unit, you will learn how the first group of teachers for the missionary schools were trained and recruited.
3.2 The Beginning of Formal Teaching and Teacher Education in Nigerian As schools were opened by the Missionaries, it become necessary to have teachers who would teach there.
The first set of teachers in the mission schools as you would expect were the missionaries themselves.
As time went on, other Europeans as well as a few Africans particularly the ex-slaves and the products of the Mission schools joined the teaching staff of the schools.
They often doubled as catechists and teachers in the mission schools.
However, the proportion of Africans in the teaching staff in schools was very low to the Europeans.
Infact, as noted by Fafunwa (1991), Frederick Lugard, the first Governor General of Nigeria, called for the rapid replacement of Europeans in schools by Nigerian teachers as far back as 1914.
Lugard did this for two major reasons.
First, to reduce the high cost of employing Europeans and second, to ensure continuity in teaching.
The employment of foreign teachers could not ensure continuity since they would always return to their home countries for various reasons.
Therefore, to solve the problem of shortage of Nigerian teachers, some of the good products of the mission schools were recruited as pupil teachers.
In many instances, some of the good pupils in the upper primary classes were made to teach in the lower primary classes.
As 86 ECE222 MODULE 2 mentioned earlier on, many of the teachers served as catechists and teachers to their respective missions.
You might say that the first group of Nigerians employed to teach in the schools were not professionally qualified.
You are right but the fact remains that they gave their best and they were respected by both the pupils and the general public.
How then did the training of Nigerian teachers for the schools start?
This is what we are going to discuss in the next section of this unit.
Remember that the first sets of Nigerian teachers in our schools were not professionally trained.
They were just the good products or even pupils picked and given some guidelines to follow.
Therefore, in order to have professionally trained teachers, it became necessary to establish Teacher Training Colleges.
The responsibility of establishing the Teachers Colleges as you would expect fell on the Christian Missionaries.
The first Teachers College known as the Training Institution was established in Abeokuta by the CMS in 1859.
However, when the missionaries for certain reasons were expelled from Abeokuta, the college was moved to Lagos in 1867.
By 1896 it was again moved to Oyo town to become the popular St. Andrews College.
If you are very familiar with the College, it was once changed to a College of Education and the original campus of the great St Andrews College is now occupied by the Ajayi Crowther University in Oyo Town.
The Church Missionary Society (CMS) thus opened the gate for the establishment of Teachers Colleges in Nigeria.
As noted by Fafunwa (1991), other missions established their own Teachers Colleges as follows: The Baptist established the Baptist Training College, at Ogbomoso in 1897.
The Wesley Methodist Mission on the other hand opened their own Teacher Training College in 1905 at Ibadan.
Other missions such as the Presbyterian Church, the Roman Catholic Mission and later the Ansar Ur Deen in Islam established their own Teachers Colleges in different parts of the country.
By 1948, the number of Teacher Training Colleges in Nigeria and assisted by the Government had risen to fifty three (53) with a student teacher population of 3,026 (Fafunwa 1991).
Now let us consider the admission in the first teachers colleges and the type of professional certificates issued by them.
This is necessary for us to know how teachers have over the years been improving their professional skills and competence in teaching.
3.3 Admission into the Teacher Training Colleges As you were told earlier on, the product of the mission schools were the first set of Nigerians to teach in the schools.
These good products of the schools were referred to as pupil teachers.
When the teacher Training Colleges were eventually established, the first set of candidates for 87ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE admission were the pupil teachers.
In other words those who passed the standard six and had been pupil teachers for at least two years were eligible.
In addition to this, the candidate must also pass the pupil teacher examination and must have served as an assistant teacher before admission into the Teacher Training College.
You must have noted the rigorous process involved in the admission of the prospective professional teachers into the Colleges.
This tells you how much emphasis was placed on the production of professionally competent teachers then.
The missionaries were then more concerned with quality and not just the quantity of teachers produced to teach in the schools.
You must have noted also that people were not just recruited directly from the primary schools.
Only those who have been found to possess certain qualities were first allowed to become pupils teachers who later went into the colleges.
No wonder, the products of the teachers colleges in those days were confident, competent and dedicated men and women who were loved and respected in their communities.
Those who gained admission into the Teachers Colleges were usually there for two years.
At the end, they took the necessary teachers’ certificate examination and were certified as trained teachers if they passed.
This level of Teacher Education was later known as the Elementary Training Colleges (Grade III).
After passing out of the Grade III Teachers Colleges, the candidates usually had authomatic employments.
They then had to teach for at least two years before then could proceed to the Higher Elementary Teachers’ College (Grade II).
This (Grade II) for many years remained the minimum teaching qualification in Nigeria.
The Grade III teachers were specially prepared to teach in the lower classes of primary schools while the Grade II teachers could teach in any class of the primary school.
The Higher Elementary Teachers College also ran a course of two years duration.
The professional and academic skills impacted into the students in the Grade II Teachers Colleges were higher than those of the Grade III Teachers Colleges.
As you must have observed, it was not possible in those days for any mis-fit person to get into the Grade II Teachers Colleges.
This ensured that only dedicated, effective and efficient teachers found their ways into the classrooms as Head Teachers in particular.
From this short description of the admission procedure into the early teacher training colleges, one thing is clear.
That is, the fact that Teacher Education Programme in those days was not meant for the never do well, the drop out or reluctant school leavers.
Moreover, the would be student teachers had to prove themselves not only to be mentally fit, but 88 ECE222 MODULE 2 for the training to be received.
They also had to demonstrate during their pupil teacher mentorship period that they were socially efficient and emotionally stable to cope with the various classroom challenges.
Let us now look at what the situation was during the self rule period.
3.4 Teacher Education in the Decade before and after Independence What we have discussed so far could be regarded as the period of complete Missionary control of Education in Nigeria.
We are now going to discuss what teacher education was during the decade before and after independence.
The decade before and after independence, that is, 1951 – 1970 has been described as the Era of self determination in education.
This according to Fafunwa (1991) was because the regionalization of education in 1951 led to a healthy rivalry among the three regional governments.
The introduction of the free primary education in 1955 by the Western Region led to rapid expansion of teacher – training facilities in the region.
Similarly, the Eastern and Northern Regions made appreciable expansion in their teacher education programmes.
As a result of the various free primary education programmes embarked upon by the three Regions between 1955 and 1960, it became necessary to expand the teacher education institutions.
This trend continued after independence in 1960.
By the time the National UPE programme was introduced in 1976, the number of Teachers Colleges to produce teachers for the teaming population of school enrolments became doubled.
The implications of the rapid expansion of Teacher Training Colleges for the development skills and one of professional skills and competence are many.
In the first place, the idea of having to serve as a pupil teacher for at least two years before going in for the Teacher Education Programme was dropped.
Moreover, the number of years spent to qualify as a Grade II teacher after modern III, S75, school certificate or GCE OL dropped to three years, two years and one year respectively.
The Elementary Teachers College (Grade III) was eventually phased out and by the 1970s only Grade II Teachers Colleges were available for training primary school teachers.
In addition to these, the gates of the Grade II Teachers Colleges were thrown open to whoever wanted to come in.
The rigorous screening of candidates for good moral and academic standards before admission into the Teachers’ Colleges was also done away with.
You will still remember that, the missionaries ensured that only those who were both intellectually and morally fit for teaching were allowed into the Teachers’ Colleges.
However, the urgent need for teachers particularly 89ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE for the National UPE programmes of 1976, did not allow for such screening.
This led to the admission of all those who ordinarily should not have found themselves in the teachers colleges, and the teaching profession being given some encouragement to come in.
The open door policy in teacher education is responsible for what Taiwo (1982) once described as the poor quality and low output of products of Teacher Training Colleges.
In other words, those who were admitted into the colleges were not all good quality in terms of their intellectual and moral standards.
Invariably, when such people get to the classroom as teachers, their productivity will be low.
This as you would expect has affected the quality of the products of our primary schools.
You will learn more about this in the next unit.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Why did the Christian Missionaries establish schools in Nigeria?
2.
Explain the procedure for admission into the teachers colleges during the missionary era.
3.
Would you say the expansion in teacher education in the 60s and 70s was a good decision?
Give reason for your answer.
4.0 CONCLUSION The introduction of formal education by the Christian missionaries in the early 19th century brought about the establishment of Teacher Training Colleges.
The admission process into the teachers’ colleges was very tight as they wanted only those who are intellectually and morally sound to become teachers in our schools.
However, the various UPE programmes led to the expansion of Teacher Training Colleges and the lowering of admission requirements.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • The first schools in Nigeria were established by the Christian Missionaries.
• The introduction of schools led to the demand for teachers and the introduction of Teacher Training Colleges.
• Admission into the Teacher Training Colleges was very strict as only the good products of the Mission schools were offered admission.
90 ECE222 MODULE 2 • The introduction of the various UPE programmes in the country led to the lowering of the admission requirements into the Teachers Colleges in order to produce the large number of teachers required.
• The lowering of admission requirements into the teachers colleges led to the poor quality and output of teachers produced from the Teachers Colleges since the 1970s.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why was the admission requirements into the Teachers Colleges very strict during the Missionary era?
2.
What were the conditions to be met in those days before one could be admitted into the teachers’ college?
3.
How did the UPE programme affect the quality of the products of our Teachers’ Colleges in the 70s?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fafunwa, A. Babs (19-).
History of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NPS Educational Publishers.
Taiwo, C.O.
(1982).
Nigeria Education: Past Present and Future.
Lagos: Thamas Nelson (Nig) Ltd. 91ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE UNIT 5 THE GOALS OF TEACHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Teacher Education 3.2 The Goals of Teacher Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt how formal school teaching in Nigeria started.
You also learnt how teacher education started with the missionaries as well as the development in Teacher Education before and after independence.
In this unit, you are going to learn the goals of Teacher Education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of Teacher Education?
• identify and explain the major goals of teacher education in Nigeria • discuss the means of achieving the goals of teacher education in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Teacher Education Before we discuss the goals of teacher education in Nigeria, it is necessary for you to know what teacher education is all about.
This will give you the special advantage of appreciating the goals of teacher education.
Teacher education has been described in various ways by different authorities.
For our purpose here, we shall refer to teacher education as the planned programme of specialized education for producing teachers with the skill and competence of teaching in schools and colleges.
The 92 ECE222 MODULE 2 teachers who after their training are referred to as professional teachers are expected to educate the learners in a way that will make them responsible citizens in the society.
3.2 The Goals of Teacher Education As you are aware, teachers are at the centre of any system of education.
The importance of teachers to the success of any system of education has been clearly recognized in the National Policy on Education (2004).
In the document, it is stated that no education system can rise above the quality of its teachers.
That is to say, their professions, competence, creativity, and dedication among other qualities are central to the success of the learners in the education system.
Therefore, in order to achieve the desired goals of education at all levels, special attention should be paid to teacher preparation.
In Nigeria, the importance of effective education for teachers has been recognized hence it is stated in the NPE (2004) that teacher education shall continue to be given major emphasis in all educational planning and development.
Let us now consider the major goals of teacher education in Nigeria as stated in the National Policy on Education: (a) To produce highly motivated, conscientious and efficient classroom teachers for all levels of our education system.
One of the problems of teacher education for schools in Nigeria, according to Taiwo (1982) is the poor quality and low output of teachers produced from the Teachers’ Colleges.
Therefore to tackle this problem, it has become necessary to raise the admission requirements and review the minimum teaching qualification in Nigeria.
As you may be aware, the Nigeria Certificate in Education (NCE) has now become the minimum teaching qualification in Nigeria.
In one of the previous units of this module, you learnt that the Grade III and Grade II Teachers Certificates were at different times the minimum teaching qualifications in our schools.
However, the big question you may wish to provide answers to is whether or not the policy of making NCE the minimum teaching qualification has really helped in producing highly motivated, conscientious and efficient primary school teachers in Nigeria.
We may have to discuss this later in another unit.
(b) To encourage further the spirit of enquiry and creativity in teachers.
93ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE There is a popular saying that for a candle to give light, it must keep on burning.
In the same way, for teachers to keep on encouraging and developing the spirit of enquiry and creativity among the learners, they must keep on learning.
If the teacher does not keep on learning, he or she will not be able to motivate the learners.
In the same way, a teacher should know more than what he is expected to teach his/her students on any topics or subject.
Therefore, in order for the Nigerian teachers to develop the spirit of inquiry and creativity, attention should be given to the development of a meaningful curriculum for both pre – service and in service teacher education programmes.
Such a curriculum should ensure the presence of an enabling learning environment in the teachers colleges, institutes and Faculties of Education where teachers are being prepared for our schools.
In this regard only professionally qualified teachers should be employed to teach at the various levels of teacher preparation.
This is because, we teach the way we are taught.
The situation of the 1970s and 1980s whereby non-professionally qualified teachers were drafted to teach in Teachers Colleges should not be allowed again.
In the same way, all the necessary infrastructures and facilities such as adequately equipped classrooms, laboratories, libraries and personnel should be made available.
Since teachers need a lot of practical knowledge, there should be more emphasis on their practical activities in both their cognate and pedagogical disciplines.
The question you can try to provide answers to in this respect is whether or not the available learning environment in the Colleges of Education as well as the Institutes and Faculties of Education are good enough for encouraging further the spirit of enquiry and creativity in our teachers.
(c) To help teachers to fit into social life of the community and the society at large and enhance their commitment to national goals.
You will still remember that in one of the earlier units of this module, you were told that nations are built in the classrooms and not in the barracks or parliament.
If this assertion is correct, we can then say again that teachers are the most important manpower needed to develop other manpower in any nation.
Therefore, for teachers to perform this all important role of nation building, their conditions of service and continuous support and training are very essential.
The teachers should be one of the most highly respected and rewarded professionals in the society.
It is by improving their conditions of service, work environment and treated with curtsy by 94 ECE222 MODULE 2 all that they could feel wanted and invariably be committed to national goals.
If you give them the best training/education possible without the necessary support and improved conditions of service, their self esteem will be low and this in turn will affect their productivity.
(d) To provide teachers with the intellectual and professional background adequate for their assignment and make them adaptable to changing situations.
At the inception of formal teacher education programme by the missionaries, only the good products of their schools were allowed to go into the Teacher Training Colleges, Similarly, when the colleges of education were first introduced, only the good products of our secondary schools and Teachers Colleges were admitted.
This as noted by Akinbote (1999) was responsible for their high level of competence, and the respect accorded them by both the learners and the general public.
However, with the introduction of the UPE programmes and the attendant crash – programmes for teacher education, those who should not have seen the inside of Teachers’ Colleges, were admitted.
This as noted by Akinbote (1999) led to a situation whereby the reluctant, the rejected and the never do wells found their ways into the Teachers Colleges and invariably the teaching profession.
The result of course is the low output and lack of dedication once mentioned by Taiwo (1981) as some of the major problems of teacher education for our schools.
If we are to produce teachers who are intellectually and professionally adequate for their teaching, guidance and counselling tasks in and outside the school, we need to do something about the quality of recruits into our teacher education programmes.
There are many things we can do in this regard.
Suggest some of the steps that should be taken to ensure that only intellectually and morally upright people are admitted into the teacher education programmes in Nigeria.
(e) To enhance teachers’ commitment to the teaching profession.
It is generally believed that any kind of work that brings some high degree of satisfaction to a person will bring the best out of the individual.
Not only that, the individual will devote much attention and time to the work that the level of commitment will be total.
Therefore, to enhance teachers commitment to the teaching profession their welfare during their training as well as work must be adequately taken care of.
During their training they must be treated in a way that will boost their morale like it is done for students of other professions.
A situation whereby education students will be feeling inferior to their counterparts 95ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE in other faculties in the University or Polytechnic for various reasons is not good enough.
Similarly, teachers self esteem and dignity should be enhanced by their employers.
Their conditions of service must be looked into so that they do not feel inferior to other professionals.
In the same way, their work environment must be such that could be worker friendly.
All these will go a long way to enhance teachers’ professional commitment.
We cannot first be talking about commitment without doing anything concrete about improving the self esteem, image and dignity of the teachers.
On your own, try to find out whether or not Nigeria teachers are committed.
What do you think is responsible For this and how can the situation be corrected?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Why is teacher education at the centre of any education system?
2.
Enumerate the major goals of teacher education in Nigeria.
3.
In your own opinion, which of the goals of teacher education have we achieved and which ones have we not achieved?
Give reasons for your answer.
4.0 CONCLUSION Teacher education is crucial to the success of any education programme.
This explains why different governments have given teacher education the necessary support and attention in different parts of the world.
In Nigeria, there are five stated goals of teacher education.
All efforts are being made to ensure that these goals are achieved.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Teacher education is crucial to the success of any educational programme.
• Teacher education is the planned programme of specialized education for producing teachers with the appropriate skills and competence.
• There are five goals of teacher education in Nigeria – namely.
(a) To produce highly motivated conscientious and efficient classroom teachers for all levels of our educational system.
96 ECE222 MODULE 2 (b) Encourage further the spirit of enquiry and creativity in teachers.
(c) Help teachers to fit into social life of the community and the society at large and enhance their commitment to national goals; (d) Provide teachers with the intellectual and professional background adequate for their assignment and make them adaptable to changing situations (e) Enhance teachers’ commitment to the teaching profession.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the goals of teacher education in Nigeria?
2.
How can the goals of teacher education be best achieved?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Federal Republic of Nigeria (1998).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC.
97ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE UNIT 6 NATIONAL POLICY ON TEACHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Government Policy on Teacher Education 3.2 Educational Institutions Designed for Teacher Education in Nigeria 3.2.1 College of Education 3.2.2 Faculties of Education 3.2.3 Institutes of Education 3.2.4 National Teachers’ Institutes (NTI) 3.2.5 Schools/Faculties of Education in the Polytechnics 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION You have just learnt the five major goals of teacher education in Nigeria.
In this unit, you are going to learn the government policy as it relates to teacher education.
In this unit, you will learn what is the minimum teaching qualification allowed in Nigeria, the educational institutions available for teacher education and how government intends to achieve the objectives of teacher education in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the major policy statement of government on teacher education • identify the various educational institutions designed for teacher education for the various levels of education and their functions • discuss the importance of the National Policy on teacher education in Nigeria.
98 ECE222 MODULE 2 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Government Policy on Teacher Education Before we discuss the policy on teacher education in Nigeria, it is necessary for you to know what an education policy is.
According to Osokoya (1987), education policy is the statement of intentions of government and the envisaged means of achieving those aspects of its national objectives that have to rely on the use of education as a tool.
This therefore implies that, the teacher education policy refers to the intentions of government on what teacher education should be and how to go about it.
We can now discuss the teacher education policy as contained in the National Policy on Education (1998).
These are: (a) Teacher education shall continue to be given major emphasis in all educational planning and development.
(b) The minimum qualification for entry into the teaching profession shall be the Nigeria Certificate in Education (c) All teachers in educational institutions shall be professionally trained.
(d) At the Nigeria Certificate of Education and degree levels, education programmes shall continue to be expanded to also cater for the requirements of technical business, and special education.
(e) Teacher education shall continue to take cognizance changes in methodology and in the curriculum.
Teachers shall be regularly exposed to innovations in their profession.
(f) In – service training shall be developed as an integral part of continuing teacher education and shall also take care of all inadequacies.
(g) Promotion opportunities shall be created to allow for professional growth at each level.
(h) Teaching is a legally recognized profession in Nigeria.
In this regard, Government has set up the Teachers Registration Council to control and regulate the practice of the profession.
99ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE (i) Those already engaged in teaching but not professionally qualified shall be given a period of time within which to qualify for registration or leave the profession.
(j) Efforts towards the improvement of quality education at the primary and secondary school levels shall include: a.
Appointment of academically and professionally qualified persons as teachers and head teachers.
b.
Regular in – service training programmes for teachers and head teachers.
These policy statements are many as you can see from the list given above.
We shall not be able to discuss each of them into details.
Rather, we shall have a general look at them and their implications for the promotion of professional skills and competence of Nigeria school teachers.
The government is aware of the important role of teachers in the overall growth and development of the nation.
This is why it is stated that no system of education can rise above the quality of its teachers.
In other words, like teacher like pupils.
Why then has government decided to raise the minimum teaching qualification in Nigeria from the Teachers Grade II certificate to the Nigeria Certificate in Education?
What are the implications of making all teachers in our schools professionally qualified?
By raising the minimum teaching qualification from Grade II to the NCE, government has deliberately tried to improve on the quality of teaching and learning in our schools.
It is generally believed that products of the Colleges of Education are better equipped with a broader knowledge of the content and methodology of teaching various school subjects than the Grade II teachers.
As noted by Adesina (1977) the Colleges of Education at their inception were to produce non-graduate middle level manpower to teach in the lower classes of secondary schools.
This means that the NCE teachers are expected to be better than the Grade II teachers in their professional skills hence the decision to make NCE the minimum teaching qualification.
In the same way, the professionalization of teaching as contained in the policy statement is also aimed at ensuring that only people who have acquired the necessary professional skills and competence teach in schools.
The past situation whereby anybody with any evidence of literacy is allowed to teach our children is not good.
It has done more harm than good to the individual learners, and the general public.
Therefore, if only professionally competent and registered teachers are 100 ECE222 MODULE 2 allowed to teach in our schools, both public and private, it is expected that the quality of teaching and learning will greatly improve.
The provision of in-service training for teachers who are already teaching is another policy aimed at the development of their professional skills and competence; In-service programme could be organized for full time or part – time courses in an educational institution.
It could also be short term workshops, conferences and seminars.
Whatever the nature of the in-service programme, they are aimed at improving the professional skills and competence of teachers in teaching.
As it is done in the developed countries of the world, nobody is ever allowed to teach at the primary or secondary schools without being licensed to do so by the relevant professional body.
The situation in Nigeria will soon become sanitized when all the unqualified teachers are thrown out of the classroom.
When this is done, we hope our teachers will not only be very competent but also more dedicated.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Explain what you understand by Education Policy.
2.
Enumerate some of the national policy on teacher education in Nigeria.
3.2 Educational Institutions Designed for Teacher Education in Nigeria In the proceeding section, we discussed the policy statements on teacher education.
Let us now identify and discuss the various teacher education institutions in Nigeria and their roles.
As stated in the National Policy on Education (2004), the following institutions are expected to give the required professional training for teachers: 3.2.1 College of Education This is a tertiary institution established to produce non-graduate professionally qualified teachers.
At the inception, they were known as Advanced Teachers Colleges and produced middle level manpower for the lower arms of secondary schools.
The establishment of the Advanced Teachers Colleges was based on the Ashby Report which in 1960 recommended the establishment of Grade I teachers colleges (Fafunwa 1991).
Therefore, the first generations of the ATC were established in 1962 by both the Federal and Regional Governments.
The five Advanced Teachers Colleges were then established as an 101ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE emergency scheme for the production of professionally qualified non graduate teachers.
The number of the Colleges of Education in Nigeria today has risen to well over 70, owned by the Federal, State and private individuals and organizations.
The original plan of the colleges was to produce professionally qualified and competent non-graduate teachers for the lower classes of secondary schools as earlier stated.
In recent years however they have been producing teachers for the primary level of education.
Some of them have also become degree awarding institutions.
There are presently four different categories of Colleges of Education in Nigeria.
These are: i.
The conventional Colleges of Education: These are the colleges that produce all categories of teachers for the primary and junior secondary school levels.
The areas covered by the conventional colleges of Education are – Arts, Social Sciences, Sciences, Primary Education Vocational and technical education.
This category has the highest number of colleges and enrolment figures.
ii.
Colleges of Education (Technical): This category produces teachers mainly for the junior secondary schools in introductory technology, integrated science and home economics.
This implies that this category of colleges of education does not produce teachers in the other subject areas in the Arts or Social Sciences.
iii.
College of Education (Special): There is only one of this category in Oyo town.
It trains teachers in all disciplines for special education.
That is, teachers who are specially trained to teach the different categories of handicapped people.
iv.
College of Primary Education: There is only one of this category at Noforija Epe, Lagos State.
It was established to produce specialist teachers in all disciplines for primary schools.
That is, the products of this college are specially trained to teach particular subjects at the primary school level.
3.2.2 Faculties of Education The desire to have graduate teachers who are professionally qualified led to the introduction of the Bachelors degree in education at the University of Nigeria NSUKKA in September 1961.
Before this time, what we had were people with their Bachelors degrees in various disciplines who found themselves teaching in secondary schools.
They 102 ECE222 MODULE 2 were given some basic training in the psychology, philosophy, sociology and general principles of teaching and learning for a year in the University.
That is the Postgraduate Diploma/Certificate in Education (PGDE/PGCE).
This was considered inadequate for providing teachers with sound background knowledge of the principles and practice of education.
This new programme in education initially generated some controversy among the university dons.
However, it has become the normal thing in the conventional university now to offer degree programmes of B.A/B.Sc Education or B.Ed in the Faculty of Education.
There are also other professional programmes offered by the various Faculties of Education even though some of them have been discontinued with.
They include the Associateship Certificate in Education for Grade II teachers.
There is also the Diploma in Education for secondary school leavers or practitioners who could not gain admission into the degree programme for various reasons.
The diploma candidates could specialize in any aspect of education such as pre – primary/primary education, Adult Education and Community Development, Educational Administration and Physical and Health Education.
3.2.3 Institutes of Education The Institutes of Education perform similar functions as the Faculties of Education.
The only difference is that the Institutes engage more in research activities in teacher education than the actual production of full time first degree holders.
They are also involved in outreach programmes such as having degree programme centres in College of Education.
There was a time when all the Colleges of Education in Nigeria were affiliated to universities nearest to them.
We can say here that teacher education in Nigeria has benefited greatly from the various professional and academic programmes of the Faculties and Institutes of Education of our Universities.
You can now go up to the PhD level in Education in any area of your interest.
As you are already aware, there are many professors of education both serving and retired in Nigeria today.
Can you mention five of them?
3.2.4 National Teachers Institute (NTI) The National Teachers Institute was established in 1976 with its headquarter in Kaduna.
It has branches in all States of the Federation and Abuja.
The Institute is charged with the responsibility of providing courses of instruction leading to the development, up grading and certification of teachers as specified in relevant syllabus using Distance Education Techniques.
103ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE Essentially, the Institute was concerned with the retaining and up grading of unqualified primary school teachers.
However, the Institute is now also involved in equipping graduates without teaching qualification with modern teaching techniques.
In other words, NTI is also involved in the PGDE Distance learning programme which started in the year 2005.
There are many beneficiaries of the programmes offered by NTI in the country today.
Mention at least five people who are products of the NTI managed programmes.
3.2.5 Schools/Faculties of Education in the Polytechnics Some polytechnics established school/faculties of education for the major purpose of training professionally qualified teachers for technical education.
This started during the initial stages of the introduction of 6334 system of education.
At that time, there was an acute shortage of teachers for introductory technology and other commercial courses.
Therefore, the introduction of NCE programme into the polytechnics was a kind of emergency solution to the shortage of technical education teachers.
As at today, there are may Colleges of Education (technical) in addition to the school of vocational and technical education in most of the conventional colleges of education.
In view of this, some polytechnics like the Ibadan Poly has stopped their NCE programme.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1(a) Identify any five teacher education policy statements in Nigeria.
(b) How far have we been able to implement such policy statements?
2.
Discuss the roles of the various teacher education institutions in Nigeria.
4.0 CONCLUSION The National Policy on teacher education refers to the intentions of government on what teacher education should be and how to go about it.
That is, it provides a focus on what type of teachers we need and how to get them trained for the different levels of education.
There are five designated institutions for teacher education in Nigeria as at now.
104 ECE222 MODULE 2 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt • The meaning of Education Policy • The meaning of teacher education policy.
• The policy statements on teacher education in Nigeria • The different educational institutions design for teacher education in Nigeria a.
Colleges of Education b. Faculties of Education c. Institutes of Education d. National Teachers Institute e. Schools of Education in the Polytechnic.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the concepts National Policy on Education.
2.
What are the essential Features of the National Policy on Teacher education?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Fafunwa, A. Babs (1991).
History of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NPS Educational Publishers.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: MRDC 105ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE UNIT 7 PROBLEMS OF TEACHING AND TEACHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Teaching Profession in Nigeria 3.2 Problems of the Teaching Profession and Teacher Education 3.2.1 The Poor Prestige of the Profession 3.2.2 Poor Conditions of Service 3.2.3 Low Self Esteem among Teachers 3.2.4 Inconsistency in Government Policy 3.2.5 Low Output of Teachers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the first six units of this module, you learnt much about the profession of teaching in Nigeria.
From the meaning and characteristics of a profession to the profession of teaching and teacher education, you have been exposed to different aspect of teaching as a profession.
In this unit, we are going to discuss some of the problems associated with the teaching profession and teacher education in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • enumerate the problems associated with the teaching profession in Nigeria • suggest solutions to the problems.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Teaching Profession and Teacher Education in Nigeria In the first two units of this module, you learnt the characteristics of a profession and how teaching could be regarded as a profession.
Some of 106 ECE222 MODULE 2 the characteristics of a profession which qualifies teaching to be classified as a profession include: i.
Long period of Teaching ii.
Members practice the profession freely iii.
Code of conduct guides the practice iv.
Well spelt out condition of service v. Members under the umbrella of a body called Union or Association Similarly, you learnt in one of the units that teacher education is the aspect or component of any educational system charged with the education and training of teachers to acquire the necessary skills and competence of teaching.
Without the acquisition of the skills and competence for teaching, it will be difficult if not impossible to achieve the desired aims and objectives of education generally.
In view of the unique roles which teachers have to play in the successful implementation of the school programmes, government has done much for both the teaching profession and teacher education in Nigeria.
However, as much as efforts have been made to improve the image of the teaching profession as well as modernize and expand the teacher education programme, much is still left to be done.
This has created some problems for the Nigerian teachers both inside and outside the classroom.
We shall now consider the cause of the problems and proffer solutions to them.
3.2 Problems of the Teaching Profession and Teacher Education There are many problems facing the teaching profession in Nigeria.
It may therefore not be possible to enumerate all the problems here.
We shall only discuss the most important ones and suggest solutions to them.
3.2.1 The Poor Prestige of the Profession This appears to be the grand parent of all the problems facing the teaching profession and teachers in Nigeria.
There is probably no group of professionals who have been more scorned and blamed than the school teachers.
This is as a result of many factors which we may not be able to extensively discuss here.
As you learnt in one of the units, teachers were once the most highly respected and honoured workers in Nigeria.
This was probably due to the quality of entrants to the profession then.
That is to say teachers then were among the best products of the Mission Schools in terms of their high academic and moral standards.
107ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE However, the desire for self determination in education and other spheres of life led to the massive expansion in schools and colleges.
This on the other hand led to the recruitment of people without professional teaching qualification to teach in our schools in the process of filling the classrooms with people to cheat rather than teach the pupils.
Men and women of low academic and moral standards were brought into teaching.
So, the teachers who were once seen to be always neat, disciplined, firm, conscientious and morally and socially efficient are now found wanting.
Suddenly, the schools which were well known as serious places for learning have become institutions in which less and less learning takes place.
People now feel there is a fall in standards as a result of the teachers’ inefficiency.
Therefore, the teachers’ prestige has dwindled over the years.
It has become so bad that nobody wants his/her children to become teachers now.
As observed by Akinbote (2001) those who go into the Teachers Colleges now do so because there is no other place to go.
Solution: The solution to this problem is to first restrict the entry into the teaching profession to only those who are professionally qualified and registered.
There is a step in this direction now with the Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria already put in place.
After a period of grace, anyone who is not professionally qualified and registered as such by the TRC cannot teach in any school in Nigeria.
The other solution is to raise the entry qualification and the procedure for admission into the various teacher education programmes in Nigeria.
The present situation whereby only the weak, rejected, the frustrated and reluctant candidates are admitted into the teacher education programmes will not help to raise the prestige of the teaching profession.
This is because, according to Akinbote (2001), the entry qualifications of recruits into a profession tell much about the prestige of that profession.
3.2.2 Poor Conditions of Service When we say the conditions of service of teachers are poor, we do not only mean the salary.
There are some other things like regular and prompt payment of salaries, decent and environmentally friendly place of work among other things which affect the prestige of workers.
Teachers in Nigerian Schools particularly the public primary schools have not enjoyed these conditions of service for many decades now.
Although, the salaries may have been increased considerably in recent years yet, we cannot say they are paid regularly as at when due.
There are many states where teachers’ salaries and allowances are often in arrears.
All these delays and irregularities in teachers’ salaries often 108 ECE222 MODULE 2 force many of them to borrow or to be unable to pay their rents and purchase the basic necessities of life.
In addition to this, many teachers do not have decent chairs, tables and offices to work in their schools.
All these often lead to the poor prestige of teacher in the society.
Solution: The solution is to improve generally the condition of service of teachers.
This could be done through the provision of a special Salary Scale or Structure for teachers, payment of their salaries and allowances regularly as at when due, and making their places of work more worker friendly.
Special allowances should be paid to those who are posted to the rural areas, while basic social amenities should be provided in the schools so that teachers and their pupils could also enjoy the benefits of modern information technology.
3.2.3 Low Self Esteem among Teachers As a result of decades of neglect, scorn and blame, many teachers in Nigeria tend to look down on themselves.
If you ask any of them why they are not having a good physical appearance or some of the basic necessities of life, they are quick to blame their misfortune on the type of profession they have chosen.
In other words, they have a low self esteem.
They tend to carry the Biblical injunction to be humble to the extreme end of self denigration.
Some teachers’ physical appearance cannot command any form of respect or affection from either their pupils or the parents.
This as you learnt in one of the units of this Module is contrary to the teachers of the Colonial/Missionary Era.
You can still learn from your parents or uncles how teachers of those days were respected and admired by their pupils and the general public.
Solution: Thank God some young teachers particularly in the urban centres are now living up to the standard expected of them in terms of their physical appearance.
However, much still need to be done to improve the self image of the teachers.
One of them is the regular payment of their salaries and allowances as mentioned earlier on.
If they receive their salaries promptly, they may be able to meet their needs and thereby have some self confidence.
Also, the teachers should try to improve themselves academically.
When they have high qualification, they may become more confident and assert themselves wherever they may be.
3.24 Inconsistency in Government Policy One of the greatest problems facing Nigeria generally is inconsistency in government policies over the years.
The frequent changes in Government particularly during the military era and the attendant changes in policies have had its effect on education and teachers welfare 109ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE in particular.
In the last two decades, primary education management has changed from the state to the federal and local governments several times.
This has led to the welfare of teachers being subject to inconsistencies as it relates to who pays their salaries.
You will still recall the dark days of primary education in Nigeria between 1991 and 1993 when primary school teachers were on strike for many months in some states.
Solution: There should be continuity in government policy with particular reference to the welfare of teachers.
May be teachers salary at the primary school in particular should be placed under the consolidated fund.
This will ensure regular payment of teachers’ salaries and allowances irrespective of who is in charge at any period of time.
A situation whereby teachers are placed at the mercy of Local Government Chairmen or State Governors is not good for the welfare and morale of teachers.
3.2.5 Low Output of Teachers One of the major problems of teacher education for primary schools in Nigeria according to Taiwo (1983) is the poor qualities of the products and the low output of the teachers.
It is obvious from what is going on around us that there are many teachers who are deficient in both the curriculum content and the methodology of teaching.
Since you can only give what you have, such teachers output will be low.
This is why it is now generally believed that less and less learning is taking place in our schools.
This may in part be due to the quality of enticuts into the teacher education programmes.
In the same way, the quality of their preparation is another thing to worry about since we teach the way we are taught.
Other causes of the low output of teachers is the lack of dedication to duty by many teachers.
The reasons for their not being dedicated are too many for us to list here.
Can you just mention any two reasons why some Nigeria teachers are not dedicated?
Solution: There must be a proper reorientation of teachers right from the teachers colleges.
They should be made to realize that teaching deals with the development of human beings.
Therefore, any carelessness on their part will lead to a chain of negative results in the individual and the society at large.
The next thing is to control the entry into the profession though the admission process into the various Teachers Education Programmes.
Only those who are academically socially and emotionally suitable should be allowed into the various teacher education programmes.
There 110 ECE222 MODULE 2 is no point in a crash, programme that will produce half baked, third- rate, unsure and reluctant teachers.
At the end of the day, their productivity will not only be low but they would have done a lot of damage to the individual learners, the education system and the society at large.
Therefore, only those who, like in the Colonial/Missionary period are found capable should be admitted into the teacher education programmes and invariably teaching.
Finally, the condition of service of teachers should be made better to boost their morale.
When they are comfortable, they will exhibit some self confidence which on the other hand will reflect on their attitude to work.
The head teachers and the school inspectors should do their supervision and inspection of classroom teaching of the teachers regularly.
They should be there to put the teachers right and not only to be fault finders.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Identify five problems facing teachers and the teaching profession in Nigeria.
2.
Explain the causes of the problems.
4.0 CONCLUSION Teacher education and the teaching profession are facing many problems in Nigeria.
Unlike the Colonial/Missionary days, teachers no longer enjoy the prestige and the honour associated with their work.
teaching is one of the most scorned and blamed professions in Nigeria.
Therefore, efforts should be made to connect the anomalies and restore teaching to its former position of honor and respect in the society.
Right from the recruitment of intakes into the various teacher education programmes to their appointment as class teachers, proper screening of teachers should take place.
The conditions of service of teachers should be improved while teachers should improve their self image.
They should stop looking down on themselves.
The school Heads and Inspectors should intensify their supervision of teachers.
All these will go a long way in improving the image of the profession and also the quality of education in the country.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt five major problems facing teacher education and the teaching profession in Nigeria.
These are: 111ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE a.
Poor prestige of the profession b.
Poor condition of service c. Low self-esteem among teachers d. Inconsistency in Government policies e. Low output of teachers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the cause of the poor prestige of teachers in Nigeria?
2.
Suggest ways of bringing the past glory, honour and dignity back to teachers and the teaching profession in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote O.
(2001).
Problems of Poor Quality in Primary School Teacher Preparation: A Case Study of Nigeria’s Colleges of Education.
African Journal of Educational Planning and Policy Studies; 1(1) 23-39.
Akinbote, O.
(1999).
NCE Teacher Education Programme for Nigeria Primary Schools: Expectations for the 21st Century in Abimbade, A.
(Ed).
Teaching and Teacher Preparation in the 21st Century, Ibadan: Department of Teacher Education, University of Ibadan.
112 ECE222 MODULE 2 MODULE 2 THE TEACHER IN THE CLASSROOM Unit 1 Qualities of a Good Teacher Unit 2 Behavioural Job Expectations for Teachers Unit 3 Learner Characteristics and Teacher Interactions Unit 4 The Teaching/Learning Process Unit 5 Planning to Teach Unit 6 Teachers’ and Pupils’ Questions Unit 7 Keeping up to Date in Teaching The first unit tells you the qualities expected of a teacher.
It further introduces you to those things you can do to make you the pupils and the general public respect and admire you.
In the second unit, you are going to be introduced to the behavioural job expectations of a teacher.
Unit three discusses some learners’ characteristics that must be taken into consideration for effective teaching and learning to take place.
Unit four discusses the nature of child-centred and teacher-centred education.
It further discusses their implications for effective teaching and learning.
The fifth unit introduces you to lesson note preparation and why a good teacher should always prepare his/her lesson note.
In the sixth unit, you will learn why teachers and pupils ask questions in the classroom.
You will also learn how to ask good questions and answer pupils’ questions.
The last unit discusses the importance of self development and improvement.
It also gives some steps on how the teacher can keep up to date in both the curriculum content and methodology of teaching.
UNIT 1 QUALITIES OF A GOOD TEACHER CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Personal Qualities of a Good Teacher 3.2 Neat and Clear Physical Stability 3.3 Moral and Emotional Stability 113ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 3.4 Resourcefulness 3.5 Self Confidence 3.6 Proven Integrity 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every profession has certain traits or qualities expected of its practitioners.
In other words, there are certain things which they must do before they can be regarded as skillful, competent and effective.
In this unit, you are going to learn what qualities you should possess to become a skillful, competent and effective teacher.
All those things that will make you to be respected and liked by the learners and the general public as a teacher will be discussed in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list and explain five personal qualities of a good teacher • discuss ways of developing the good qualities by individual teachers.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Personal Qualities of a Good Teacher Teachers are at the heart of any strategy or efforts that may be put in place to improve the performance of the learners at all levels of education.
Therefore, if teachers are to exhibit the skill, competence, creativity and dedication that could enhance the success of the learners, they must posses certain personal qualities.
As we have seen in one of the earlier units, the teacher does not teach by words of mouth alone.
A teacher teaches with his/her total personality.
This includes his physical appearance, attitude and behaviours, mental ability, self-confidence and moral integrity among others.
Let us now discuss some of these personal characteristics and how to achieve them as identified by Afamah et al (1991).
114 ECE222 MODULE 2 3.2 Neat and Clean Physical Appearance One of the first qualities expected of a good teacher is that he must be neat and clean always.
In his or her appearance, the teacher must present a model or an example of neatness to his pupils.
This is probably why people say as is the teacher so are his pupils.
Since pupils generally regard their teachers as their role models, it is necessary for teachers to give them a good model to imitate or copy.
If therefore the teacher always dresses shabbily and carelessly, it is most likely that many of the learners will copy him/her.
This is because they will think that he/she is doing the right thing.
A teacher who is neat and clean in his/her appearance will command love and respect of the learners, their parents and even colleagues.
One of the reasons why teachers are looked down upon in Nigeria is because of the way many of them dress shabbily.
Teachers are not the worst paid workers in the country hence they should not appear to be too poor to put on good cloths and shoes.
Remember that teachers in the good olden days were always neat and clean.
Infact, they were among the best if not the best or the neatest workers in their communities.
They were therefore well respected, loved and admired by all.
The teachers then were able to correct pupils who were dirty and often sent them home.
It is bad to see teachers with their hairs unkempt, long finger nails, torn shirts or shoes.
Above all it is a shame to find teachers with dirty and smelling mouth.
Such teachers can not and will never command the respect of even their learners.
How should a teacher therefore appear in the school?
When you were told earlier on that the teacher should be neat and clean, it does not mean she should over do it.
He/she should not appear as a masquerade as a result of too much of make ups.
In this way, you do not need to go for the most expensive cloths or shoes before you can appear neat.
What we are saying here is that the teacher should appear simple and clean in what ever he or she wears.
For example somebody can wear cloths made from “Adire” and appear neater and more attractive than one who puts on lace or other more expensive cloths that are not clean or neat.
So, the teacher can be neat and clean even in the so called cheap materials.
What you should note in your physical appearance as a teacher is that you should not distract the attention of your pupils.
When you ‘over dress’ or ‘under dress’, you are likely going to distract the attention of your pupils from what you are teaching them.
This is not good for the learners as it may affect their moral, social and mental development.
115ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 3.3 Moral and Emotional Stability The way a teacher behaves or reacts to certain issues or things under certain conditions will go a long way in describing the type of person he/she is.
Therefore the way a teacher comports himself/herself inside or outside the classroom will affect the public image of teachers and the teaching profession generally.
Somebody sometimes ago said that medical students are usually the best behaved students in the University.
This according to the person is because you hardly can find medical students particularly in their clinical years participating in protests or riots on campuses.
This may be responsible for the high respect and admiration people have for the medical doctors and the profession of medicine.
How then does a teacher cultivate good moral and emotional stability?
This is very simple.
For example, the teacher must be punctual and hardworking.
He must be honest, kind and fair in his dealings with the pupils.
He must respect and obey his/her superiors.
He must also respect his pupils by not using abusive or derogatory language on them.
He/She must not tell lies to his pupils.
A teacher who tells the pupils to inform the Head Teacher that he/she has gone to the toilet when in actual fact he/she has gone out of the school is not only telling lies but also teaching the pupils to tell lies.
Above all, the teacher should be able to control his emotions in the face of provocation.
He/she should be able to avoid shouting at the pupils or colleagues when they annoy him/her.
The philosophy of a good teacher which we should all take to is that a good teacher does not take a rash decision when angry.
This means, when angry, the teacher should neither talk nor react violently.
As a philosopher once suggested when you are provoked by people’s actions or words do not say or do anything until after counting at least 1 – 10 silently and slowly.
Why is it not good for a teacher to talk or do anything when angry?
Provide an answer to this question.
3.4 Resourcefulness What does it mean to say that a good teacher should be resourceful?
There are many teachers in our schools today who do not make use of any instructional materials except the chalkboard and possibly the textbooks in their lessons.
When you ask them why, they often complain that the school authorities have not supplied the necessary materials for them to use.
Such teachers that are always waiting for the school authorities to supply them with the necessary instructional materials to use in their lessons are not resourceful.
116 ECE222 MODULE 2 A resourceful teacher will therefore be able to make use of the vast resources in the environment which could be used in his/her lessons.
Most of the waste’ materials in the environment either at home, in the office or in the school can be used to enhance the effective teaching and learning of different subjects in the school.
These waste materials do not cost the teacher anything.
He only needs to identify such materials and be able to keep them for use in his/her lessons.
At times, the learners could even be asked to bring them from home in advance.
Such things brought to the school are sometimes a relieve to the parents who may not know what to do with such materials.
In many homes, such materials have become a sort of nuisance to them.
They therefore gladly release such materials to their children to take to school.
By so doing, a lot of potentially good instructional materials will be available in the class.
What the teacher will need to do is to identify which one will be relevant/useful for a particular subject or topic.
On the long run, it will be discovered that it may not be necessary to wait for the school authorities to supply most of the instructional materials for use in the school.
As we are all aware there are many things to be done in the school.
Since available funds are limited, and there are many competing demands, it may not be possible to supply all the needed instructional materials to schools.
Even the private schools cannot claim to be able to supply all the necessary materials.
It has therefore become necessary for the teacher to be resourceful by improvising some of the instructional materials for their lessons.
This improvisation could be done from the array of waste materials around us.
Identify some of the waste materials in your environment that could be used as instructional materials.
Ask the pupils to bring any of them that are available in their homes and environments and see how they will respond.
3.5 Self Confidence A good teacher must have confidence in his own ability.
This means that a good teacher must be very sure of his/her own ability.
When a teacher is intellectually capable to teach his/her subject in the class with the appropriate methods, materials and techniques, he will radiate self confidence.
This self confidence in his/her ability which is demonstrated in his/her effective and efficient method of teaching will help him to command the respect of his pupils.
Many teachers do not know that their pupils, however, young do appreciate and recognize a teacher who is a master of his subject.
When a teacher is good in both the content and methodology of his subject, he will not only be respected and admired by the pupils.
He will also stimulate the pupils’ interest in that particular subject.
Many students have developed either a great interest in or 117ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE dislike for some subjects as a result of the teachers knowledge and method of teaching.
Can you mention a subject you like or dislike as a result of the knowledge/method of teaching it by the teacher?
How then can a teacher develop the self confidence in his own abilities so as to command the respect of the learners?
There are many things a teacher can do to become self confident.
The first thing is to keep on reading/studying.
According to a popular saying, a candle can only provide light when it keeps on burning.
Therefore, a teacher will only be able to give new knowledge/ideas to his pupils if he/she keeps on reading/studying.
A teacher like a medical doctor or lawyer needs to keep abreast of developments in his field of specialization.
The only way to do this is to keep on reading and studying.
A teacher should know better than his/her learners in any topic or subject he/she is going to teach.
In these days of great breakthroughs in knowledge, there are new ideas, facts and principles being generated on daily basis.
The only way by which teachers can get this is by reading journals, textbooks and other publications.
More importantly now is the use of internet for information gathering.
There is no area of knowledge that cannot be accessed through internet.
The other way to develop his/her self confidence is to improve on his/her academic qualification.
This can be done through in-service programmes such as attending workshops, conferences or seminars organised by various institutions and organizations.
It could also be by full – time study leave with pay or without pay.
There are also many part-time or distance learning programmes which anyone can make use of now in improving on the academic and professional qualifications.
Therefore for a teacher to radiate self confidence in his/her own ability, he/she must keep on learning.
He/she must not regard him/herself as Mr. Know all in the class.
There is always room for improvement hence the teacher must not be lazy and depend solely on the knowledge acquired in the college or University a couple of year ago.
Research findings have shown that five years after leaving an institution, an individual must haven lost about 50% of the knowledge acquired.
The only way to keep the knowledge and even add to it is to keep on reading.
It is only when a teacher has acquired the necessary experience and expertise in his/her discipline that he develops self-confidence.
A teacher that is not sure of his/her ability cannot radiate self confidence.
Invariably such a teacher will not command the respect and admiration of the learners.
Such a teacher will not attract students into studying that subject later in life.
118 ECE222 MODULE 2 3.6 Proven Integrity The teacher should be a person of proven integrity so that he can command the respect of the learners and members of the community.
This simply means that a teacher should not be a person of questionable character.
As said earlier on, a teacher should be a model for his her pupils to emulate.
This as you learnt in one of the earlier units was why the Missionaries screened the teachers very well before they were even allowed into the teachers colleges.
As a result of the high moral standards exhibited by teachers in those days, they were not only loved and admired but also respected.
This also explains why teachers were always nominated to serve in various bodies responsible for the welfare and general development of the communities.
In addition, many parents willingly asked their children to go and stay with the teachers in order to acquire the high moral standards often exhibited by the teachers.
In short, we could say that although the teachers in the olden days were not known and respected for their material possessions but their proven integrity.
Find out from your parents, uncles or grandparents how may teachers owned cars or houses in the past.
Are the present day teachers of high moral integrity?
Now let us identify how high moral integrity of teachers can be ensured.
The first thing is to screen people well before they are allowed into the teachers colleges.
A situation whereby the doors of our teacher education institutions are thrown open to all without any discrimination is not good enough.
Moreover, a situation whereby only the rejected, frustrated, the left over and the never do-wells go in for teacher education programmes cannot help us to have men and women of proven integrity going into teaching.
Rather than allow just anyone into teaching, we should screen them for certain qualities which are essential for a successful career in teaching.
This was how the teachers in the 50s and 60s were selected to produce men and women of proven integrity who went into the teachers colleges and invariably the teaching profession.
The men and women of shaddy character in teaching in recent years is a reflection of the weaknesses inherent in our crash programmes in teacher education.
This must be discontinued if we are to have men and women of proven integrity in teaching.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Identify and explain five personal qualities expected of a good teacher.
2.
How can any of these personal qualities be developed in teachers?
119ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 4.0 CONCLUSION In order for teachers to efficiently and effectively perform their roles in the school, they should possess some personal good qualities.
Without the personal qualities being highly noticeable in teachers, it will be difficult for them not only to command the respect of the learners and members of the society but also to demonstrate high professional skills and competence.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • A good teacher must be neat and clean • Morally and Emotionally Stable • Be resourceful • Must have self confidence • Be a person of proven integrity.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Enumerate five personal characteristics associated with an ideal teacher.
2.
What personal characteristics would you look for in trying to interview candidates for a teaching job?
Give reasons for your answer.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Amafah, J.E, Osaghae P.O.
and Ekpo E.J (1991).
Manual for Effective Management of Primary Education in Nigeria, Kaduna Min of Educ.
(Special Programme Unit).
120 ECE222 MODULE 2 UNIT 2 BEHAVIOURAL JOB EXPECTATIONS FOR TEACHERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Behavioral Job Expectations 3.2 Varying Methods of Teaching 3.3 Effective Communication 3.4 Fairness and Firmness 3.5 Motivation and Encouragement 3.6 Giving and Marking Assignments 3.7 Keeping Accurate Records of Pupil Profession 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt some of the essential personal qualities of a good teacher.
There we identified five of the good qualities a teacher should possess to make him/her competent and effective.
In this unit, we are going to continue our discussion on the qualities expected of a good teacher.
We shall discuss the behavioural job expectations for teachers.
That is those things which are expected of a teacher in his day to day classroom interactions with the learners.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list five job expectations of an ideal school teacher • differentiate between the personal qualities and job expectations • of a teacher.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Behavioural Job Expectation Behavioural job expectations for teachers refer to what teachers are expected to do in the course of their day to day classroom interactions with the learners.
They are the specific things teachers can do 121ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE physically, socially or psychologically to enhance effecting teaching and learning.
As you are aware, the purpose of teaching is to promote learning.
Therefore whatever teachers do to help or make learning permanent among the learners is the behavioural job expectation for teachers.
Behavioural job expectation can also be referred to as the responsibility, of teachers: let us now consider some of the behavioural job expectations for teachers in the following sections.
3.2 Varying Methods of Teaching ‘Monotony kills interest’ is a popular saying by teachers.
This simply means that when a teacher uses the same method or technique of teaching all the time without any change, it makes the lesson very uninteresting.
It means such teachers do not know how to vary their methods no matter the subject or topic, the age and ability of the learners or even the particular period of the day, they are teaching.
Therefore, such teachers often discover that their pupils show little or no interest in their lessons.
No matter how much the teacher may wish to force the pupils to learn, he/she will just find the pupils not doing well.
At the end of the lesson, the teacher may become frustrated and angry with the pupils.
He may blame the pupils and even insult them by calling them names such as, coconut heads, lazy drones, and so on.
In order to stimulate his pupils’ interest and enrich their learning, the teacher must vary his methods and techniques of teaching.
He must realize that when the teacher does everything himself the same way often, the pupils will not learn.
Even when the pupils are made to do the same thing all the time, they become disinterested in such lessons.
This implies that the teacher must be creative and innovative.
Apart from varying his methods, he should be able to improvise and use different types of instructional materials for different topics or subjects.
The use of the same instructional materials for different lessons for many days kills the interest of the pupils in such materials.
As you should know, when the pupils loose interest, they will not pay attention to such lessons.
The task of the teacher in this regard is that he must get to know what is of interest to the learners and harness it to hold their attention from time to time.
3.3 Effective Communication One of the greatest weapons of teaching is effective communication.
As once mentioned the essence of teaching is learning.
However, for effective teaching to take place there must be effective communication.
Effective communication is the process of relating well with the pupils in the most suitable and appropriate language.
Language is a very 122 ECE222 MODULE 2 powerful, organised and rich medium of communication which distinguishes man from other creatures.
Other means of communication by writing and reading are indeed based on the use of language.
In order for the teacher to communicate effectively with not only the pupils but also their parents and colleagues, the following must be taken into consideration: i.
The language must be simple and clear: It is necessary for the teacher to talk at the level of the learners.
He must be simple and clear in his discussions with the pupils.
Whenever he makes a point or asks a question, he should be very simple and clear in his choice of words.
This will prevent misinterpretation or lack of understanding of what has been said.
ii.
The language must be polite: Every pupil in the class has his or her own personality that must be respected.
The same is true of parents and other colleagues.
Since we all like to be respected, derogatory remarks or comments on the pupils should be avoided at all costs.
Do not because a child is weak academically and therefore insult or subject him to ridicule in the class.
We should therefore follow the popular sayings that if you cannot inflate the ego of your pupils, do not deflate the ego.
Be polite in your communication with the pupils, parents and colleagues.
That is the ideal thing.
iii.
Communication must be interesting and child friendly: Whether we are using verbal or visual communication, we must try to arouse the interest and attention of the learners.
The teacher must exercise good judgment in ensuring that whatever he is to communicate to the learners are not only well presented but also well organized and well-timed.
The teacher as said earlier on must understand the nature, needs and interests of the learners in communicating with them.
Each learner must be treated in his own special way.
3.4 Fairness and Firmness All the pupils in the class should be treated equally.
As much as possible, you should not show special interest love or hatred for any particular pupil.
In class tests, assignments or examinations, the teacher must be fair to all.
There should be no favoritism for any particular child.
Everyone must be treated on his/her own merit.
In the same way, every teacher should be firm.
You should not be making rules you cannot enforce in the class.
It is indeed better not to make rules than to make rules that cannot be enforced.
When you are 123ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE enforcing the rules, you must be fair to all.
Do not enforce rules for one group and relax it for another.
You must be seen to be just in all that you do so as to command the love and respect of the learners.
Remember also that it is better to make a few rules that can be enforced than to make many rules which you as the teacher may even forget.
3.5 Motivation and Encouragement As a good teacher, you must be ready to motivate and encourage your pupils to greater heights.
Even when it is obvious that the learners are not doing well you can still use your good knowledge of individual differences among the learners to encourage them.
As we learnt earlier on, it is not good for teachers to frustrate their learners or demoralize them with their words, actions or inactions.
Always motivate them to greater efforts.
There are two types of motivation.
These are intrinsic and extrinsic motivation: i. Intrinsic Motivation: This can also be referred to as internal or self motivation.
This occurs when a child decides on his/her own to do something like reading a book not necessarily with any force or pressure from anybody.
He does it out of interest.
Okoye (1981) has suggested that we should resort to intrinsic motivational conditions that are conducive to learning.
There are many ways by which we can help and encourage our students to develop self – interest in their studies.
Can you mention one or two ways of doing so?
ii.
Extrinsic Motivation on the other hand is the externally imposed motivation.
This could be from the teachers or parents in the form of rewards and punishments.
For instance, a child that reads because he will be punished if he does not read may not really learn anything in the process.
Let us take another example of a teacher who promised to give pupils who do certain things well may find that the children may not do well next time if there is no gift or prize.
We all know that motivation is necessary, including the extrinsic, but it should be done with care.
As suggested earlier on we should let the pupils see the joy and satisfaction inherent in self motivation.
Therefore, as much as possible, we should encourage self motivation (intrinsic) and discourage extrinsic motivation.
124 ECE222 MODULE 2 3.6 Giving and Marking Assignments The giving and marking of assignments is one of the great responsibilities of school teachers.
The purpose of assignments is to give the pupils more practice on whatever they have learnt.
Assignments also help to keep the learners busy at home and to find out things on their own.
Research findings have shown that children who are given assignments are marked regularly do better in specific school subjects than those that are not given at all or those that are given assignments but not corrected by the teacher.
There are many teachers who give assignments to their pupils either in the class or as home work for the sake of doing so.
In other words, some teachers do it to while away the time or because their boss or parents of the pupils want it.
As a result, such assignments are never graded or marked with the necessary corrective feedback to the learners.
This is not good at all as the purpose of giving assignments will be defeated by doing so.
Here are a few things you should know about assignments.
i.
Assignments can be given as a follow up work on what has just been learnt in the class.
In this case, the learners are given more practice on what they have learnt in the school.
The advantages of this type of assignment are many.
Try to list some of the advantages.
ii.
Assignments can also be given to prepare the learners for a new topic.
In this case, the learners are given a sort of home work to prepare them for a new topic to be learnt or discussed in class.
All the teacher does here is to challenge the learners to find out certain things by themselves.
This is necessary because as noted by Wilson (1978), the teacher must be concerned with providing experiences and opportunities from which the pupils learn for themselves.
Whatever the nature or type of assignment, one thing is clear, and that is to enhance pupils learning and knowledge.
However, whenever the assignment is given, it must be marked.
If for whatever reason a teacher knows he cannot mark any assignment, it is advisable not to give such assignment to the learners.
One other thing to note is that a teacher should not give too many assignments which he may not have the time to correct.
Give a few but relevant assignments at a time and do not give assignments as punishment to the learners.
Many teachers often give too many assignments to their students as a means of punishing them for one 125ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE offence or the other.
This is a wrong use of assignments and it should not be engaged in at all by the teacher.
3.7 Keeping Accurate Records of Pupils Performance Record keeping is one of the greatest and most important responsibilities of a good teacher.
Records are necessary because they provide the necessary indices for the assessment of pupils’ performance and the school.
It is also an important index for planning for the future progress of the child.
This makes the accurate keeping of records of pupils’ performance very essential for the teacher.
In addition to the pupils’ performance, there are some other vital records that must be kept by each teacher.
In other words, there are different types of records to be kept by teachers for the efficient administration of education let us briefly enumerate some of the records.
School records can be categorized into two.
These are: i.
The statutory records: which are records that should be kept in all schools as stipulated by law.
They include the following: a.
Admission register b.
Attendance register c. Continuous Assessment records d. Log Book e. Punishment Book f. Diary of Work g. Lesson Note h. Time Table i.
Time Book ii.
The non-statutory records: These are records that are not compulsory under the law for teachers to keep.
However any school that feels they are needed to enhance their administration can keep them.
They include the following: a.
Staff Records b.
Accounts Records c. Inventory Book d. Minutes Book e. Visitors Book etc.
You can find out the uses of these records and who keeps or completes them in the school.
126 ECE222 MODULE 2 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
What do you understand by job expectations of a teacher 2.
Identify five job expectations of a teacher.
4.0 CONCLUSION The behavioural job expectations of a teacher refer to the responsibilities which a teacher has to discharge in the school to enhance teaching and learning.
The job expectations are different in a way from the personal qualities of a good teacher discussed in the previous unit.
In the last unit, we discussed the characteristics which a good teacher must possess.
On the other hand, we have in this unit examined some of the responsibilities of a teacher in the school.
These responsibilities must be performed skillfully in order to promote effective teaching and learning in the classrooms.
The personal qualities of the teacher may however affect the behavioural job expectations.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the responsibilities of a teacher which must be discharged diligently and skillfully in order to promote effective learning in schools.
These responsibilities or job expectations include: • Varying method of teaching • Effective communication • Fairness and firmness • Motivation and encouragement of learners • Giving and marking assignments • Keeping accurate records of pupils performance 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the job expectations of a teacher?
2.
Explain with relevant examples the differences between the personal qualities or characteristics of a good teacher and the job expectations of a teacher.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Amafah, J.C. Osaghere, P.O.
and Ekpo E.I, (1991).
Manual for Effective Management of Primary Education in Nigeria.
Kaduna: Fed Min of Edus.
Special Programme.
Dodd, W.A.
(1978).
The Teacher at Work.
London: Oxford University Press.
127ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE UNIT 3 LEARNER CHARACTERISTICS AND TEACHER INTERACTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Learner Characteristics 3.2 Gender 3.3 Ethnicity 3.4 Parental Background 3.5 Disability Styles 3.6 Disability 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last two units you concentrated on teacher characteristics which can make them more efficient and effective in their teaching.
It is also necessary for you to learn some of the characteristics of the learners that must be taken into consideration for effective teaching and learning to take place.
Specifically, you are going to learn in this unit some student characteristics and teacher interactions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • list some of the students characteristics that can affect the teaching and learning process • explain how any of the characteristics could be adequately taken care of by the teacher.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Learner Characteristics Teaching a group of learners from different backgrounds is a big challenge to teachers.
According to Katz cited in Berns (2004), teacher – student interaction is specific and limited in that it relates to school matters.
Teachers must exhibit impartiality toward individual learners as their scope of responsibility is toward the group.
Therefore, the 128 ECE222 MODULE 2 relationship between the teacher and students which in turn affect the teaching and learning process include gender, ethnicity, parental background, learning styles and disability.
Let us now discuss each of the characteristics as much as possible.
3.2 Gender Research has shown that the teacher-learner interaction differs according to the gender of the learners.
As noted by Berns (2004), it has been found that when children request attention, teachers generally respond to boys with instructions and to girls with nurturance.
Similarly, girls receive more attention when they are physically close to the teacher whereas boys are given attention from a distance.
He went further to assert that boys receive considerable criticism for failing to obey the rules while girls receive criticism related to their performance.
These have been found to affect the performance of children in certain school subjects particularly as from the secondary school level.
Do some pupils therefore perform better than others in certain school subjects as a result of the type of attention received from their teacher?
Try to find out the answer to this question.
You must however note that as a professionally trained teacher, you must foster assertive and affiliative skills in both girls and boys.
There should be no special or preferential treatment of the pupils on the account of their gender.
You should also watch out for certain aspects of the school curriculum or textbooks that are gender stereotypes.
There should be no particular skill or activity specially reserved for either the boys or girls alone.
All pupils should be given equal opportunity to perform.
3.3 Ethnicity One of the greatest social problems in Nigeria and possibly in other parts of the world to day is ethnicity or what some people refer to as racial or tribal sentiments.
The classroom has not been spared of this dangerous and inhuman factor.
Sometimes either consciously or unconsciously.
Teachers and learners bring the ethnicity factor into play in their attitudes, motives, behaviours and interaction patterns.
Although this may not be too pronounced at the primary school level, it is often exhibited at the upper levels of education.
The moment a student is not from the particular ethnic group where the institution is located that student is looked down upon, or discriminated against in many ways.
Have you experienced such a thing before?
How did you feel then?
As a teacher, you must note that it is your role to help implement the philosophy of Nigerian education which gives equal opportunity to all 129ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE citizens irrespective of their background.
You should help to build on our affirmation that our national strength and unity come from our diversity.
You must therefore be sensitive to all the variety of customs in your class by listening to and respecting the views of all the pupils.
This can go a long way in helping the pupils to learn to be tolerant and respectful of others.
You must mind your language particularly in your questions and how you attend to pupils questions.
You will learn more about how to handle pupils’ questions later.
3.4 Parental Background Parents differ in their educational, social and economic status.
Some are highly literate and first class professionals, while others may be artisans, farmers, petty traders and so on.
Research findings have shown that parents, background often affect not only the academic performance of the pupils but also their socialization.
If you are teaching in an urban area, you must have had the privilege of having pupils from the different backgrounds in your class.
As a professional teacher you have to treat all the pupils in your class equally.
You may be tempted at times to feel more favourably disposed to one or two pupils as a result of their relatively ‘good’ background.
Do all you can to resist the temptation and place all of them at the same level?
Except for the purpose of giving the individual learner the special attention that he or she needs as a result of special disability or ability, they must be treated equally.
What you learnt in the last two units should ring in your ears always that a good teacher must be friendly, kind, just, firm and fair to all.
This is a teacher’s motto for all seasons.
3.5 Learning Styles Children have preferred ways of learning just as teachers have their own preferred ways of teaching.
While some children like working in groups, others like listening to lectures and others like individual work.
Research findings have suggested that children develop their learning or cognitive styles based on the socialization they received in their homes and peer groups.
Therefore, some children have analytical cognitive style while others exhibit a holistic concrete social approach to learning.
The latter group of learners, often referred to as field dependent, works well in groups and perceives things in terms of the larger context.
On the other hand, the analytics who are also referred to as field independent learners relate well to impersonal, abstract information independent of the context (Berns 2004).
130 ECE222 MODULE 2 Since children learn differently, it is recommended that teachers should adapt their teaching styles to meet the needs of their learners.
This is saying here that the individual differences of the learners must be taken into consideration.
This is not the type of differences we talked against in the discussion of gender, home, and ethnic differences.
It is a matter of doing things that will promote effective learning for each child.
As a professional teacher, you should do whatever is possible to ensure that all the pupils are helped to realize and develop their potentialities.
No child should be held down, or made to go at a rate too high for him/her.
Every child must be allowed to go at his/her own rate.
3.6 Disability The United Nations General Assembly has adopted certain declarations as the rights of the child which all member Nations including Nigeria have endorsed.
One of the rights of the child in the declaration is the right to special care of handicapped.
This is in addition to the right that every child is entitled to free education at least up to the primary level.
Individual countries also have special laws to protect all children including the handicapped.
There is a greater awareness now than in the past on the need to send all children to school irrespective of their physical conditions or disabilities.
Although, there are special schools for the handicapped, yet not all towns and villages have them.
This implies then that you will always find children with one form of disability or the other in your class.
Although you may not find pupils with total blindness or deafness, yet this does not rule out the possibility of having those who are partially deaf or blind in your class.
In addition you may find other categories of disabilities among your pupils.
The question now is, how do you handle such children so that they could also be assisted to develop their potentialities like the normal children?
As mentioned in the last section, you must take the individual differences of each learner into consideration in order to assist them.
You must have probably heard the popular assertion that there is nobody who is not educable and there is ability in disability.
The problem is for the teacher to find out how best to assist the individuals to learn.
The first thing for you as a teacher is to identify the children with disabilities in your class.
For example, it is easy to identify pupils with hearing difficulty or those with short or long sightedness.
When a child is always turning aside to you to hear well or always coming from the back seat to look at what is written on the chalk board, you easily identify the problem here.
In this case a rearrangement of their sitting position in the class may solve the problem.
131ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE There are however more complex disabilities which could be mental, emotional or social.
In such cases, you may have to modify your teaching methods and environment to suit their particular disabilities.
Hallan and Kauffman cited in Berns (2004) have suggested how the teaching environment can be modified to include the following.
i.
Individual instruction where children abilities rather than prescribed academic content provide the basis for teaching techniques.
ii.
Adaptation of the curriculum to various learning styles, whereby visual, auditory and tactile learners are motivated to succeed.
iii.
Collaboration with various professionals whereby services such as medical, physical, and speech therapy and counseling are provided.
iv.
Peer tutoring whereby children with greater abilities help those who are in need.
In some of your courses, you will learn the various methods of teaching and special education.
However, it is necessary for us to note here that the children with disabilities should not be placed in restrictive environment as much as possible.
When such children are in your class with the normal children, you must provide the appropriate interactive activities which make them feel accepted.
In a way, this encourages cooperation, particularly when you allow them to work in small groups.
When children work together in groups with both disabled and non- disabled, they learn problem solving techniques and to constructively work with others.
Children without disabilities can reinforce certain behaviours in children with disabilities and vise versa.
You as the teacher can also through your direct instruction provide an opportunity for close social interaction in the class.
Therefore as your learners receive instructions from you, you also learn to be sensitive to their needs, interests and problems.
Above all, both the teacher and the learners develop communication skills which in the long run promote self-confidence, self esteem and better academic achievement.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Mention five learner characteristics that may affect classroom interaction 2.
Why should teachers not discriminate against the learners on the basis of their characteristics?
132 ECE222 MODULE 2 4.0 CONCLUSION Learners vary in terms of gender, ethnicity, home background, learning styles abilities and disabilities.
You as a teacher should not discriminate against the pupils on the bases of their characteristics.
It is your duty as a teacher to provide the opportunity for equal chances for close interaction among the learners and with you.
They must also be given equal opportunities to develop their hidden talents and potentials.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt the characteristics of learners and how they affect the teachers’ interaction with them.
You have also learnt how the teacher should handle them so as not to discriminate against any learner on the basis of their characteristics.
The characteristics discussed here are: 1.
Gender which deals with whether a learner is a boy or a girl.
2.
Ethnicity which is about the particular tribal or ethnic group a learner comes from e.g.
Hausa, Ibo or Yoruba.
3.
Parental/Family/Home Background.
This deals with the academic, economic, political or social background of the learners parents.
4.
Learning styles which refer to the preferred ways of learning by children.
Some children have analytical cognitive styles while others have holistic concrete social approach to learning.
5. disability which refer to the physical mental, social or emotional state of the learner which is not normal.
There are various degrees of disability among school children which may not be enough reason for the teacher to discriminate against them.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the five major characteristics of school children.
2.
How should a teacher interact with the learners so as not to discriminate against them on the basis of their characteristics?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Berns, R.M.
(2004).
Child, Family, School, Community: Socialization and Support.
(Sixth Edition) Belmont: Thomson Wads Worth.
133ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE UNIT 4 THE TEACHING LEARNING PROCESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Teaching and Learning 3.2 Teachers Pupils Relationship 3.3 Creating a Learner Friendly Classroom 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt the general philosophies of teaching and learning.
In this unit, you are going to learn the types of relationships that exist between the teacher and the learners.
The implications of such relationships to effective teaching and learning will be discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept child – centred and teacher centred education • discuss the implications of each mode as they affect teacher- learner relationship for effective teaching and learning in schools.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Teaching and Learning Whenever the learners do badly in their studies, it is often assumed to be their fault.
In other words teachers are often quick to say that the pupils are not serious, they are lazy and so on.
Rarely could teachers find faults in their own teaching.
Although, the causes of poor performance or failure among learners are complex, yet one could say that poor performance by the learners tend to indicate that something is wrong with the child’s capacity to learn as well as the teaching provided.
Therefore, it could be said that good academic performance is a product of effective teaching and learning.
Effective teaching and learning on the other hand is a product of good teacher – pupils relationship in the classroom.
In other words the types of relationship or interactions that 134 ECE222 MODULE 2 go on in the classroom to a great extent determine the learning out come of the learners.
In one of the units in Module 1, you learnt that teaching is a conscious or deliberate effort on the part of a more experienced person to impact knowledge into a less experienced person.
Now let us find out what learning is and the conditions necessary for learning.
Learning is generally defined as a relatively permanent change in behaviour as a result of experience.
In this regard, the change in the behaviour of a drunkard cannot be regarded as learning since such a change in behaviour is not permanent.
On the other hand we can say that learning has taken place in the case of a student of Music who could not play the piano on his first day in the Department of Music.
However, after attending the Music lectures where she was taught how to play piano, and is now able to play it, we can say learning has taken place.
This is evident in the fact that the student can repeat the action – playing the piano if asked to do so.
The drunkard after a few days could even be embarrassed if asked to repeat what he said or did when he was drunk.
Therefore we can say that a learnt behaviour can be reproduced voluntarily.
The experiences which according to Akinbote (2005) leads to learning include reading, playing and observing.
Such experience may be acquired individually or in groups.
Thus we can say that learning involves activity on the part of the learner as a result of motivation.
This now brings us to the conditions necessary for learning to take place.
There are three of such conditions for us to discuss briefly here: a. Readiness/Maturation: Readiness is a very important condition for any meaningful learning to take place.
This implies that learning will take place only when a person is ready or mature enough for the particular thing to be learnt.
For example, you cannot teach a child to write, sing, jump or drive until he is mature enough or ready for it.
b.
Motivation is necessary for learning because in life, there must be things serving as incentives or drives which force people to do certain things.
Sometimes, students must see some value in or need for what they are doing before they can really learn.
There must therefore be some motivation for the learners in the classroom since motivated learners learn better than the unmotivated ones.
See our discussion in Unit 2 on the types of motivation.
135ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE c. Activity is the third condition for learning to take place.
This is because activity helps to generate interest which on the other hand promotes meaningful and more permanent learning.
Research findings have shown that people, children, and adults alike, learn better and faster when they are actively involved in the learning process.
We must however note that such activity must be interesting, relevant and purposeful for it to promote learning.
3.2 Teacher – Pupil Relationship The teaching and learning activities that go on in the classroom revolve around the teacher and the pupils.
This is why the type of relationship that exists between the teacher and the pupils to a large extent determines whether or not learning will take place.
According to Ridgeway (1976), a good relationship with the pupils is the most significant single element in satisfactory teaching.
Apart from the personal rapport with individual learners, the general way by which the teacher interacts with the class is another crucial factor in the teaching learning process.
For the purpose of our discussion here, we shall simply classify the teacher – pupil relationship into what is popularly referred to as learner centred and teacher centred education.
i. Learner/child centred Education: Akinbote (2005) citing Evans has described child/learner centred education as the sort of education which places the learner at the centre of the teaching and learning process.
This actually regards the child as not only the centre of attraction but also an individual with inalienable rights which must be respected by the teacher.
Essentially therefore, the child centred education believes that education should stem from the nature of the child.
Education should not be imposed on the child.
This is why the advocates of child – centred education have always asserted that the child’s education must be in accordance with the stages of development.
As you must be aware, children at different stages of development vary in their needs, interests and abilities.
What then is involved in the classroom practice of child – centred education?
As you have just been told, the classroom practice of child – centred education suggests that as much as possible, the nature and interests of the child should form the basis for the teaching and learning process.
That is, the learner must be actively involved in the learning process.
This will involve his natural curiosity, his sense of creativity, self expression, and the desire to work and play with others.
136 ECE222 MODULE 2 The teacher in devising or selecting his methods of teaching must take these developmental needs and interests of the learners into consideration.
He should be a guide rather than a dictator.
The learner’s involvement in the teaching and learning process is of great importance and should not be taken lightly.
The teacher must really harness the child’s interest and experience into his teaching methods.
The advantages of the child – centred education are many.
can you just mention and explain any two of them?
ii Teacher – Centred Education: As the name suggests, this is the opposite of child – centred education.
This is a situation where the mere acquisition of a body of knowledge and skills by the learners are stressed more than anything else.
The teacher here is an authoritarian and mounts some pressure on the learners to work.
He may sometimes apply some force or artificial incentives in his desire to make the children learn.
The individual differences among the learners are usually not taken into consideration.
The child is usually blamed for his failure or poor performance in school.
In the teacher – centred approach, the child is regarded as lazy and careless and will not do anything unless he is forced to do so.
This approach in education is gradually becoming unpopular particularly at the pre – primary and primary education levels.
Whatever the level of education, this approach to teaching and learning is becoming very unpopular.
It does not encourage the good relationship between the teacher and the learners.
As a result, it does not enhance effective learning since the learners are not usually actively involved in the process.
The modern day conscientious teacher should therefore avoid this approach to education.
Teachers should now acquire the good skills which will make them to teach effectively and efficiently in a world which is now moving towards the application of the democratic principles in every aspect of life.
3.3 Creating a Learner Friendly Classroom A learner friendly, classroom environment is one which is favourable to the child and makes him free, happy, and healthy and ensures his harmonious and sustainable well being, growth and development.
The classroom environment can be categorized into the social and physical environment.
The social environment refers to all the interactions that go on between individuals and groups in the class.
This could be between the teacher and the learners or among the learners.
The physical environment on the other hand refers to all the tangible things that could be seen, touched, 137ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE used or manipulated in one way or the other.
These include the instructional materials, the chairs and tables, the school building and other facilities.
When all these social and physical surroundings are adequately organised and made attractive, the learners feel welcome and happy.
In other words they become more alert, self confident and ready to learn.
This is why the teacher should do everything possible to make the classroom a happy and beautiful place for the learners.
The attitude of teachers should promote cordial relationship in the classroom.
There should be freedom for the learners to work and play with others.
The learners need practice in social competence such as respect for others, mutual cooperation with and assistance to one another as well as self criticism.
These and other skills are best developed in a friendly classroom environment.
When the teacher acts as a guide and friend and not as a master or dictator, there is a social interplay which leads to the formation of appropriate attitudes and values among the learners.
Since the teachers, values and attitudes are evidenced in their actions and choices, they must ensure that every educational strategy used promotes positive attitude toward the school and the society, through their professional skills to motivate the learners.
In the same way, the physical environment in and out of the classroom must be good enough to stimulate the learners’ innate desire to explore, manipulate and be creative.
As you were told in one of the earlier lectures, the teachers’ ability to improvise will go a long way in motivating the learners.
The teacher should not always wait for the school authorities to supply everything.
You as a teacher can through your resourcefulness enrich not only your teaching but also the classroom.
Environment that welcomes the learners will not only make them more alert, self confident and happy but also stimulate their curiosity, and activity.
These are some of the essential characteristics of children which have been found to contribute greatly to their effective learning.
Most of the failure and school – drop – outs among school children could be traced to the unfriendly classroom environments.
It is not all the cases of poor academic achievement that are due to the low level of intelligence of the learners.
This therefore implies that the teaching and learning process must be learner – centred.
The role of the teacher in a learner – centred teaching and learning situation is crucial to the achievement of the goals and objectives of education.
The teacher must respect the views and opinions of the learners and provide a friendly environment for their optimum development 138 ECE222 MODULE 2 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Explain what you understand by learning 2.
What are the essential conditions necessary for effective learning?
4.0 CONCLUSION The teaching/learning process that places the learner at the centre of all activities in the school is known as child centred education.
The child should be an active participant in the whole process.
This is the only way by which the learners can be free, happy, creative and well developed individuals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Teaching is a conscious effort on the part of a more experienced person to impact knowledge to a less experienced person.
• Learning is a relatively permanent change in behaviour as a result of experience.
• The three conditions necessary for effective learning are (a) readiness/maturation (b) motivation and (c) activity.
• Learner – centred education promotes better relationship between teacher and learners than teacher centred education.
• A friendly classroom environment is one which makes the learner free, happy healthy and ensures his/her harmonious growth and development.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the differences between a learner – centred education and a teacher centred education.
2(a) What is a learner – friendly classroom environment?
(b) Enumerate the components of a learner – friendly environment.
7.0 REFERENCES AND LIST FOR FURTHER READING Akinbote O.
(205).
An Introduction to Teaching in Press.
Dodd, W.A.
(1978).
The Teacher at Work.
London: Oxford University Press.
139ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE UNIT 5 PLANNING TO TEACH CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Importance of Effective Planning 3.2 The Scheme of Work 3.3 The Lesson Note 3.4 The Actual Lesson Note Preparation 3.5 Writing the Instructional Objectives 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt the types of relationship that exist in the classroom, and their implications for teaching and learning.
In this unit, you are going to learn the practical steps to effective teaching that can bring about effective learning.
You will also learn how to prepare a good lesson note.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the reasons why a teacher should plan his lessons well • identify the steps involved in lesson preparation • write a good lesson note.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Importance of Effective Planning To plan is simply to make adequate arrangement before hand about any intended project or activity.
As noted by Akinbote et al (2001), planning is an important aspect of any human endeavour.
Therefore, no appreciable progress or success can be achieved without adequate planning.
This is particularly true of teaching which is aimed at changing the behaviour of the learners.
140 ECE222 MODULE 2 3.2 The Scheme of Work The teachers’ preparation or planning for teaching starts with the scheme of work.
The scheme of work is the breaking down of the syllabus into weakly or daily learning experiences which the individual teacher would like the pupils to follow in a logical order.
The advantages of having the scheme of work include the following: It helps to bring the syllabus to the level of the pupils.
That is, it helps to fit the syllabus into the needs, interests, experience and environment of the learners.
Since the syllabus is too general, it is not designed for the whole country as in the case of the primary school or a number of countries as in the case of the West African Examination Council.
The scheme of work helps to organise the work in a logical suitable and easy to teach and learn way.
If you want to teach what is in the syllabus directly to the pupils, you may find it difficult to stimulate the interest and secure the attention of the pupils.
As you learnt in the last unit, you need to secure the interest and attention of the learners for effective learning to take place.
The scheme of work also ensures that the syllabus is covered within the available time.
This therefore ensures that no aspect of the syllabus receives too much or too little attention.
In addition, the scheme of work ensures the continuity of work in cases where for whatever reasons, a succession of teachers have to teach the particular class during the session.
This is because the incoming teacher will be able to see what has been done and what the next topic to be taught is.
Individual teachers or a group of teachers may prepare the scheme of work for their class or their subject.
Whatever the case may be, there are some factors to take into consideration when preparing the scheme of work.
These are: i.
The syllabus: The areas covered and the order in which they are to be arranged.
ii.
The class: the age, ability, needs, interest and the environment of the learners.
iii.
The time available: The number of periods per week and the number of weeks per term must be taken into consideration.
141ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE iv.
The available materials such as text books and other instructional materials.
v. The season of the year.
This is necessary because there are certain topics that are best taught at a particular period or season of the year.
3.3 The Lesson Note The lesson note refers to the visible and comprehensive plan of the work to be done in a lesson by the teacher.
It indicates the unit of work as interpreted from the scheme of work to be covered in each period which may vary according to the level of education.
Some teaches often find it difficult to write their lesson notes because they are lazy.
They often claim to have been teaching the same topic or class for years hence they know everything they want to do off head.
This kind of argument is not acceptable in teaching.
Let us now consider some of the reasons why a good teacher should always prepare his lesson notes.
First, lesson notes help the teacher to limit himself to the most important and relevant facts to be presented to the learners.
If there is no adequate planning, the teacher may include a lot of irrelevant facts which may either make the lesson not only uninteresting and boring but also makes the teachers work disorderly.
It helps the teacher to select the most appropriate method and materials for the topic to suit the age, interest and ability of the learners.
It also guides against time wasting since the teacher must have allocated definite time to every stage of the lesson.
The lesson note helps the teacher and the pupils to work towards a particular goal or objective.
Therefore at the end of the lesson, the teacher would be able to assess the success or failure of the lesson.
Finally with the lesson note well prepared, the teacher should be able to make use of the appropriate method, materials and questions at each stage of the lesson.
The success or failure of any lesson to a large extent depends on the level of preparation made by the teacher.
If a teacher prepares a good lesson note, it is most likely that he will have a good lesson.
Infact, a teacher’s competence could be determined from the type of lesson note he has prepared.
This is why every teacher must ensure that they take time to be thorough in their lesson note preparation.
Let us now go into the actual lesson note preparation.
142 ECE222 MODULE 2 3.4 The Actual Lesson Note Preparation As you have just learnt in the last section of this unit, the lesson note is a must for every teacher.
The success or failure of any lesson depends on the thoroughness of the lesson note preparation by the teacher.
Although there is not yet a method of lesson note preparation that could be regarded as the best, yet there are some acceptable guidelines for a good lesson note preparation.
We shall now discuss the general procedures involved in lesson note preparation.
The lesson note can be classified into five important parts.
These are: a.
The general information section.
This includes name of the school, class, date subject, topic, objective, instructional materials, entry behaviour and others.
What to include in this section depends on what is required from the teacher.
As an example, as a student teacher, you might need to include your matriculation number and name.
You should be able to mention some reasons why this section is necessary for inclusion in the lesson note.
b.
The second part is the Introduction.
This could bear a separate sub heading in the lesson note.
The step 1 of the presentation stage could also be used as introduction.
Whichever way, the introduction helps the teacher to explore the learners experience, interest and ability.
The lesson could be introduced in different ways depending on the learners, the subject, topic and the teacher.
It is possible to use questions, stories, songs, pictures, a news item or any other thing that could be of interest to the learner.
What is important here is to secure the interest of the learners.
So, anything that could stimulate their interest provided they are relevant, morally and socially acceptable may be used.
c. The next stage is the Presentation.
This is sometimes referred to as procedure or development by some teachers.
It is here that the teacher presents to the learners the body of knowledge or information for that period.
The teacher must also indicate in steps what the pupils and teacher’s activities are.
The teacher displays the most appropriate method of teaching the particular topic here.
There are three things which must be taken into consideration in the writing of this presentation stage of the lesson.
These are: i.
The subject matter: This refers to the body of facts, principles, information or knowledge to be taught and learnt.
143ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE ii.
The methods and steps of presentation: The teachers and learners activities have to be specified.
The questions to be asked and in what order are to be shown.
iii.
The use of instructional materials must be indicated.
It is not necessary to list the instructional materials in the first section of the lesson note without really specifying how they are to be used.
The presentation stage is an appropriate stage for the teacher to clearly demonstrate how the materials are to be used during the lesson.
d. The fourth stage is the evaluation or what is sometimes referred to as the conclusion.
The teacher here tries to revise the lesson and assess whether the stated instructional objectives have been achieved or not.
The evaluation of the pupils could take the form of oral, written or practical activities.
e. The last stage in modern day lesson notes is the assignment.
This is where the teacher gives the pupils some assignments or home work to do.
It could be a follow up work on what has just been learnt in the class.
It could also be a form of preparation for the next lesson.
Whatever the purpose, it is generally regarded as a good means of keeping the learners busy at home.
3.5 Writing the Instructional Objectives The statement of instructional objectives is an important aspect of the lesson note.
This is why we have to give it a special attention here.
In the lesson, it is necessary to state right from the beginning what you intend to achieve.
If you do not state the objectives at the beginning of the lesson, you will find it difficult to evaluate your lesson.
As a result of the importance of the objectives in a lesson note, we shall now try to discuss some of the principles involved.
a. Behavioural Objectives: As you learnt in one of the previous units, learning is a relatively permanent change in behaviour as a result of experience.
Therefore, for you to ensure that learning has taken place in the pupils, you must find out if there is any change in their behaviour.
That is to find out whether the pupils have been able to do or say certain things they could not do or say at the beginning of the lesson.
This is why the objectives of your lesson should be stated in behavioural ways.
Therefore, the first thing to do in the statement of your instructional objectives is to start the statement in terms of what you expect at the end of the lesson e.g.
144 ECE222 MODULE 2 At the end of the lesson, the pupils should be able to … The next thing is the choice of words to describe what you expect them to be able to do as a result of your teaching.
That is, you must use; action verbs’.
These are verbs that describe observable behaviours in the learner.
The following verbs in group A should be used while those in group B should be avoided while stating your objectives.
As noted by Akinbote (2005), the verbs in group A indicate observable behaviour which can tell anyone whether or not the objectives of the lesson have been achieved.
A – Mention, identify, list, explain, calculate, construct, suggest, define, differentiate, describe etc.
B – Understand, learn, know, appreciate, enjoy, grasp, believe, think, have faith in and advise among others.
As you can see, those in group B are too general or ambiguous to be easily measured.
For example, how does a teacher measure how for the learners have enjoyed the lesson, understood the lesson or know what has been taught in the lesson.
It is difficult.
Therefore the verbs in group A should be used since they describe the specific action expected of the learners and these can be measured.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Why does a teacher need to plan his lesson ahead?
2.
Explain the scheme of work and the factors to consider in its preparation.
4.0 CONCLUSION Adequate preparation is necessary for success in any thing we are doing.
A teacher needs to prepare adequately for his lessons in order to achieve the desired goals.
The planning of work for the teacher begins with the scheme of work preparation.
It helps him to break the syllabus into teachable units.
The scheme of work also helps the teacher to prepare his lesson notes in a way that will meet the needs of the learners.
There can be no effective teaching without a carefully planned lesson note.
145ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: • Effective Planning is essential for success in whatever we are • engaged in.
• The scheme of work helps to bring the syllabus to the level of the • Learners.
• In planning the scheme of work, the syllabus, the class, the • available time, the available materials and the season of the year must be taken into consideration.
• The lesson note is the comprehensive plan of the work to be done by the teacher in a particular lesson.
• The five sections in the lesson note are – the general information, the introduction, presentation, evaluation and the Assignment.
• Instructional Objectives must be stated in purely behavioural form.
• Only action verbs should be used while stating the instructional or lesson objectives.
• The objectives should be stated in terms of the expected changes in the behaviour of the learners.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do you consider the lesson note to be essential for the effective teaching and learning process?
2.
Discuss with examples factors to be considered in the planning of scheme of work.
3.
Explain the five sections involved in lesson note preparation using specific examples.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, O.; Oduolowo E. and Lawal, B., (2001).
Pre-Primary Education in Nigeria: A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling – Horden Publishes.
Akinote O.
(2005).
An Introduction to Teaching, in Press.
146 ECE222 MODULE 2 UNIT 6 TEACHERS AND PUPILS QUESTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Questions in the Classroom 3.2 Teachers Questions 3.3 Pupils’ Questions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, we discussed the lesson into preparation.
Specifically, we discussed the reasons for the preparation of lesson notes and the sections involved.
We also discussed instructional objectives and how to state them.
In this unit, you are going to learn the teachers and pupils’ questions and how to handle them.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain why teachers and pupils ask questions in the classroom • identify the types of questions asked in the classroom and explain how to handle them.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Questions in the Classroom Probably the most important characteristics of children are curiosity and enquiry.
All children possess them in varying degrees.
In their desire to satisfy or put these innate tendencies of this into action, children ask questions.
They start to do this ever before getting to the school.
Unfortunately however, this important natural desire of children to find out things through questions is often, killed or suppressed in the school.
Thus in most of our classrooms, there is little or no signs of the development of the intellectual curiousity of the learners.
The teachers are always there to fill the empty mind/heads of the children with knowledge.
Such teachers probably forget that children already know a lot of things before coming to the school.
It is thus in their attempt to 147ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE add more to their knowledge or clarify things that are strange or not clear to them that children ask questions.
What we find in most of the classrooms is that only the teachers ask questions from the pupils.
In many instances, such questions by the teacher are badly framed, irrelevant or not well timed.
At the end of the day, the learners only receive the knowledge to memorize and reproduce it for examination purpose.
This is the old idea associated with the teacher – centred education discussed in the last unit.
As you were told in the last unit, teachers are now moving away from the teacher – centred to learner centred education encourages the teacher to develop the intellectual curiousity and the spirit of enquiry of children.
In other words, the learners are to be encouraged to ask questions and explore their environment.
Therefore, in order to promote good interaction and effective communication in the classroom, there should be questions from both the teachers and the pupils.
The two types of questions in the classroom are the teachers’ questions and the pupils/learners questions.
Before we discuss these two types of classroom questions, it is necessary for us to note the following factors as identified by Dodd (1978).
• Not all pupils have the same tendency to ask questions or enquire.
• Not all pupils are satisfied by the same answers.
• Teachers conduct their lessons in different ways and the type of questions and the way of asking them vary from one teacher to the other.
Whether these factors vary from individuals to individuals and from day to day, or not, it is clear that questions are asked in the class on daily basis.
3.2 Teachers Questions Teachers ask different questions for different purpose in the classroom.
This therefore means that each teacher develops his own style of questioning that benefits the learners.
However, not all teachers know how to ask good questions.
While the experienced teachers may be able to ask extempore’ question, the inexperienced teachers may not be able to do this successfully.
Extempore questions are questions not planned or prepared before hand.
They are asked as the situation warrants.
The experienced teacher may sometimes even ask poorly framed and carelessly posed questions.
148 ECE222 MODULE 2 In order to help you frame good questions and pose them properly, we will discuss the general principles or guidelines for questioning with you now.
Before then, let us briefly consider the importance of questioning by the teacher in his/her lessons.
a.
Questions help the teacher to draw out the learners experience at the beginning of the lesson.
As you are aware lessons should begin from known to the unknown.
Teachers’ questions at the beginning of the lesson therefore help to focus on the particular aspect of the learners’ experience that is going to be relevant to the topic or lesson.
When the teacher through the answers provided by the learners is able to find out their level of knowledge about the new topic, he will know exactly how and where to introduce the new topic.
b.
Another importance of teachers question is that it helps to arouse the interest of the learners.
The teacher must use questions wisely in order to arouse the learners’ interest.
When the learners show interest in the lesson right from the beginning, they are likely going to pay attention to the lesson.
The teacher will however need to keep on asking well framed and well posed questions to sustain the interest and attention of the learners to the end.
Thus, as once observed by Wilson (1978), the extent to which the questions asked at the beginning of a lesson appeal to the learners’ interest will often determine its success or failure.
In other words, when teachers ask questions that are of interest to the learners at the beginning, they are most likely going to pay attention to the lesson.
At the end of the lesson, effective learning must have taken place.
c. Teachers questions during and at the end of the lesson help to keep the interest of the learners alive thereby sustaining their attention to the end.
Questions at the end of the lesson help the teacher to evaluate his teaching.
That is, the teacher will be able to find out whether or not the stated objectives of the lesson have been achieved.
This helps him to take a decision on whether to proceed to the next topic or repeat the whole lesson or a part of it.
d. You must bear in mind that the teachers’ questions at any stage of the lesson do not need to be oral.
They could be written on the board or even typed out on paper.
This now brings us to another importance of teachers’ questions.
The question helps to keep pupils at alert.
When the teacher does all the talking and the pupils are made to be docile recipients of knowledge, they may loose interest.
Some may be doing some other things or even be sleeping.
In other words they may not pay attention to the 149ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE teacher.
To avoid this situation well constructed and well posed questions help to keep the pupils at alert since they will be active participants in the lesson.
Moreover, anyone could be asked a question at anytime.
e. Finally we can add also that questions help to lead pupils to make observation and draw conclusions.
For instance, in a social studies lesson on the aspects of our culture, the teacher can bring different materials from different cultures and ask them to identify the materials.
e.g., their names, uses, where they come from etc.
Let us now outline the general guidelines for questioning by the teacher.
These are: i.
The questions should be short and clear.
Do not ask multiple questions at a time.
ii.
Avoid questions demanding only yes or no answers.
Rather, ask questions that could generate deep thinking from the learners.
Thus, questions beginning with What, How, When and where are the best in provoking pupils thinking.
iii.
Avoid rhetorical questions such as Do you understand?
Is that clear?
Etc.
Such questions only require affirmation as pupils rarely say no to such questions.
iv.
The teacher must show interest in the question and the answer.
Do this by planning some of the questions in your lesson note.
Do not ask questions to punish anybody.
v. Inform the class before posing a question how you want them to answer your questions.
For instance, may be they must raise up their hands, wait until they are called upon or answer at once.
vi.
Questions must be evenly distributed in the class.
Do not concentrate on a particular section of the class or the brilliant pupils alone.
Make sure that all the pupils in the class are given equal opportunities to answer questions.
however, in doing this the teacher must encourage the weak ones by asking them the most simple questions.
vii.
When asking questions, you must first pose the question, pause for a while and then call upon a pupil to answer.
In this regard, it is better to call each pupil by name.
It is not good to call the name of a pupil first before asking the question.
Why is this not good?
150 ECE222 MODULE 2 viii.
Ask your questions in a clear voice so that everybody can hear you clearly.
ix.
Do not always repeat your questions.
This is to train the pupils to pay attention and listen well.
x.
When pupils answer your questions, let them know whether or not their answers are right.
If the answers are wrong, try to provide some reasons why they are wrong and give them the chance to try it again.
Whatever happens, do not answer your own questions.
If they do not know the answer to a question, it means something is wrong.
It is either the question is not clear or it is too difficult.
3.3 Pupils Questions As you were told at the beginning of this unit, one of the things children love to do always is to ask questions.
However too often children are discouraged in different ways from asking questions.
In the African culture it is even regarded as bad manners for children to ask too many questions from the elders.
In the classroom, some teachers do not encourage their pupils to ask questions.
Some are afraid the pupils may ask questions they cannot answer.
In some cases, they do not want the pupils to interrupt their lectures while others find their pupils questions annoying and irritating.
There are some reasons why pupils ask questions.
Pupils may ask questions for the following reasons: a.
To clarify certain facts or information that are not clear to them.
b.
To find out new facts, information or knowledge about anything.
c. To test the teacher’s knowledge or his ability to control his temper.
d. To gain recognition, attention or to become popular in the class.
Whatever the reasons why pupils ask questions, they all need to be dealt with firmly but also as friendly and as kindly as possible.
Now let us discuss how to handle pupils’ questions.
When pupils ask relevant and intelligent questions on the topic you are teaching them, you can do the following: 151ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE i.
Do not first answer the questions directly.
Just throw the questions to the whole class.
There may be pupils who know the answers to the questions.
If there is no one to answer the question correctly, you may reframe the questions in a way that will make it clearer or simple.
In some cases, you may even use other questions to lead them to the right answer.
The teacher should rarely try to answer the pupils’ questions directly.
ii.
If you are not sure of the correct answer to the question of the pupil, do not attempt to cover your ignorance by giving them the wrong answer.
That is not only dangerous but it is also unprofessional.
Therefore, what you should do here is to tell them you do not know the answer and that you will find out.
You may even give it to the whole class as an assignment.
You must however get the correct answer by all means possible and tell them in the next class.
Where pupils ask silly questions to test you or gain recognition/attention in the class, you have to be firm in telling them you will not tolerate silly questions.
Do not provide any answers at all.
Take the necessary corrective measures to prevent a repeat of such irresponsible questions.
In some instances, you may simply ignore the question or simply look straight into the face of the one who asked the question.
Look at him/her for a moment and then continue with your lesson.
As much as the teacher should encourage the pupils to ask question, she should not tolerate indiscipline in any form.
Once the pupils know you do not tolerate indiscipline in any form.
They will avoid asking silly questions in the class.
This however does not mean that the teacher should resort to being wicked and unfriendly in his reaction to such question.
Every question must be treated on its own merit.
Finally, it must be said that when the class is asking good questions, it must be encouraged.
Teachers should also avoid answering their own questions.
They must not form the habit of repeating all the answers given by the pupils.
Why is it not good to do that?
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Why do pupils ask questions in the class?
2.
Explain five purposes served by teachers question.
152 ECE222 MODULE 2 4.0 CONCLUSION Questions are necessary for effective teaching and learning to take place.
Teachers and pupils ask questions for various reasons.
When questions are asked, they should be answered.
However, it is not good for a teacher to answer his own questions.
It is also not good for him to always repeat his questions or the pupils’ answers.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt that: • Curiousity and inquiry are the natural ways by which children seek to satisfy their thirst for knowledge.
• Children should be encouraged to ask intelligent questions.
• Teachers should learn to prepare their questions before the lessons begin.
• Questions should be clear, short and provocative.
• The Teacher should not always repeat his questions or give the answers himself.
• Questions should be evenly distributed in the class.
• Silly and irrelevant questions aimed at testing the teacher or gaining attention/popularity should not be entertained.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain five factors teachers should take into consideration when asking questions from the learners.
2.
How should a teacher treat pupils questions that are: i.
Intelligent and relevant to the topic?
ii.
Too difficult for the teacher to answer?
iii.
Just to gain popularity in the class?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Wilson, J.M.
(1978).
Questions and Questions in Dodd, W.A.
(Ed) The Teacher at Work.
London: Oxford University Press.
Ridgeway, L. (1976).
Task of the Teacher.
London: Ward Lock Educational.
153ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE UNIT 7 KEEPING UP TO DATE IN TEACHING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Teachers Tasks 3.2 How to Keep up to Date 3.2.1 Readings 3.2.2 Learning from the Pupils 3.2.3 In-Service Programmes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous units of this module, you have learnt about the teacher in the classroom.
We discussed in the different units the qualities of a good teacher, the behavioural job expectations for teachers, the teaching learning process as well as questioning and questions in the classroom.
In this unit, you are going to learn how the teacher should keep up to date in his professional skills and competence.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to • explain the two major tasks of the teacher • suggest how teachers can keep on improving on their professional skills and competence.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Teachers Tasks The task of the teacher is two-fold.
The first one is to grow in the ability or capacity to use knowledge which they have.
This means that the teachers should always demonstrate their skills and knowledge they have acquired in their day to day interactions with their pupils.
Their ability to do this efficiently and effectively depends on their experience.
The ability to make good use of the experiences acquired from their pupils will go a long way in demonstrating their capacity to use their knowledge well.
Teachers must therefore be adequately trained to make 154 ECE222 MODULE 2 them acquire the necessary professional skills and competence.
Without this initial professional training, it may be difficult or even impossible for them to grow in their capacity to use the knowledge.
As you must have known, you can only give what you have.
If teachers do not acquire the necessary knowledge and skills while in training, it may be difficult for them to give their best.
The second task of the teacher is to acquire new knowledge and relevant skills.
This is a great and challenging task of the teacher.
The explosion of knowledge is on a continuous and regular basis.
Teachers must therefore be able to keep abreast of developments not only in their areas of specialization but also in the methodology areas.
There are many areas of knowledge where new discoveries and developments take place daily.
These areas where knowledge continually increases for the teacher to catch up with include the following: (b) Psychology: This is an area of study where knowledge as a result of intensive research activities, much is now known about the nature of the learners.
We must remember how psychology has revealed to us what we can do with respect to the needs, interest, ability and problems of children at different stages of life.
The increase in the body of knowledge in psychology of learning requires every teacher to be up to date.
There are new findings on the nature of learning, causes of difficulties in learning, and how the learners could be helped.
All these continuously evolving theories about the child and how he could learn better are challenges to the teacher.
The ideas of great educators on teaching and learning should be properly interpreted and applied by the teacher.
The works of Jean Piaget, Jerome Bruner, Benjamin Bloom and a host of others are yet to be effectively applied by teachers.
As a teacher, you should realize that these great educators and psychologists do not necessarily give direct advice to teachers.
Although they may offer some suggestions on how best to go about the application of their ideas and theories, yet there are still much to be learnt by teachers on how best to apply them to the practical classroom situation.
(c) The Changing Curriculum: As you will soon learn, if you have not done so, the curriculum is not a once and for all affair.
That is to say, it is continually changing.
There are new knowledge areas, new materials and methods which teachers need to understand.
In these days of high technological advancement, the teacher is faced with changing curricula.
Since the school curriculum has to change with time in order to accommodate new developments, needs and interest of the society, the teacher has to keep on up dating his knowledge.
155ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE The different educational technology devices cannot replace the teacher.
Since learners find them interesting and helpful in learning, teachers must master their use in order to enhance their teaching.
(d) Changing Social Situations: As human beings are always changing in all ways, the teacher is also faced with the challenges of handling different social cultural and economic backgrounds of the learners.
The acquisition of relevant knowledge in these areas enhances the teacher’s tasks in and outside the classroom.
If the teacher remains stagnant in his knowledge about societal changes, he may not be effective in his teaching.
If he does not know how to make his classroom stimulating for all categories of learners, he may find it difficult to be effective in his teaching.
(e) Changes in Methods of Teaching and Evaluation: Research findings are always providing new ways and opportunities for improving the teaching and learning process.
This means that teachers must always maintain contact with developments not only in their areas of specialization but also in the professional aspects of their work.
They must be current with the new methods of teaching and evaluation.
They need to have a broad knowledge which covers other areas or levels outside their immediate concern.
The modern day teacher does not need to be too conservative and dogmatic in his attitudes, belief and practices.
While he needs to conserve or preserve the good aspects of the past, he must be open minded enough to modify not only the methods but also the knowledge component of the curriculum.
It is only when teachers are able to recognize the need to accommodate new ideas and new ways of doing things that they may be able to teach effectively.
That means the teacher has to keep on reading and learning all his life.
According to Ridgway (1976), the idea of life – long education is especially significant in the case of those who teach others.
3.2 How to Keep Upto Date There is a popular saying that for a candle to provide light, it must keep on burning.
In the same way, for a teacher to keep on impacting relevant knowledge, to others, he must keep on acquiring knowledge.
The question we would now try to answer in this section is, how does a teacher keep up – to – date?
Since we all agree that a teacher needs to be up to date in both the content area of the curriculum and the methodology of delivering it, 156 ECE222 MODULE 2 there are many ways of achieving this.
The teacher is an important key not only in the socialization of the child.
He is also the key to educational change.
If the curriculum is improved upon and all the school facilities and materials are adequately provided, without good teachers who are ready to learn, not much will be achieved in the teaching and learning process.
In one of the earlier units, you learnt the characteristics of a good teacher.
One of them is that he must be ready to learn all his life.
The one way by which the teacher can keep abreast of developments in his profession is to keep on learning.
How does he/she keep on learning?
He can do this by: 3.2.1 Reading The print is one of the most important media of information dissemination of our time.
Millions of works are printed in books, journals, magazines, and newspapers every day.
Even the computer heavily depends on the power of letters to reach out to millions of people daily.
Therefore, anyone who wishes to be up-to-date in his or her chosen profession cannot avoid reading.
As for the teacher, new knowledge either in the curriculum content or in the methodology areas is continuously evolving.
The new knowledge can only be found on the pages of journals, books and magazines which are kept waiting for readers in the library.
Similarly, the internet is full of knew knowledge on any aspect of human endeavour.
In short, there is nothing you want to know more about that you will not get through the Internet.
In short, we can say here that there is no excuse whatsoever for any teacher to claim ignorance of new developments in his field.
We may however agree that most teachers in our rural areas may not have access to the library or internet facilities.
We may therefore appeal to the relevant authorities to make such facilities available in the rural areas.
The local communities, the Parent Teachers’ Association, Various Association and Philanthropists could come to the aid of teachers.
The government alone cannot provide these facilities.
There are many of our Business men and women and politicians who are even richer than the local or state government.
The money they waste on less important things could be used to provide library and internet facilities to all the rural areas.
Even if it is made available only at the Local Government Headquarters, teachers can still go there to make use of them.
We must at the same time advice teachers to cultivate the habit of reading.
Their reading should not be limited to their pupils’ textbooks or newspapers.
Many teachers who even have the library and internet facilities in the urban centres do not make use of them.
Sometimes, they do not even know such facilities are available and when they know, they 157ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE do not use them out of indolence.
You must keep on reading to fill your mind with new ideas and new ways of doing things.
3.2.2 Learning from their Pupils Modern methods according to Ridgway (1976), have encouraged teachers to learn with and from their pupils.
The teacher as we mentioned in one of the units is not Mr. Know all.
He must have the sufficient humility to acknowledge that there are many things which he does not know or better ways of doing things.
Some of the learners may be more exposed to the library and internet facilities than the teacher.
Such pupils may often come to the class with better information/knowledge of a particular thing.
They may even know better, faster or the easier way of doing certain things.
In such situation, the teacher can allow the pupils to tutor their peers while the teacher also learns from them.
3.2.3 In-Service-Programmes There are different modes of in-service-programmes teachers can benefit from: They include: i.
Study – leave with pay: This is where a teacher after some years in teacheing may wish to go in for a higher qualification.
For instance, an NCE teacher who wants to go in for a degree programme may wish to do it full time.
In this case, the employer could grant him study leave with his salary paid for the period of study.
He will however need to sign an agreement bond to serve the employer for a specific number of years before he could resign or retire.
ii.
The study-leave without pay: This is a situation where the teacher goes for a higher qualification in teaching without receiving salary.
He will however be reabsorbed into his teaching position after the completion of the course.
The teacher could also be placed on a higher salary scale commensurate with his present qualification.
iii.
Part–Time/Distance Learning: In recent years, there are many opportunities for teachers to keep on improving themselves.
There are many institutions now in the country that offer part – time programmes.
The Open University of which you are a student is a good example.
The teacher in this type of progamme does not have to resign or leave his job for a full – time course.
He can now keep on teaching and doing a higher degree at the same time.
The programme may come up on week – ends or 158 ECE222 MODULE 2 during long vacations.
It may even require the students receiving lectures through the television, radio or internet.
The major advantage of this mode of study is that it does not give room for long absence between husband and wife.
In the past we have heard about people loosing their wives or husbands to others as a result of the long separation from home.
We have also heard about men not allowing their wives to go for further studies because of the fear of their being seduced or suited by their teachers or others while in school.
iv.
Seminars/Conferences/Workshops: These are short programmes aimed at improving on specific skills and competences of teachers.
It could be organised by the federal, state or Local Government as well as Government Agencies, Non – Governmental Agencies and International Organization.
Mention some of such agencies.
From the discussion of the in-service programme, you will see that teachers more than ever before now have better chances of improving themselves and keeping up-to-date.
Unfortunately, as a result of laziness, many teachers often fail to avail themselves of such great opportunities.
Such teachers are those that are often complaining that there are no materials; the pupils are not good and so on.
When next you see or hear such teachers, you will know that they are the lazy ones.
On the other hand, we should not forget to remind the school authorities whether public or private, that they need to motivate the teachers.
Many school heads or proprietors do not show interest in their teachers’ education.
When some teachers apply for permission to attend one course or the other, they are often told to resign.
Teachers are at the heart of any effort made at improving the quality of education in any society.
Their commitment, competence and professional skills should enhance through the continued support they receive to improve themselves.
In this regard, they need the support and cooperation of all to keep them up to date.
The more up to date the teachers are in their curriculum content and methodology areas, the more skillful and effective the teaching and learning process will be.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Explain the two major tasks of the teacher.
2.
Why do teachers need to keep up-to-date in their profession?
159ECE222 DEVELOPING PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COMPETENCE 4.0 CONCLUSION Teachers can only be effective and efficient in their teaching by keeping up-to-date.
Teachers can only be up-to-date if they keep on improving themselves.
They can keep on improving themselves by reading, attending conferences workshops and seminars or through full time or part time in-service programmes.
The candle can only give light when it keeps on burning.
Therefore, teachers must be encouraged and supported by all to help them acquire the necessary skills and competence.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt the following: 1.
Teachers tasks are two fold a. acquiring the necessary knowledge and skills for teaching.
b.
Keeping up-to-date in the curriculum content areas and the methodology 2.
Knowledge continually increases in the following areas: a.
Psychology b. Curriculum c. Society d. Methodology 3.
Teachers can keep up to date by a.
Reading b. In-service programmes such as fulltime studies part-time and short term programmes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Why does a teacher need to keep – up – to date in his profession?
2.
Explain the different ways by which teachers can keep-up-to date.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Berns, R.M.
(2004).
Child, Family School, Community: Socialization and Support (Sixth Edition).
Belmont: Thomson Wadsworth.
Ridgway L. (1976).
Task of the Teacher.
London: Ward Lock Educational.
160
