 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: ECE 227 COURSE TITLE: ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION ECE227 COURSE GUIDE NAT COURSE GUIDE ECE 227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Course Team Dr (Mrs.) Adebomi Oyewumi (Developer/Writer) - UI Prof. A.
B. Alhassan (Editor) - OSU Dr. Dorathy Ofoha (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii ECE227 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: All Rights Reserved CONTENTS PAGE iii ECE227 COURSE GUIDE Introduction ………………………………….…………………….
1 The Course ………………………………….…………………….. 1 Course Aims ……………………………………………………….
1 Course Objectives………………………………………………….
1 Working through the Course ……………………………………… 2 The Course Material ……………………………………………….. 2 Study Units ………………………………………………………… 2 Textbooks and References ………………………………………… 3 Assessments ……………………………………………………….. 3 Tutor-Marked Assignment (TMA) ………………………………… 3 End of Course Examination ……………………………………….. 4 iv  Introduction Education is a veritable tool in the process of development in any nation.
As a result of this there is need for each level of education to be properly administered.
Early Childhood Education teachers also should possess accurate knowledge, information and tools that are needed for effective management.
This course is therefore to equip the students with a clear understanding and deep understanding of organizations and administrative functions in early childhood education.
It is also the focus of this course to provide students with insight to work harmoniously with various groups within or outside the school system.
The Course ECE227: Organisation and Service Provision in Early Childhood Education (2 CU) is designed to expose you to general knowledge on organization and service provision in early childhood education.
Here we shall examine the knowledge and functions of administrators and supervisors.
Also, policy professionalism and behavioural issues will be discussed.
Course Aims This course aims at introducing you to the dynamics and principles of organization and service provision in early childhood education.
Course Objectives The objectives of this course shall be to: (1) examine the basic components of organization, administration and service provision in early childhood education.
(2) Discuss administrative and organizational techniques in early childhood education.
(3) examine behavioural characteristics within an organization.
(4) highlight and discuss basic principles of supervision in early childhood education.
(5) examine programme planning in early childhood education.
(6) to analyse and examine fiscal management and budgeting in early childhood education.
(7) outline basic indicators of quality provision in early childhood education.
ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Working through The Course This course requires you to match your study with practical observation.
The content will provide you with background information on the course.
It is expected that you will match the information provided with visit to early childhood education centres to acquaint yourself with practical knowledge on organization administration and service provision.
You are equally advised to attend tutorial sessions.
Further, it is pertinent for you to consult other textbooks, and or journals to enhance your knowledge of this course.
The Course Material The course material consists of a course guide and study units which will be provided for you.
In addition, references and further readings are provided to further your knowledge in this field.
Study Units This course consists of 15 units in three modules.
Module 1 Fundamentals of Organisation in Early Childhood Education Unit 1 Meaning and Components of Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Meaning and Function of Educational Administration Unit 3 Administrative Structure in Early Childhood Education Unit 4 Service Provision and Record Keeping in Early Childhood Education Unit 5 Behaviour within an Organisation I – Motivation Module 2 Administrative Technique in Early Childhood Education Unit 1 Behaviour within an Organisation II – Group Dynamics Unit 2 Behaviour within an Organisation III – Conflict Resolution Unit 3 Supervision in Early Childhood Education Unit 4 Professional Development Unit 5 Child Care Agencies ii ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Module 3 Programme Planning in Early Childhood Education Unit 1 Planning in Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Decision Making in an Organisation Unit 3 Quality Control in Early Childhood Organisation Unit 4 Budgeting in Early Childhood Education Unit 5 Fiscal Management in Early Childhood Education Textbooks and References Akinbote O., Oduolowu, E. and Lawal B.
(2001).
Preprimary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling Horden Publishers.
Ajayi, A.O.
(1989).
Basic Concepts of Administration Planning and Economics of Education.
Ibadan: Gabesther Publishers.
Akinbote, O.
(2006).
Organization and Administration of Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria Ibadan, University of Ibadan, Distance Learning Centre.
Nwankwo, J.I., Nwokafor, J.N., Ogunsanwo, O.A, and Ighalo, S.A. (1981).
Educational Administration and supervision.
Ibadan: Institute of Education, University of Ibadan.
Akinbote O.
(2001) Administration in Primary and Secondary Schools” in Ladipo S.O.
and Ogunsaya M.
(eds.).
Application and Practice in Education Oyo, Andrian Publication Series.
Ozigi A.O.
(1977).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
Assessment There are two components of assessment for this course.
The Tutor Marked Assignment (TMA) and at the end of course examination.
Tutor-Marked Assignment The TMA is the continuous assessment component of your course.
It accounts for 30% of the total course.
All of these must be answered before you will be allowed to sit for end of course examination.
The TMA’s would be given to you by your facilitator and returned after you have done the assignment.
iii ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION End of Course Examination The examination concludes the assessment of the course.
It constitutes 70% of the whole course.
You will be informed of the time of examination.
iv ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Course Code ECE227 Course Title Organization and Service Provision in Early Childhood Education Course Team Dr (Mrs.) Adebomi Oyewumi (Developer/Writer) - UI Prof. A.
B. Alhassan (Editor) - OSU Dr. Dorathy Ofoha (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA v ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2010 ISBN: All Rights Reserved vi ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Fundamentals of Organisation in Early Childhood Education ………………………………... 1 Unit 1 Meaning and Components of Organisation in Early Childhood Education ………………………………….
1 Unit 2 Meaning and Function of Educational Administration... 7 Unit 3 Administrative Structure in Early Childhood Education …………………………………………… 15 Unit 4 Service Provision and Record Keeping in Early Childhood Education ………………………………….
22 Unit 5 Behaviour within an Organisation I – Motivation …… 28 Module 2 Administrative Technique in Early Childhood Education …………………………………………….
35 Unit 1 Behaviour within an Organisation II - Group Dynamics …………………………………….
35 Unit 2 Behaviour within an Organisation III - Conflict Resolution …………………………………………… 42 Unit 3 Supervision in Early Childhood Education ………… 49 Unit 4 Professional Development …………………………….
55 Unit 5 Child Care Agencies ………………………………….
61 Module 3 Programme Planning Early Childhood Education... 61 Unit 1 Planning in Early Childhood Education ……………… 61 Unit 2 Decision making in an Organisation ………………….
70 Unit 3 Quality Control in Early Childhood Organisation ….. 83 Unit 4 Budgeting in Early Childhood Education …………… 89 Unit 5 Fiscal Management in Early Childhood Education ….. 93 vii NoneECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MODULE 1 FUNDAMENTALS OF ORGANISATION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION INTRODUCTION This module introduces you to the rudiments of administration and organization in schools.
This shall be treated as follows.
Unit 1 Meaning and Components of Organisation in Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Meaning and Function of Educational Administration Unit 3 Administrative Structure in Early Childhood Education Unit 4 Service Provision and Record Keeping in Early Childhood Education Unit 5 Behaviour within an Organisation I – Motivation UNIT 1 MEANING, FUNCTIONS AND COMPONENTS OF ORGANISATION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Organisation 3.2 Functions in Schools which are related to Concept of Organisation 3.3 Components of Early Childhood Organisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The word organizing has been used to refer to different things by people simply because human beings live in company of each other with their goals and objectives.
An organisation thus consists of people who carry out different tasks which are coordinated to contribute to organisational goals.
The word organisation means different things to different people because of its components.
Various scholars in different fields have attempted to define what organisation is.
But in this course we are talking about organisation in schools.
1 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • explain the meaning of organisation • analyse the functions of organisation • identify and discuss the major components of organisation in early childhood education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Organisation The concept of organisation has been described in many ways by experts in sociology and administration.
For instance Ezewu 1983) a sociologist defined organisation as a social unit that pursue specific goals which they are structured to serve.
Some examples given by him include schools, prisons, and churches among others.
Similarly Nwankwo (1982) has defined organisation as 1.
A group of persons working together 2.
A network of relationship among individuals and activities 3.
A process of executive functions aimed at ensuring that resources, activities and authority relationships are so co- ordinated to achieve specified goals.
Thus organisation in Schools deal with the arrangement or grouping of activities and services (in the school) into units or parts to make the work of the administration simpler in execution of a plan, programme and schedule.
The number 2 definition of an organization according Nwankwo is suitable for school as an organisation.
It says organisation is a network of relationships among individual and activities which implies the structural and or strategic arrangement of persons’ positions and roles.
Thus arrangement helps to achieve the objective of the school curriculum.
3.2 Functions in Schools which are related to the Concept of Organisation 1.
Communication: Communication is the means by which people are linked together in an organisation to achieve common purpose(s) of the organisation.
Communication is important 2 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION because it enables the administrator to: i.
Establish and disseminate goals ii.
Develop plans for the achievement of goals iii.
Organize human and other resources efficiently and effectively iv.
Select, develop, and appraise members of the organisation v. Lead, direct, motivate and create a climate in which people want to contribute vi.
Control performance 2.
Coordination: It involves harmonizing the differences in opinion as to how group goals can be reached and individual objectives can be harmonized within group objectives to achieve the stated goals of the organisation.
3.
Directing in organisation is a principle or unity of direction: It simply means selection, inventory, appraise and training of people so that they can assist in the accomplishment of organizational goals and objectives.
The administrator who must be involved in directing function must be knowledge about the functions of each staff as dictated by the goals/objectives of the organisation.
The most important instrument for effective directing especially in schools is the planning and controlling devices put in place.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE (1) Define organization in schools (2) Identify 3 organisational functions in schools.
3.3 Components of Early Childhood Organisation The early childhood institution is an organization that has specified goals.
These goals can be achieved through effective planning and management of the various components through which the curriculum is put into practice daily, weekly, termly or yearly.
There are six major components of school organisation which are central to all the activities that goes on in early childhood institution/centres.
These components have been identified by Akinbote, Oduolowu and Lawal (2001), as: 1.
Duration of the Course This refers to the number of years spent at each of level of education to achieve the desired goals.
For children aged two to three years they 3 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION usually spend another three years in nursery/preprimary institutions.
But day care/crèche accept children from the age of six weeks to two or three years.
2.
Length of the School Year This refers to the number of weeks or months a school is opened in a year i.e.
the length of the school year.
The length of the school year in Nigeria especially is not more than thirty six weeks divided into three terms of approximately twelve weeks each.
The three terms are marked by holiday period which may vary from two to eight weeks.
The nursery/pre primary schools establishments, which are owned by private individuals and organizations often, determine their own holiday periods.
It must be noted that majority of these schools planned their holiday to tally with the government owned schools.
3.
The School Time Table This is an important component of the school organisation.
It is the planned daily routine which shows the sequence of activities for any particular period of the day.
A well-prepared timetable will enable the school to implement the curriculum.
All the school subjects to be taught and activities should be carefully planned and the periods for them allocated so that everybody will know what activity is taking place during each period.
In planning, and constructing the school timetable, factors such as the ratio of pupils to teachers, the teaching space available, the availability of facilities and equipment should guide the head-teacher and or the most senior staff in the school.
The duration of periods for nursery school classes should not be more than 20 to 25 minutes in the morning period and between 15 to 20 minutes in the afternoon period.
4.
The School Subjects The school is specifically established to help pupils acquire some knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values that will make them responsible and useful members of the society.
The classification of the teaching and learning activities into specific branches of knowledge is known as subject.
Many factors influence the choice of subjects at any level of education.
This includes learners, interest, age and ability, the need of the society, and government policy among others.
4 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 5.
Classes, Grades and Streams The grouping of pupils into classes according to their age is the most popular in Nigerian schools.
Thus in pre primary or nursery classes you find the three year old in nursery 1, the four and five years old in nursery II and three respectively.
In a situation where there are more children of the same age group coming for admission into class the children may be grouped into two or more classes hence there is nursery 1A, B, C, D. This is what is often referred to as streams or arms in the school.
In nursery schools the children must not be more than 20 in a class.
6.
Staffing This refers to the allocation of teachers to the appropriate classes.
The type of schools and its goal and objectives often determine the type of teachers and other staff members to recruits.
The teachers are the most important factors needed for the success of any education enterprise.
Nwagu (1978) pointed out that the teacher is the most expensive and also the most indispensable factor in the school system.
No matter how efficient and well intentioned the school administrator.
He/she cannot achieve success without the support and cooperation of well qualified, dedicated, and adequate staff.
Recruiting, developing and retraining of teachers is not an easy task.
Therefore the training, recruitment should be carefully done.
It is not enough to fill up the classroom with anybody as teacher.
4.0 CONCLUSION Organisation has been described as any social system established specifically for a purpose or purposes.
Early childhood educational institution can be seen as social system which consists of individuals working together and sharing mutual relationship for the establishment of common goals.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit above discusses: 1. the concept and meaning of organisation 2. functions of organisation 3. components of organisation 5 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE School as an organization is a network of relationship among individual and activities.
The activities are coordinated towards achieving a common goal and objectives.
Organisational functions in schools are: (i) Communication (ii) Coordination (iii) Directing 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate the major components of early childhood education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote O.; Oduolowu, E. and Lawal B.
(2001).
Preprimary and Primary Education in Nigeria: A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling Horden Publishers.
Ajayi, A.O.
(1989).
Basic Concepts of Administration Planning and Economics of Education.
Ibadan: Gabesther Publishers.
6 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 2 THE MEANING AND FUNCTIONS OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Educational Administration 3.2 Functions of Educational Administration 3.3 Principles of Educational Administration 3.3.1 Major Principles of Educational Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In our first unit, we examined the concept of organisation.
Organisation was described as a network of relationship among individual and activities which implies the structural and or arrangement of position and roles.
Definitely school as an organisation will therefore require administrators to put in place or arrange these networks of activities and also to assign roles to individual involves in day to day activities of the school.
In this unit we shall be discussing about the meaning of educational administration, functions of educational administrations as well as principles of educational administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • explain the meaning and functions of educational administration • enumerate the principles of educational administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Educational Administration Having understood that an organisation is a group of people whose activities are coordinated toward a common goal or objectives, it means that there must be somebody that coordinates peoples activities towards the achievement of the goals/objectives.
The activities that people within an organisation engage themselves in require proper planning, coordinating, supervision, direction of these group activities by selected 7 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION member(s) of the group is referred to as administration.
Educational administration is concerned with using method, principles and practices to establish, develop, and execute the goals, policies, plans and procedures necessary to achieve the objectives of education.
This process means the arrangement of human and material resources available for education carefully and systematically using them for the achievement of educational objectives.
Hence an administrator may be described as an executive head of the organization because he/she is responsible for making decisions and implementing its policies and programmes.
In the school situation the administrator is the manager and he/she is regarded as a disciplinary because of the way discipline is handled.
3.2 Functions of Educational Administration The function of educational administrators can generally be said to be that of implementation.
Due to the nature of their job they are knowledgeable about day to day activities and programmes of the school than any other person in the institution.
The school administrators have to deal with teaching, non-teaching staff, pupils, parents and members of the public.
Apart from these, other functions include: 1.
Programme Planning and Policy Making This function implies that the school administrator contribute in different capacities and at different levels in the system formulation of plans.
Also the administrators help in the interpretation of educational plans and policies at the state, local and school level.
2.
Provision and Maintenance of Funds and Facilities This function often referred to as school business administration is one of the most crucial functions of the school administrator.
Though, most educational administrators have limited control over the sources of funds for the schools, many of them at times influence the provision of funds and facilities.
The school administrator must ensure that the funds and facilities are effectively used and well maintained to achieve desired objectives.
3.
Employment and Development of Personnel This function is referred to as school personnel administration.
The ideal educational administrator identifies and indicates the staff needs of the 8 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION school or the educational system as well as the specific type of personnel needed to meet the needs.
In the school the head teacher ensures proper employment placement, use, motivation, development, welfare and professional development of the staff under his/her administration.
4.
Curriculum Development and Programme of Instruction School programme management constitutes one of the most important functions of the educational administrator.
The ultimate goal of educational administration is the improvement of learning and learning opportunities.
The school head teacher work with the classroom teachers, pupils and supervisors in the selection of appropriate curricular or school activities, choice of subjects, textbooks, work scheduling, use of instructional facilities, teaching methods and methods of evaluating school and students’ progress.
5.
Student Personnel Services This function includes the selection, orientation placement guidance and counseling of pupils.
The administrator ensures that every pupil is given adequate opportunity and motivation to learn.
The school should encourage extra curricular activities such as games, as well as ensuring that adequate school health services transportation (bus), moral and civic orientations, discipline and adequate interpersonal relations are maintained.
6.
Maintenance of Effective Interrelationship with the Community and External Agencies The educational system as an open system and a social organization thrives on effective interrelationships within it and with the society/community.
The school administrator endeavour to promote school community relations through the participation of the school community activities or projects and the community participation in some aspects of school life.
The head teacher should prepare and supply information about the school to interested member of the public and other visitors to the school.
The above function reveals that the educational administrator is involved in the totality of the education enterprise.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the functions of educational administration?
9 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3 Principles of Educational Administration Principles of administration are descriptive guides which help the educational administration to make sound and useful decisions.
They are not laws but they reveal to the administrators some of the most common ways of viewing and taking actions.
The administrative principles serve the following purposes.
1.
They guide the actions of the administrator 2.
They describe techniques for understanding and treating different administrative situations 3.
They form the basis for administrative actions 4.
They prepare the administration against the consequences of his/her action or decision 5.
They protect the school against irrational administrative actions and administrator against abuses of the school members.
3.3.1 Major Principles of Educational Administration 1.
Fundamental principle: these are basic and important principles that applies to organization and control of education.
They are sometimes referred to as universal principles of administration under this we have a.
Responsibility: This implies that at all level of the organization each person has his or her own responsibility i.e.
area and capacity of influence and act responsibly.
Each individual must dutifully and seriously perform the task assign to him/her conferred by the opposition he/she is occupying.
b. Delegation of Authority: This refers to departmental or sectional functions that are assigned or entrusted to a staff or a group of staff according to their specialty, expertise position or roles.
This is simply because the head teacher or administrator alone cannot perform all the roles and at the same time be in places where he/she is needed.
Delegation of authority therefore ensures ease of administration and encourages expertise as well as ensuring participation and support or collaboration among the staff.
c. Communication: Easy and quick flow of and access to information to every organization.
People must know what, why, how, when, who, where of things that are happening in their work environment.
Communication enhances democratic administration because it encourages deliberation consultation, opinionation.
10 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 2.
The Humanitarian Principle: The humanitarian principle focus on decision making in an organization.
The educational administrator must know how and when to make decision and how, as well as when others must make decisions.
There are three principles under this.
These are: a.
Democracy: This implies that those that will be affected by a decision must have a say in the formulation and development of the decision.
In the school setting the students, parents, and staff must participate in decisions regarding the school rules and regulations, school activities discipline, and extracurricular activities.
b.
Justice: Justice in educational administration implies that everyone must be bias or prejudice under the law.
In essence school rules must be obeyed by everybody and the administrator must use his or her discretion in applying law, rules or regulation on individuals or groups since differences may occur.
Notably the administrator is warned to make room for exceptions while employing uniform application of justice.
However exceptions must not be allowed to become justice and acceptance of authority.
c. Human Relations: This principle affirms the statement ‘friendliness begets friendliness’.
Since the administrator deals with human beings who have varied needs, expectations, feelings, emotions, interests and backgrounds he/she must learn how to relate to get and make the best out of each individual.
This principle applies words such as respect, courtesy, kindness, confidence, trust, sincerely and opens mindedness in dealing with people.
The administrator should be a friend to all but not a special friend to anybody in the school.
3.
The Prudential Principle: The prudential principle encourages judicious use of all resources by staff and administrator.
This principle involves: a.
Economy: This implies that the administrator must be economical in the use funds.
Provision should be equally made for check and balances, accurate accounting, proper planning and optimal utilization of resources.
b.
Responsibility and Authority: This principle demands that all responsibilities must be accompanied with commensurate authority to exercise it.
Everybody must know to whom and for what he or she is responsible to/for.
11 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION c. Loyalty: Each staff must be loyal to the organization i.e.
the school, the task and functions to support the goals of the institution.
The administrator must learn how to harness loyalty of all members without frustrating or exploiting such loyalty.
d. Employment of Staff: This implies that the administrator must ensure that the right and qualified staff is employed.
In the employment of staff there should be adequate and careful selection, appointment, placement, training, re-training, and staff development without bias or favouritism.
4.
The Principle of Change: This principle advocates for change as at when necessary without disrupting the stability of education.
The principle involves: a. Adaptability: This advocates that the administrator must be flexible and be able to adapt to changes in the environment; situations or development within the school as in the well as society.
The administrator must not be rigid he/she must welcome new ideas, innovations and methods.
b.
Stability: This emphasizes the needs to conserve the educational goals, practices and programmes that have proven very useful in the past for future and immediate use so as to serve as a measure of stability in the organization.
This is because everything cannot be flexible or change at all times.
Even when change is necessary stability demands that it should be gradual to ensure evolution rather than revolution in the management of the school.
5.
The Bureaucratic Principle: The bureaucratic principle tends to be the most significant of all administrative principles.
Even though it is common it may not be the best for humanitarian organization such as education.
The bureaucratic principle’s key elements involves: a. Stipulated Rules: This refers to some official functions that are bound by rules.
Bureaucracy believes in creating rules and regulations which cover the rights, duties and operation of all staff.
These rules are meant to save effects by avoiding the need for deriving new solutions for every problem and care.
b.
Division of Labour: This means that every body must perform the roles or duties assigned by the authority for him or her.
There must be adequate provision of necessary authority and resources to carry out or perform the assigned task.
12 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION c. Hierarchy of Authority: This implies that lower officer is under the control and supervision of a higher one.
That is power flows from the top.
d. Employment and Promotion of Staff: This implies that only the staff who has adequate training should be employed and promoted as at when due.
e. Impersonality of Official Matters: This indicates that the administrator should be impersonal in his/her official dealing and should not personalise the means of administration.
In order words the administrator should not own any property of the organization neither should he/she reflect his personal interest for anybody in the dealing with official matters f. Emphasis on Official Matter: This implies that all events and activities must be recorded and all members are expected to follow the recorded rules regulation and procedures.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the purposes of Administration principle?
4.0 CONCLUSION The administrator sees to the day to day running of the school.
The principles of administration are to guide the administration on possible actions in specific situation.
The administrator is therefore expected to identify and use the principle so as to be effective and successful in running the school.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit we have discussed meaning and functions of educational administration.
We have also discussed the principle of educational administration.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Purpose of Administration Principle: 1.
They guide actions of the administrator.
2.
They describe techniques for understanding and treating different administrative functions.
3.
They form the basis of administrative actions.
4.
They prepare the administrative against consequences of his/her action or decision.
13 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION They protect the school against negative actions and administration against abuse(s) of the school member.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define the term educational administration.
2.
What are the functions of educational administration?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, O.
(2006).
Organization and Administration of Pre-Primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: University of Ibadan, Distance Learning Centre.
Nwankwo, J.I.
; Nwokafor, J.N.
; Ogunsanwo, O.A.
and Ighalo, S.A. (1981).
Educational Administration and Supervision.
Ibadan: Institute of Education, University of Ibadan.
14 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 3 ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Administrative Structure 3.2 Administrative Structure of Early Childhood Education 3.3 Characteristics of Organisation and Administration 3.4 Importance of Educational Administration to Teachers 3.5 Qualities and Characteristics of an Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION I want you to imagine a situation whereby the school is run without an order of hierarchy and relationship.
Am sure you would expect an non- conducive atmosphere in such a school setting.
I should join you then in advocating for having administrative structure in a school system.
In this unit therefore, efforts shall be made towards making you to have a full group of what it takes to have a functional administrative structure in school as a school teacher and school head-teacher to be.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of the unit you should be able to: • to explain the meaning of administrative structure • to illustrate the administrative structure of early childhood education • to enumerate the characteristics of organization and administration • to explain the need for the knowledge of educational administration by teachers • identify the quality of a good administrator.
15 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Administrative Structure Structure means the framework or patterns of organization within which people work.
It includes the internal positioning of official roles and the network of relationship among the position.
In education administrative structure means the process of logically arranging posts sharing authority, and responsibility and establishing work relationships that will enable both the institution and the individual to realize their mutual objective.
3.2 Administrative Structure of Early Childhood Education/ Nursery Education HEAD TEACHER Assistant Head Teacher Class Teacher Specialist Teacher Account Clerk Typist Others Pupils SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Highlight the administrative structure of Early Childhood Organisation.
3.3 Characteristics of Organization and Administration An organization is based on certain characteristics and principles which are necessary for survival and achieving the set goals.
Some of these characteristics can be related to early childhood education administration.
1.
Effective administration depends on proper organization.
Early childhood education center/nursery schools are established with specific aims and objectives.
16 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 2.
The organization must have a definite structure and system for providing leadership.
In nursery school/pre-school setting the head teacher is the executive head of the institution, there may be a deputy and others personnel of various ranks all of whom are given specific responsibilities.
There is amongst others clerical staff, messengers’ nannies or nursery aids, gardener, cooks, cleaners, nurses, etc.
Every worker has a specific job to do.
If the school organization is to fulfill its aims it must have an effective and efficient leadership and division of labour.
3.
An effective organization must have clearly defined goals and purposes which binds its members together for example the main aim of early childhood education is to develop the child holistically emphasizing the physical, emotional, social, as well as cognitive development of the child.
If the aims of an organization are not clear, it will lack the sense of direction and purpose.
Hence there will be conflict, confusion and lack of direction and progress.
4.
There is need for personnel policies in an organization for example there should be policies for selecting the right type of staff to ensure maximum productivity.
There should be policies covering staff promotion, development welfare and pension schemes so as to maintain staff morale.
A system of reward and punishment is equally inevitable in an organization.
5.
There is need for proper coordination of functions, activities, interests, and assignment if the organization is to perform its functions properly and achieve its aims.
Coordinating activities will be one of the principal functions of an administrative head, and will ensure that things go on smoothly and efficiently without delay or conflict.
6.
The members of organization must have a sense of security.
No member of an organization should entertain any fear of insecurity in his/her job as long as the duties are discharged conscientiously and efficiently.
A feeling of insecurity among members of staff may seriously lower their morale and consequently affect their productivity and the attainment of common goals.
7.
Cooperation is most essential for the efficient running of an organization.
This implies that an establishment should be functioning as one in unity with all members of various units working together.
Lack of cooperation could have disastrous consequences such as confusion, inefficiency, costly mistakes, and disappointment.
17 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 8.
An effective organization should maintain an effective machinery for planning, and decision-making.
There should be short and long range plans aimed at accomplishing specific objectives and general aims of the establishment.
9.
If an organization is to make satisfactory progress it should develop an objective means of periodically programme and policies in order to ascertain to what extent it is achieving it’s aims.
Whatever evaluation device is used by organization should be valid, and reliable and replicable.
3.4 Importance of Educational Administration to Teachers In Nigeria, most school heads have no regular training courses for the post, because it is wrongly believed that school administrator does not require any special training and all that is needed is experience on the job.
This has been the practice in the country but with rapid expansion of educational system and the projected increase in school sizes, it is now important that teachers in training who eventually is going to head the school need to be knowledgeable in rudiments of educational administration.
Schools are now becoming more complex institutions facing many complicated problems of pupils and staff hence there is need to equip the teachers who will handle the situation and the accompanying problems effectively.
Akinbote (2001) gave the following reasons for student teachers to study educational administration: 1.
It will help to introduce students to the various techniques of resources programme planning, policy making, and implementation in education.
2.
It helps them to learn how to work harmoniously with various groups within and outside the school system in order to achieve the goals and objectives of education.
3.
It exposes the teachers to the various approaches for improving teaching and learning as well as solving various administrative problems associated with population explosion in schools.
4.
It also exposes teachers to the different kinds of leadership and their styles of administration in schools.
5.
It also enhances their ability to adequately keep necessary school, records and communicate effectively.
18 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Justify the inclusion of educational administration as a course in the programme of study for early childhood education teachers.
3.5 Qualities and Characteristics of an Administrator Functioning as a school administrator is not easy.
He or she is not appreciated; he/she is misunderstood at times and unappreciated by those for whom he works.
He/she is blamed for many things for which he is not directly responsible.
Despite these he/she must posses certain characteristics which will affect his/her leadership quality.
Therefore an effective and successful administrator must have many or all of the following personal attributes: a.
Technical Skills 1.
He/she must have the ability to organize and delegate responsibility and authority.
He has to plan ahead, budget the time, and work in a systematic manner to ensure that everything goes well.
2.
He/she must have a sound knowledge of what the job entails.
He/she must be well versed not only in a particular field but in other areas and have up to date general knowledge of events, and developments.
He/she must be able to express his/her thoughts and ideas clearly and intelligently.
3.
Even though as a school administrator he/she is a teacher, possessing teaching skills.
He/she must be able to demonstrate the teaching ability and other teachers should learn from the techniques of teaching.
4.
To be a successful administrator, he/she must possess an ability to work with others and obtain cooperation so that goals of the establishment would be achieved.
5.
In order to obtain cooperation he/she must have the ability to make others feel important.
Try to treat others with respect and acknowledge individual differences.
b. Traits of Personality 1.
He/she must be modest and not give the impression that he/she is the boss and the most important while others are not.
19 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 2.
He/she must possess the virtue of friendliness by being personally interested in the welfare and problems of both staff and pupils.
3.
He/she must be frank and honest in dealing with people and in handling the school property.
He/she should not set double standard.
4.
He/she must be faithful ready to accept other peoples opinion or point of view on issues.
5.
He/she must be committed to the work by displaying sense of responsibility and doing his/her best at all times.
c. Intellectual Qualities Leadership demands a lot of intellectual qualities such as sound judgment, resourcefulness, initiative broad-mindedness, originality, ability to foresee and analyze problems and be able to proffer good solution.
4.0 CONCLUSION The administrative structure affects the whole functioning of the school with the head teacher occupying the leadership position.
As a result he/she must possess adequate knowledge and technical capability in facing the task ahead.
5.0 SUMMARY The unit above discussed the meaning and concept of administrative structure.
It also give a graphical organization of administrative in early childhood education.
Characteristics of organization and administration as well as qualities of administrators were equally discussed.
ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Compare your answers to 3.2 above for assessment A and for B, 3.4.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Define what is meant by administrative structure.
(2) Identify five characteristics of an organization.
20 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote O.
(2001).
Administration in Primary and Secondary Schools” in Ladipo S.O.
and Ogunsaya M.
(eds.).
Principle and Practice in Education.
Oyo: Andrian Publication Series.
Ozigi A.O.
(1977).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
21 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 4 SCHOOL SERVICE PROVISION AND RECORD KEEPING IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Service Provision in Schools 3.2 Record Keeping in Early Childhood Education 3.2.1 The Importance of Keeping Records 3.2.2 Types of Records in Early Childhood Centres School 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The preceding chapters introduced you to the concept of school as an organisation.
It described the meaning and component of organisation in early childhood education.
Also function of educational administration and the administrative structure in early childhood education.
From these we have discovered that early childhood organisation is all about service provision.
To achieve the stated goals and objectives there is need to provide some essential services.
These services are pertinent to the welfare of both the pupils and personnel.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this lesson you should be able to: • identify the essential services to be established in early childhood centres • explain the maintenance and use of such facilities • Identify various records to be kept by the teacher and head teacher in the school.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Services Provisions in Schools These are physical facilities such as classrooms, libraries, recreational 22 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION and health facilities.
The location of the school should be in a conducive environment for teaching and learning process.
Not beside a factory that generate a lot of noise, apart from the health hazards will not make the pupil’s learning environment enjoyable.
The schools should neither be cited near market place.
(a) Classrooms Apart from the site, the classroom should have a wide window and should be cross-ventilated.
The ceiling should be high enough to enable adequate air circulation in the room.
The provision of tables and chairs should match the age of the pupils so that there will be no danger to their health with the use of wrong sizes of furniture.
Adequate instructional materials should equally be provided.
(b) Libraries These are essential part of education and efforts should be made by the school administrator to establish a good library in the school.
The library should have adequate texts books, and instructional materials, for both staff and pupils children should be trained to acquire a reading habit through their regular use of school and class libraries.
The collection in the library should cover all area of the curriculum content that are relevant to the immediate society.
(c) School Health Clinic/Sick Bay There is need for provision to meet emergency needs of children while at school.
The school may not be able to build a school clinic by itself through lack of financial resources.
But provision of first aid drugs even in a box on the shelf in a corner of the classroom is a welcome idea that would be useful and handy in case of emergency They can be useful for the treatment of minor ailments and in offering first aid to injured pupils or staff.
It may not be possible to employ a permanent health staff due to lack of funds but there should be a member of staff trained and assigned for this.
(d) Recreational Facilities The school play ground should be located away from the classrooms and offices.
Arrangement should be made for the care and maintenance of the playground where there are facilities for indoor games.
There should be arrangement for the rooms to be open only when it is time for games.
Adequate play materials should be provided at early childhood education centres because play is one of the most important activities for 23 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION children learning at this age.
(e) School Transport Some schools own vehicles purchased at times at the instance of parent- teachers association.
These are to be used for conveying children from home.
The control and use of such vehicles is the responsibility of the school administrator.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify various services that should be provided in early childhood education.
3.2 Record Keeping in Early Childhood Education Education laws require that every educational institution keeps and operate school records.
There are other records not required by law, but they are kept because they provide a useful source of information not only for the school but also for other members of the community.
3.2.1 The Importance of Keeping Records a.
School records provide useful information on the activities going on in the school.
b.
School records keep and provide scholastic achievement of pupils general behaviour, and over all academic performance in all the school subjects.
c. They serve as a source of information for inspectors of education who come to the school.
3.2.2 Types of Records in Early Childhood Centres School The following are the main types of schools records to be found in most schools: a.
Admission Register: The register shows the list of all pupils enrolled each year into the school.
It also shows their age, date of enrollment, their admission number and their home addresses.
b.
Attendance Register: This register shows the class attendance each day.
The register is usually marked twice a day by the class teach.
The information regarding the number of pupils present as well as the number absent on any day must be submitted to the 24 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION head teacher to enable him to keep the school daily attendance notice board up to date.
c. The Log Book: This is a daily record of the significance happenings which takes place when the school is in session.
It is kept by the head teacher and all important entries should be briefly signed and dated.
Events such as changes in staff, dates of opening and closing the school term, examination, visits by important people and special occasions can be entered into the log book.
If it is properly kept the log book serves as a historical record for the school.
d. Cumulative Record: This is a continuous record or combination of record which contain comprehensive information about each pupil and which provide a summary of the pupils career in the school.
A cumulative record card shows full particulars of the progress of each pupil.
e. Scheme of Work: Work record shows the plan of work to be covered by each class during the term and the school year.
The work envisaged for the school year.
It is usually contained in a prescribed syllabus.
It is the responsibility of the class teacher to breakdown the syllabus for each class outing of the topics to be covered each week.
The scheme of work should be drawn up before the school year begins.
f. Record of Work: This shows the teachers plan of work in each subject area and the actual work covered weekly.
Entries are usually made at the end of each week.
The head teacher is supposed to ensure that all entries are correctly made.
The record of work is helpful when a teacher is no more in the class and another teacher takes over.
g. Official Correspondent Files: The head-teacher must keep several files for all the official correspondence connected with the school.
Files must be opened to cater for all the school official correspondences e.g.
1.
General circulars from the state ministry of education 2.
Correspondence with local government area ministry of education 3.
Confidential reports 4.
Confidential or personnel files h. Stock Book: This book shows a careful record of the supply of equipment and other school property.
25 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION i.
Staff Meeting Minute: This is a full record of staff meeting discussions and decisions.
One of the staff is nominated by the staff to take minutes of the staff meetings.
j.
The Supervisory Notebook: The supervisory note book may be considered both as a control and as an evaluative instrument of the head-teacher.
The record in the book should be accurate, concise and realistic.
It forms an important guide to the head teacher in his/her day to day activity.
k. Health Record Book: As children are bound to be sick occasionally.
It is important to keep a health record book which shows the name of the sick pupils, for how long and the treatment given.
Apart from the above record, it is very advisable to have the following in schools.
i.
A copy of school syllabus or programs of study ii.
A copy of the National Policy on education iii.
A copy of education law or edict iv.
A copy of the school calendar SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List 7 records and the purpose for their being kept in the school.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit above discusses the various services and records in schools to ensure maximum functions as well as helping in achieving the set goals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about service provision in schools and records to be kept by the teacher and head teacher in schools.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 (1) Library Service (2) Health Services (3) Recreational (4) Transport (5) Classroom 26 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 (1) Admission Register (2) Attendance Register (3) Log Book (4) Cummulative Record (5) Record of Work (6) Health Record Book (7) Syllabus 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What are the purposes of record keeping in schools?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote O.
(2001).
Administration in Primary and Secondary Schools” in Ladipo S.O.
and Ogunsaya M.
(eds.).
Principle and Practice in Education.
Oyo: Andrian Publication Series.
Ozigi A.O.
(1977).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
27 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 5 MOTIVATION WITHIN AN ORGANSIATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Motivation 3.2 Function of Motivation 3.3 Theories of Motivation 3.3.1 Abraham Maslow Theory Hierarchical Need 3.3.2 Frederick Herzberg and Hygiene Theory of Needs 3.4 Techniques for Motivation 3.5 Hints on Motivating Employers/Staff 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION An organization is a social unit with a network of relationship among individuals and activities.
As a result of interaction there is bound to be different types of behaviours.
Behaviour is not just an accident within an organization; it is as a result of human relations.
The head-teacher/administrator in school is daily faced with a variety of problems in the school with the teachers as well as the pupils.
This creates anxiety and curiosity on the mind of the teacher/headmaster to understand the underlying factors which explain such type of behaviour in his pupils as well the teachers.
Thus, the basic question which we will deal with is “why” of behaviour, what are those factors which motivate an organism for action?
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define motivation • explain the functions of motivation • identify the theories of motivation that are useful in early childhood institution as an organization • techniques for motivating employees/staff • enumerate hints on motivating employers/staff.
28 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Motivation Historically, motivation comes from the Latin word “movers” which means to move.
Thus we may say the literal meaning of motivation is the process of arousing movement in an organism.
The movement is produced and regulated through the release of energy within the tissues.
Every layman and scholar has his/her definition of motivation.
Usually one or more of the following words are included in the definition.
These words are desire, want, wishes, aims, goals, drive, motives and incentive.
Here are some of the definitions.
Berelson and Stainer defined it as “Inner state that energizes, activates channels behaviour towards goals.” Sandford and Wrights-man described motive as restless, a lack, a yearn, a force once in the grip of a motive the organism does something.
To Bernard, motivation refers to all these phenomena which are involved in the stimulation of action towards particular objective where previously there was little or no movement toward those goals.
According to Maslow, motivation is constant never ending, fluctuating and complex and that it is an almost universal characteristic of particularly every organismic state of affairs.
The key to understanding motivation thus lies in the meaning and relationship between needs, drives that aid goals.
Motivating is one of the simplest yet most complex of an administrator job.
It is simple because people are basically motivated or driven to behave in a way that they feel leads to reward but complex because what one person considers a research might not be so considered by another person.
It might even be considered useless.
But whatever motivation is; is the “bottom line” of administration.
Administrators get things done through other people and if he/she cannot motivate the employees/staff he may not be successful enough in administration.
Performance is considered to be a function of ability and motivation.
29 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2 Functions of Motivation 1.
Motivation Energizes and Sustains Behaviour: Motive energizes the behaviour of an individual and arouses him/her for action.
Motive not only energizes the behaviour but they sustain interest and behaviour for longer period in the activity.
Motive or drives (two terms that can be used interchangeable) are set up to alleviate needs.
Drives are action oriented and provide an energizing thrust toward a goal accomplishment.
2.
Motives Direct and Regulate Our Behaviour: is often describes as guided, directed and goal oriented.
The motivated behaviour is in specific direction.
A goal can be defined as anything which will alleviate a need and reduce a drive.
Thus attaining a goal will tend to restore psychological or physiological balance and will reduce or cut off drive.
3.
Behaviour is Selective: Under motivated condition, the behaviour of an individual does not move in haphazard way.
It is directed toward a selective goal which the individual set for himself/herself.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
Define Motivation.
2.
What are the functions of motivation in an organization?
3.3 Theories of Motivation There are several theories of motivation but only two will be discussed because of their relevance to organization structure.
These theories are: 1.
Abraham Maslow Theory of Hierarchy of needs 2.
Frederick Herzberg Xof Hygiene Theory of Needs 1.
Abraham Maslow Theory of Need Maslow has developed a hierarchical order of needs from physiological to self actualization needs.
These needs are physiological, safety, love, esteem and self-actualization.
The order to these needs starts from basic survival lower order needs to higher order needs.
Physiological need (lowest) Safety needs Love needs Esteem needs Self actualization (highest) 30 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3.1 Abraham Maslow Theory Hierarchical Need 1.
Physiological Needs: The lowest level.
These are the most basic needs we all have e.g.
food, drink, shelter and rest 2.
The Safety Needs: When the physiological needs are successfully fulfilled the safety needs become activated.
They becomes the needs which the person tries to satisfy, the needs that motivate him/her.
These are the needs for protection against danger or deprivation and the need for security.
3.
The Social Need: The need for belongingness and love.
These are need of making intimate relationship with other members of the society, being accepted member of as organized group, needing a familiar environment as family.
These needs are dependent on the fulfillment and satisfaction of previous categories of needs.
4.
The Esteem or Ego Need: Esteem needs are divided into two categories (i) self esteem, self respect, self regard and self valuation.
(ii) relating to respect form others reputation, social success and fame.
5.
Self-Actualization: The highest and ultimate need.
This is the need for self fulfillment, the need we all have to become the person we feel we have the potential of becoming.
3.3.2 Frederick Herzberg and Hygiene Theory of Needs According to him man has two different set of needs.
one is the lower level set needs.
It drives from man’s desire to avoid pain and satisfy his basic needs.
These include such things as feeding, clothing, shelter as well as the need for money to pay for these things.
Man also has a “high level” set of needs.
This set of needs relates to the unique human characteristics, the ability to achieve a difficult task, to obtain prestige and to receive recognition.
The above mentioned theories are very useful.
They help explain what motivate people and they help to see what sort of needs the administrator can focus on satisfying.
When it comes to administration the administrator need some specific technique for applying these theories.
31 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.4 Techniques for Motivating Staff Three techniques have been identified.
These are: 1.
MBO (Management by Objectives) 2.
Job enrichment 3.
KITA (kick in the pants) 1.
Management by Objectives (MBO): management by objectives means managing with the objectives of the organisation in mind.
This consists of 5 basic steps: (a) Set the organisation goals establishment of an organization wide strategy and goals: Clear and attainable, and specific goals help channel energies in specific direction and the subordinate will know the basis on which he will be awarded.
(b) Joint goal setting: establishment of short term performance target between administrators and subordinates.
Allowing subordinates genuine participation in establishing their own goals can increase their commitment to these goals and thereby their performance.
It can make them feel more involved and can thus appeal to their higher level needs.
(c) Performance reviews frequent performance review meetings between the subordinates and the administrators.
(d) Set checkpoint: Establishment of major check-points to measure.
(e) Feedback: Discussion between the administrator and his/her subordinates at the end of a defined period to assess the results of their joint efforts.
Feedback that is specific relevant and timely help satisfies needs of workers because they know where they stand.
2.
Use of job enrichment: Opportunities for growth on the job is a good motivator for ht staff one way to do this is through job enrichment that the administrator recognizes his staff’s job and make it more interesting ad challenge.
This is done by giving the staff more autonomy and allows him/her do much of the work and duties done by the superior.
3.
Kick in the pants: A kick in the pant either positive or negative is useful way of getting someone to do what you want him/her to do.
More pay, fringe benefits or threats do motivate the staff to do more.
32 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.5 Hints on Motivating the Staff by the Administration 1.
Let the staff know that you consider them valuable and capable individuals.
The need to treat people with respect and honesty is a very important element in motivation.
Maslow refers to it as the need for esteem and self actualization Herzberg calls it recognition.
2.
Make sure the subordinate has tools to work with.
No matter the amount of reward if the staff do not have materials to accomplish the task he would not be motivated.
If there is need for training ensure that they get.
In addition, make sure that the organization has a structure and the support staff needed.
3.
Avoid dissatisfier into the job: Ensure that salary and working conditions are adequate, accurate, they are necessary motivator.
4.
Set fair, achievable goals and communicate them: Staff work better when they know what the goals are and that the standard for evaluation are consistent and fair.
5.
Never belittle or criticize your staff in front of others.
6.
Let your people know how they are doing.
Feedback improves performance and morale.
7.
Use group dynamics: The administrator should improve the social and emotional climate of the organization.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention theories of motivation that are relevant to an organization.
4.0 CONCLUSION Motivation is those inner forces which energize and move individual to behave the way he or she does.
The external environment like reward system, leadership the task can exert on this drive and make people behave indifferent ways.
33 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In the unit above you have learnt about 1.
Concept of motivation; 2.
Functions of motivation; 3.
Theories of motivation that is useful in an organization; 4.
Techniques for motivation the staff/employee; 5.
Hints on motivating the staff or employees.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 A.
Motivation is the desire or drive which stimulates an action towards particular objective.
Functions of Motivation 1.
Motivation energises and sustains behaviour.
2.
Motivation directs and regulates behaviour.
3.
Behaviour is selective under motivator behaviour.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 B.
Theories of Motivation that are relevant in Organisation 1.
Abraham Maslow Theory of Hierarchical need 2.
Fredrick Herzeberg Hygiene Theory of Needs They all identified the needs of man to be food, clothing, shelter, esteem and recognition.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How can the administrator motivate the employees?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akanni J.A.
(1991).
Management Concept, Techniques and Cases.
Ibadan: Julab Publishers.
Rhauham S.S. (1978).
Advanced Educational Psychology.
New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
34 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MODULE 2 ADMINISTRATIVE TECHNIQUES IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Unit 1 Behaviour within an Organization II – Group Dynamics Unit 2 Behaviour within an Organisation III – Conflict Resolution Unit 3 Supervision in Early Childhood Education Unit 4 Professional Development Unit 5 Child Care Agencies UNIT 1 BEHAVIOUR WITHIN AN ORGANISATION I - GROUP DYNAMICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is a Group?
3.2 Characteristics of Human Group 3.3 Early Childhood Educational Institution as a Group 3.4 Leadership in Schools.
3.5 How to Improve Group Relationship within an Organisation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Dynamics means changing behaviour feelings or thoughts of individuals are influenced and determined by the behaviour and characteristics of others.
Staff members in an organization interact in group.
From morning till evening they move and work in social groups because an organization is best described as a social system established specifically for specific or purposes.
The staff works a mutual relationship to achieve the stated purposes.
The school thus consists of teachers, pupils, administrators, and supporting staff who interact and form a formidable group to achieve established goals of the institution.
35 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you will be able to: • define a group and group dynamics • identify properties of human groups • identify the characteristics of early childhood education institutions as a group • identify the elements of leadership • explain the styles of leadership • discuss the ways of improving group relationship in schools.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is a Group?
Group has been defined from different angles by different scholars.
Sheriff and Sheriff defined a group as a social unit consisting of a number of individual who stand in role and status relationship to one another.
Miller (1967) equally defined group into terms of its goals and objectives.
According to him a group is a unit composed of two or more persons who come into contact for a specific purpose and consider the contact meaningful.
Bass (1960) approached the definition of a group from the angle of motivation and satisfaction of needs.
He says that an individual joins a group because it satisfies his needs and the membership of the group is rewarding to the individual.
Mc David 1968 similarly defined a group as a social psychological group in an organized system of two or more individuals who are interrelated so that the system performs some function, has a standard set of role relationship among its members and has a set of norms that regulate the function of the group and of its members.
From the above definition you can see that there is interaction among the members of a group that binds them together.
The personality and behaviour of members constituting the group undergoes perpetual changes.
Behaviour is not static.
Hence group dynamics means change in behaviour through interaction in the group.
It refers to the forces which operate in group situations.
It studies the structure of the group and other attributes which emerge out of group interaction.
36 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2 Characteristics of Human Group Human group have certain characteristics which distinguish them from animal group.
Therefore a group must have the following characteristics in order to be called a group.
1.
Motivational Base: This means that the members of group must share some common aim or objectives so that their activities may be goal-oriented.
The motivational base differs from group to group.
It depends on the type of the group and its ultimate goal.
2.
Organization: The group must have a well organized structure of its composition.
The roles should be well-defined.
The group must have rules, regulation, and a set of norms which bind the individual members.
3.
Interdependence: The members of a group are woven into web.
They are influenced by each others actions and reaction.
4.
Structure: Structure is very essential property of a group to attain its aims and objectives.
Structure of the group may be in terms of power.
It may be hierarchical in nature in which the power is vested in the highest authority of the group.
3.3 Early Childhood Educational Institution as a Group Having discussed the characteristics of a group, now we will see whether the nursery school class fulfills the characteristics of a group.
Early childhood educational institution/class has the following essential properties.
1.
Common Goal: The staff have a common goal.
All the member, attempt to reach the goal as stipulated by the policy.
The goal of the school is well-defined.
2.
Organized Structure: Early childhood education has a well defined structure.
There are positions and roles that are clearly spelt out.
3.
Motivation: The staff members are motivated for the achievement of a common goal.
4.
Leadership: The institution has a leader.
The functions of a leader are discharged by a teacher in the class and the head- teacher in the school as a whole.
Leadership are of different types and styles.
37 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify the characteristics of early childhood educational institution as a group.
3.4 Leadership in Schools Leadership is a key process in any organization.
Success or failure of any organization is attributed to its leadership.
Leadership is concerned with the execution of those policies and decisions which help to direct the activities of an organization towards its specified goals.
The school administrator is essentially a leader of staff and students of the school 3.4.1 Elements of Leadership There are certain basic elements which are characteristic of leadership.
These are: 1.
Authority: It means the right conferred on an administrator in an organization to make decision in the course of discharging its responsibility, it enables him to require the subordinate to accept the decision and if necessary enforce them.
Decisions coming from superior and affecting their subordinates are therefore authoritative.
Authority does not mean that the leaders must dictate decision.
There is need for discussion and consultation for opinions of various people before decisions are made.
2.
Power: Power is a necessary element of leadership.
Power means the capacity to use force.
Power is the force behind authority in administration.
Therefore there is need for a leader not to use the power bestowed upon him unnecessarily.
3.
Responsibility: Responsibility is the ability to execute duties in accordance with the official procedure.
A good leader must therefore work within the confines of authority and power.
4.
Delegation of responsibility: is the process whereby the leader of an organization transfers the responsibility of taking some actions as well as making some decisions in particular area to members of staff.
5.
Decision making: This is an important element of administrative leadership.
It is an attempt to solve organizational problems.
It involves the selection of a course of action from various possibilities.
A decision must always be made about who is to do what, how will it be done, when and where it will be done.
38 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Decision is a daily function of the leaders because one decision affects the other.
6.
Expertise: No one can lead a formal organization successfully without having a good grasp of what the organization aims to achieve.
Expertise grows out of specialization and field of experience.
It is only when an administrator is an expert in the field of leadership that is when high quality and progressive decisions can be made.
3.4.2 Styles of Leadership There are various types of leaders.
It is worthy to note that no two leaders are alike in the way they administer their organization.
3 types of leaders are going to be discussed for this purpose.
1.
Democratic Leader: The democratic leader respects every member of the group.
Decision making and planning are based on consultation, deliberation, and participation among the group.
Praise and criticism are given objectively.
2.
Autocratic Leader: With autocratic leader decision making is located solely with him/her.
He does not trust anybody and he is rigid.
3.
Laissez-Faire Leadership: The leadership takes a passive stance towards the problems of the group or the organization.
This leader is very tolerant and the subordinates are free to do what they want.
The laissez faire leader attempts to pass the responsibility for decision making to the group.
This type of leadership is extremely slow in process and often produces chaotic results.
3.5 How to Improve Group Relationship in the School • Good group relationship plays an important role in organization, the head-teacher should therefore strive to improve and create conducive environment for all staff.
• The head-teacher should respect the unique personality of individual staff.
Treat staff as an important capable, intelligent and creative individual.
• The head-teacher should adapt to the characteristics of the work.
Goals should be set and the staff should be relied upon to get the job done.
39 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • There should be effective communication within the school because sometimes lack of proper communication can cause disharmony in the school.
• The head-teacher should act like a leader.
His behaviour should be impartial and his handling of problems should be psychological.
In all respect he/she will have to act like the kind of person whom the staff will want to look up to.
The head-teacher should delegate duties.
No mater how competent he is, he cannot do all the work himself.
Delegation of duties not only gives freedom, but allow for more important things to be done.
Delegation of duties gives the teachers sense of belonging and responsibility.
• Effective team should be built in the school.
The organization can function well when its personnel work not as individual but as members of effective work group.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Highlight the elements of leadership.
4.0 CONCLUSION The school is a social unit where group formation and interaction is inevitable.
In any group there is always a leader.
The leader guide, modify and direct actions of group.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about group and group dynamics: 1.
Properties of human group 2.
Characteristics of early childhood education as a group 3.
Elements of leadership 4.
Styles of leadership 5.
Ways of improving group relationship in schools.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 A.
Early childhood education institution as an organization has (i) Common goal (ii) Organised structure 40 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION (iii) Motivation (iv) Leadership ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Elements of leadership: (i) Authority (ii) Power (iii) Responsibility (iv) Delegation of Responsibility (v) Decision Making (vi) Expertise 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define a group and mention its characteristics.
2.
How can a leader improve group relationship among the staff?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akanni J.A.
(1991).
Management Concept, Techniques and Cases.
Ibadan: Julab Publishers Rhauham S.S. (1978).
Advanced Educational Psychology.
New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
41 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 2 BEHAVIOUR WITHIN AN ORGANIZATION II: CONFLICT RESOLUTION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Conflict?
3.2 Sign and Stages of Conflict in an Organisation 3.3 Signs of Conflict between Groups of People 3.4 Building Teamwork and Cooperation 3.5 Conflict Management and Conflict Resolution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Conflict is an everyday occurrence even in healthy organizations.
If properly managed it can have a positive outcomes for the individual involved and the organisation as a whole.
But if mismanaged or ignored, conflict can destroy an individual or organisation.
Conflict can arise from individual differences, ambition or from rivalry between subgroups or factions.
All leaders and members of the organisation need to be alert to group dynamics that can spill into conflict.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: 1.
Define conflict and competition; 2.
Identify the common causes of conflict in an organization; 3.
Identify the signs of conflict between individuals and groups; 4.
Examine how to build teamwork and cooperation so as to minimize the possibility of conflict; 5.
Explain how to manage and resolve conflict situations in an organization.
42 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Conflict?
Conflict is defined as a state of disagreement or argument between people or groups, this can happen in any organization.
Competition usually brings out the best in people as they strive to be top in their field, sport, affairs or work.
In fact fair and friendly competition often leads to new sporting achievements, scientific inventions or outstanding effort in solving community problem.
When competition becomes unfriendly or bitter conflict can arise and this can bring out the worst in people.
3.1.1 Common Causes of Conflict in an Organization Causes of organizational conflict are many and varied.
The most common causes are: 1.
Scarcity of resources (finance, equipment, facilities, etc ) 2.
Different attitudes, values and or perceptions 3.
Disagreement about needs, goals, priorities and interest.
4.
Poor communication 5.
Poor or inadequate organization structure 6.
Lack of teamwork 7.
Lack of clarity in roles and responsible.
3.1.2 Signs and Stages of Conflict in an Organization In an organization or a workplace, there are two main types of disputes/ conflicts which may arise as a result of interaction.
These are: 1.
Dispute of right 2.
Dispute of interest Dispute of Right – Where people or groups are entitled by law, by contract, by previous agreement or by established practice to certain rights.
Disputes of right will focus on conflict issues such as employment contract, legally or enforceable issues or customary practices.
A dispute of right is usually settled by legal decision or arbitration and not by negotiation.
Disputes of Interest: - Where the conflict may be a matter of opinion, such as where a person or group is entitled to some resources or privilege (such as better working condition, access to property, increments in wages etc) because there is no established law or right, a dispute of interest will usually be solved through collective bargaining or negotiation.
43 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Stages of Conflicts The handling of conflict requires awareness of its various developmental stages.
If leaders in the situation can identify the conflict issue and how far it has developed, they can sometimes solve it before it becomes much more serious.
Typical stages include: • Where potential for conflict exists - in other words where the people recognize lack of resources, diversity of language or culture may possibly result in conflict, e.g.
where they are not sensitive to the diversity • Latent conflict where a competitive situation could easily spill over into conflict e.g.
in the workplace where there are obvious differences between groups of people.
• Open conflict - which can be triggered by an incident and suddenly become real conflict.
• Aftermath conflict - the situation where a particular problem may have been resolved but the potential for conflict still exists.
In fact the potential may be even greater than before if one person or group perceives itself as being involved in a win-loose situation.
3.3 Signs of Conflict between Groups of People In the organization leaders and members should be alert lo signs of conflict between colleagues, so that they can be proactive in reducing or resolving the conflict by getting to the root of the issue.
Typical signs may include: • Colleagues not speaking to each other or ignoring each other • Contradicting and bad-mouthing one another • Deliberately undermining or not co-operating with each other to the downfall of the team.
3.4 Building Teamwork and Co-Operation Teamwork and co-operation are essential in an organisation which aims to be effective and efficient, and not likely to be divided by conflicting factions.
The best teamwork usually come from having a shared vision or goal, so that leaders and members are all committed to the same objectives and understand their roles in achieving those objectives.
Important behaviours in achieving teamwork and minimizing potential 44 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION conflict include a commitment by team members to: • Share information by keeping people in the group up-to-date with current issues • Express positive expectations about each other • Empower each other - publicly crediting colleagues who have performed well and encouraging each other to achieve results • Team-build - by promoting good morale and protecting the group's reputation with outsiders • Resolve potential conflict - by bringing differences of opinion into the open and facilitating resolution of conflicts.
Especially in workplace situations, it is necessary to have agreed mechanisms in place for groups of people who may be antagonistic (e.g.
management and workers) to collectively discuss and resolve issues This process is often called "collective bargaining", because representatives of each group come together with a mandate to work out a solution collectively.
Experience has shown that this is far better than avoidance or withdrawal, and puts democratic processes in place to achieve 'integrative problem solving", where people or groups who must find ways of co-operating in the same organisation do so within their own agreed rules and procedures.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the likely signs of conflict in an organization?
3.5 Conflict Management and Conflict Resolution 1.
Conflict Management: It refers to the long-term management of intractable conflicts.
It is the label for ways by which people handle grievances, standing up for what they consider being right and against what they considered to be wrong.
Conflict management is the process of planning to avoid conflict where possible and organizing to resolve conflict where it does happen, as rapidly and smoothly as possible.
Conflict management concerns is an ongoing process.
Which form of conflict management will be used in any given situation are predicted and explained by the social structure of the case.
2.
Conflict Resolution: Conflict resolution refers to resolving the dispute to the approval of one or both parties.
45 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.
Conciliation: The dictionary defines conciliation as ''the act of procuring good will or inducing a friendly feeling".
South African labour relations legislation provides for the process of conciliation in the workplace, whereby groups who are in conflict and who have failed to reach agreement, can come together once again to attempt to settle their differences This is usually attempted before the more serious step of a strike by workers or a lock-out by management is taken; and it has been found useful to involve a facilitator in the conciliation process.
4.
Mediation: when negotiations fail or get stuck, parties often call in an independent mediator.
This person or group will try to facilitate settlement of the conflict.
The 'mediator plays an active part in the process, advises both or all groups, acts as intermediary and suggests possible solutions.
In contrast to arbitration (see below) mediators act only in an advisory capacity - they have no decision -making power and cannot impose a settlement on the conflicting parties.
Skilled mediators are able to gain trust and confidence from ‘die-hard’ conflicting groups or individuals.
5.
Arbitration: means the appointment of an independent person to act as an adjudicator for judge) in a dispute to Decide on the terms of a settlement.
Both parties in a conflict have to agree about who the arbitrator should be, and that the decision of the arbitrator will be binding on them all.
Arbitration differs from mediation and negotiation in that it does not promote the continuation of collective bargaining.
The arbitrator listens to and investigates the demands and counter-demands and takes over the role of decision -maker.
People or organisations can agree on having either a single arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators whom they respect and the decision they will accept as final in order to resolve the conflict.
6.
Negotiation: this is the process where mandated representatives of groups in a conflict situation meet together in order to resolve their differences and to reach agreement It is a deliberate process, conducted by representatives of groups, designed to reconcile differences and to reach agreements by consensus The outcome is often dependent on the power relationship between the groups.
Negotiations often involve compromise - one group may win one of their demands and give in on another.
In workplaces Unions and management representative usually use negotiations to solve conflicts.
46 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Explain how to build teamwork in an organization.
4.0 CONCLUSION Conflict in any organization is an unavoidable experience or situation.
Leaders and members of the organizations need to have ways of keeping conflict to a minimum and solving problems caused by conflict before it becomes a major obstacle to achieving the stated objectives of the organization.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about: 1.
Conflict and competition 2.
Common causes of conflict in an organization 3.
Identify the signs of conflict between group and individual 4.
How to build teamwork and cooperation.
5.
How to manage and resolve conflict situation in an organization.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Signs of Conflict 1.
Colleagues not speaking to each other or ignoring each other.
2.
Contradicting and bad-mouthing one another.
3.
Deliberately undermining or not co-operating with each other to the downfall of the team.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
Share information by keeping people in the group up-to-date with current issues.
2.
Express positive expectations about each other.
3.
Empower each other – publicly crediting colleagues who have performed well and encouraging each other to achieve results.
4.
Team-build by promoting good morale and protecting the group’s reputation with outsiders.
5.
Resolve potential conflict – by bringing differences of opinion into the open mind facilitating resolution of conflicts.
47 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the causes of conflict in an organisation?
2.
As a head-teacher how can you resolve conflict among your members of staff?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akanni J.A.
(1991).
Management Concept, Techniques and Cases.
Ibadan: Julab publishers.
Rhauham S.S. (1978).
Advanced Educational Psychology.
New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
48 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 3 SUPERVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of School Supervision 3.2 Forms of Supervision 3.3 Basic Principles of Supervision 3.4 Roles of the Supervisor 3.4.1 Qualities of a Supervisor 3.5 Methods of Supervision 3.6 Reasons for Supervision 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit sets out to describe the concept of supervision and the reasons for supervision in early childhood education.
It seeks also to examine the basic principles of supervision and methods of supervision.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • explain the concept of supervision • identify the needs/reasons for supervision • examine the basic principles of supervision • discuss the methods of supervision • highlight the qualities of a supervisor.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of School Supervision School supervision is the process of seeking out, defining, controlling the conditions for improving the teaching and learning environment.
This process involve using expert knowledge and experience to oversee evaluate and cooperatively improve the condition and methods of doing 49 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION things connected with the teaching-learning process in schools.
Thus both instruction and personnel are supervised to improve the teaching and learning process for the utmost benefit of the child who is regarded as the centre of education.
There is the inspectorate arm of the ministry of education and thus is charged with the responsibility of supervision.
3.2 Forms of Supervision (a) Full inspection or inspection for government approval: These are done prior to given the institution license to operate.
The facilities and cite are to be duly certified before the school can open to admit pupils.
It is rather unfortunate that inspection is hardly carried out as a result of explosion in the numbers of nursery/primary schools now.
(b) Routine inspection: This is done periodically to inspect the various aspect of the school life such as the teachers, pupils, facilities available, the budget, the system of evaluation library, playing ground etc.
this is carried out with the aim of assessing the standard and making suggestion for possible improvement.
(c) Inspection for Operational Development: This is carried out in only a few selected schools.
The inspectors visit each school for a number of days to observe the various aspect of the school system in operation.
At the end of the visit they hold discussions with staff and exchange views.
The reports of the various schools submitted at the end of the visits are studied to formulate policies on general school administration and such blue print are then circulated to all schools for implementation.
(d) Special visit – There are visits by the inspectors to a school for a particular purpose e.g.
to ascertain the method of teaching or to see the health facilities as in the case of nursery schools.
(e) Follow up Visits– These are paid to schools following full inspection to investigate what actions had been taken on the recommendation made in the report on the full inspection.
3.3 Basic Principles of Supervision i.
Supervision is a cooperative, team type service.
There should be a collaborative effort between the teacher and supervisor.
ii.
All teachers need, and are entitled to, supervisory help.
This is responsibility of the head-teacher.
iii.
Supervision should be adapted to meet the individual needs of the 50 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION staff and should enlighten on the implication of such goals and objectives.
iv.
Supervision should help to clarify educational objectives and goals.
v. Supervision should assist in the organization and proper administration of co-curricular activities for the pupils.
vi.
The responsibility for improving the programme for the school supervision rests with the teacher for his/her classroom and the head teacher for his/her school.
vii.
There should be adequate provision for supervision in the annual budget viii.
Supervision should help interpret and put into practice the latest findings of educational research.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Highlight the forms supervision 3.4 Roles of the Supervisor The supervisor can help teachers and the school in various ways such as: (1) The supervisor and the teacher can together observe the growth, development and needs of individual pupils and therefore cater for those needs.
(2) Helping teachers to evolve various approaches and techniques such as individualized instruction, group testing and evaluation.
(3) Helping teachers to develop a more ideal classroom climate and environment suitable for learning process.
(4) Keeping abreast with current trends and innovation in education by sending teachers to workshop, conferences and seminar.
(5) Providing or giving demonstration in various aspects of teaching skills to teachers.
(6) Helping the teacher in diagnosis and remediation of learning difficulties.
51 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.4.1 Qualities of a Supervisor A supervisor is a person formally designated by the organization to interact with members of the teaching – learning system to improve the quality of teaching – learning process.
He/she is therefore a leader whose function involves giving advice, refreshing, motivating, stimulating, encouraging and overseeing certain group for better productivity.
To accomplish these tasks he/she must therefore possess the following qualities which include: 1.
Understanding the meaning of and issues in supervision.
2.
Being intellectually and professionally current and always ready and willing to educate teacher.
3.
Being a person of high integrity and good moral standing 4.
Consistent, humble, friendly, and fair in dealing with issues on supervision.
5.
Possessing keen interest and commitment to professional development of teachers.
6.
Patience, tolerant, and recognizing individual differences among teachers.
7.
Being firm, fair and open in handling complaints and issues of administration in the school.
3.5 Methods of Supervision There are two levels of supervision.
These are 1.
The within – school provision 2.
Between school supervision I. Within-School Supervision This is the supervision carried out by different leaders in the school e.g.
the school head-teacher, subject heads, and class or form masters.
Their efforts is to see that each person on the school or group work well towards the achievement of the school objective.
II.
Between School Supervision This involves the activities of subject and or the ministry of education 52 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION officials in visiting schools and ensuring that the school is working hard towards the realization of educational objectives of the nation.
3.6 Need or Reasons for Supervision Several reasons have been pointed out for supervision.
These are to: 1.
Improve the teachers competencies 2.
Discover special abilities and qualities possessed by teachers in school.
3.
Know the effectiveness of classroom management by teachers.
4.
Assess the tone of the school and identify some of its urgent needs.
5.
Provide a guide for staff development 6.
Evaluate the balance and score of the achievement of the state or recommended objective 7.
Examine record keeping in accordance with relevant education laws and regulations.
8.
Advice the staff and management about up to date equipment and instructional materials which can be used to improve the quality of instruction.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the qualities of a good supervisor?
4.0 CONCLUSION From this unit, we have learnt that there is need for supervision in schools for improvement of instruction and the learning situation of pupils.
Also, supervision encourages the teachers in the release of their potentials making them to become better teachers.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about the roles of supervisors as well as the basic principles of supervision.
53 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 (a) Full inspection or inspection for government approval (b) Routine inspection (c) Inspection or operational development (d) Special visit (e) Follow up visits ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 (1) Understanding the meaning of and issues in supervision.
(2) Being a person of high integrity and good moral standing.
(3) Patience, tolerant and recognizing individual differences among teachers (4) Consistent, humble, friendly and fair in dealing with issues on supervision.
(5) Being firm, fair an open in handling complaints and issues of administration in the school.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify the two methods of supervision 2.
Explain the basic principles of supervision 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akanni J.A.
(1991).
Management Concept, Techniques and Cases.
Ibadan: Julab publishers.
Rhauham S.S. (1978).
Advanced Educational Psychology.
New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House.
54 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 4 PROFESSIONALISM OF EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Professionalism 3.2 Early Childhood Education Teachers Professional Development 3.2.1 General Education Requirement 3.2.2 Foundations of Early Childhood Education 3.2.3 Child Development 3.3 Learning and Teaching Process 3.4 Professional Laboratory Experience 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The quality of learning that young children experience is of crucial importance for both their future and that of their nation.
In guiding young children's learning and development, early childhood teachers must possess the knowledge, skills and sensitivity to interact successfully with not only the young child, but also parents, guardians, paraprofessionals, community organizations and others whose actions affect children.
Moreover, they must accommodate the breadth of young children's interests and needs in a diverse society.
Whatever the setting (child care centers, home care, Head Start programs, nursery schools, kindergartens, public or private primary schools), qualified teachers of young children should be recognized professionals in their field.
Early childhood teachers’ public or private school should be a graduate of an accredited four-five-year degree programme or post-graduate degree in teacher preparation program with professional study and experience recognizing the unique educational needs of young children 55 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • define professionalism • identify teacher preparation on requirement • explain the teaching and learning process in early childhood • narrate the laboratory experience.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Professionalism A profession is a vocation requiring knowledge of some department of learning or science.
A professional is one who follows an occupation as a means of livelihood or gain, or one who is engaged in one of the learned professions.
Therefore professionalism is exhibited by one of the professional character, spirit or methods or the standing or methods of a professional as distinguished from amateur.
Professionals are expected to: 1.
Establish a special relationship with clients.
2.
Have a lack of self-interest 3.
Be involved in all aspects of the profession.
4.
Publicize what the profession does and is Becoming a professional therefore involves: i.
Unique training ii.
Formal education iii.
Achieving credentials iv.
Activity in continuing education opportunities.
v. Joining and actively involving in professional associations.
3.2 Early Childhood Education Professional Development Teacher preparation requirements includes teachers of early childhood education being well acquainted with the broad spectrum of child development, beginning with the prenatal period and including infant/toddler, preprimary, primary and elementary school age children.
An early childhood specialty should be developed within the broad scope of teacher preparation.
The specific preparation program for teachers of young children should include the following areas: 56 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2.1 General Education Requirement To be able to help young children explore and interpret the world around them in a way that makes sense to them, teachers must be broadly and liberally educated persons.
Teacher preparation experiences, therefore, should develop: • An acquaintance with good music, art and literature; • A knowledge of health, safety and nutrition; • An understanding of the physical and biological aspects of the world and the universe; • A knowledge of mathematical concepts; • An ability to articulate one's thoughts orally and in writing; • An ability to read with Comprehension, then to analyze, interpret and judge a wide range of written material; • A knowledge of technology as an educational resource, instructional tool and curriculum component; • A comprehension of the variety and complexity of communication patterns as expressed by people of differing cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds in a global context; • A knowledge and understanding of differences and similarities among societies and cultures, both at home and abroad; • An awareness of the social, historical and political forces affecting children and the implications for education within individual nations and world contexts.
3.2.2 Foundations of Early Childhood Education Experiences should be designed to clarify the philosophical, historical, psychological, cultural, social and ethical foundations of early childhood education.
The early childhood teacher should develop a personal philosophy and approach to the learning/teaching process consistent with current research and education theories.
3.2.3 Child Development Teachers of young children should possess a broad synthesis of knowledge of child development principles derived from studying research in the social and behavioral sciences that influence learning (i.e., biology, physiology, psychology, sociology and anthropology).
In addition to knowledge of child development theory and research, teachers should study children in a variety of situations to understand better the meaning and degree of variation and exceptionality among individuals.
Moreover, techniques for observing and recording such behavior need to be developed in accordance with research and theory.
57 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3 Learning and Teaching Process Learning as a process and the role of the teacher in facilitating that process should be emphasized.
All areas of development—cognitive, physical, social- emotional, aesthetic and -.oral (or ethical) — should be included.
Examples of topics for study include; how learning takes place; factors that influence learning; climates for learning; and accommodation of children's needs, including special needs, interests, attitudes and motivations.
The early childhood professional must be familiar with both curriculum, content and instructional strategies that encourage children to become interested in learning in a wide variety of education contexts as well as to facilitate and encourage learning appropriate to ability and level of the child.
The teacher preparation program should include technique for: • Planning that integrates young children's needs and developmental stages with the teachers’ education philosophy as well as local, state/province and national mandates • Selecting and evaluating prepared materials and creating new materials consistent with stated goals and objectives • Adopting a variety of curriculum models to meet individual as well as group needs Creating learning environments that foster creativity, healthy self-concepts and regard for others, and intellectual and physical growth in balanced proportions • Integrating play, a growth process, as an integral part of a child's intellectual, social /emotional, physical and aesthetic development • Implementing a program of learning for young children that includes all curriculum areas such as Language (oral and written, literature, reading), mathematics, and use of technology.
science (physical, life, earth and space, science and technology), social studies (geographical, political, historical, economical, cultural, anthropological), performing and visual arts (music, dance, theater, art, film) and physical education • Recognizing the potential and need to integrate content across the curriculum, where appropriate, in varied education contexts • Developing classroom management and guidance techniques for children • Implementing appropriate roles for teachers, parents and peers in social contexts to encourage responsible social development 58 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • School/parent/community relationships that involve them in the educational process • Assessing and evaluating children's total development (intellectual, social/emotional, aesthetic, physical) using authentic, performance-based assessment • Working with paraprofessionals and community organizations • Developing leadership ability for appropriate contexts.
3.4 Professional Laboratory Experiences Early childhood teachers should have well-planned laboratory experiences under the supervision of experienced and qualified teachers of young children, at a variety of levels throughout the teacher education program.
Laboratory experiences should include observation, participation, student teaching and seminar discussion.
The program should encompass ongoing practice and increasing to more complex involvement with children in a variety of education settings (e.g., public/private schools, child care facilities, preschool, Head Start).
Field and clinical experiences should be conducted at quality sites that are accredited and registered.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Highlight the teacher preparation programme requirement for early childhood teacher.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have identified the curricula areas that should be addressed in professional preparation programme for teachers of children from birth through 8 years of age since no system of education can rise above the quality of the teaches.
Teachers of young children should be trained to enhance maximum output in the care of young children.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about i. Professionalism and expectation from the professionals as well as the education of professionals.
ii.
Identification of early childhood teacher preparation requirements.
iii Learning and teaching process in early childhood.
iv.
Laboratory experience in early childhood.
59 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define professionalism 2.
What are the general education requirements in preparation of early childhood education teacher?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Australian College of Educators (ACE) Position Paper on Preparation of Early Childhood Education Teachers.
60 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 5 CHILD CARE AGENCIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Head Start Project U.S.A 3.2 Creche Parentales Association – France 3.3 The Early Childhood Development and Education Nigeria 3.4 OMEP – Nigeria 3.5 Bernard Van Leer Netherlands 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In recognition of the importance of early child care and stimulation adequate attention has been given to education and socio-emotional, physical and intellectual development of children all over the world.
Various organizations as well as agencies are now providing integrated education and care quality framework for pre-school children all over the world.
Their activities are helping in transforming early years and child care services.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • identify various child care organization • discuss the objectives of the organizations/agencies • discuss the relevance of these agencies in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Head Start Project Head Start Project (United States of America) Head Start, the United States Government's early-childhood development programme began in 1965 as a six week summer experiment in using child development series to fight President Lyndon Johnson's war on poverty.
The 15% legislation for project Head start authorized a set of organized summer programmes for 61 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION children aged four and five whose socio-economic status predicated their failure or marginal success in elementary school.
Action programmes are accomplished through the Federal Government to local community agencies whose responsibility was lo guarantee that child, family and community welfare would be maintained.
The seven objectives which have guided the national head start programme conducted under federal auspices since 1965 (GrutDerg, 1969) are as follows: i.
Improving the child's physical health and physical abilities.
ii.
Helping the emotional and social development of the child by encouraging self-confidence, spontaneity, curiosity and self discipline.
iii.
Improving the child's mental processes and skills with particular attention to Conceptual and verbal skills.
iv.
Establishing patterns and expectations of success for the child will create a climate of confidence of his future learning efforts.
v. Increasing the child's capacity to relate positively to family members and others, while at the same time strengthening the family's ability to relate positively to the child and his problems.
vi.
Developing in the child and his family a responsible attitude toward society, and fostering constructive opportunities for society to work together with the poor in solving their problems.
vii.
Increasing the sense of dignity and self worth within the child and his family.
These are not dissimilar to those of conventional nurses and kindergarten programmes as: a typical afternoon includes a nap, outdoor play and miscellaneous activities such as cooking project, experiments with various classroom materials, book browsing, record listening, and game playing.
The Head Start Project is a Comprehensive Program and it is interdisciplinary in nature, in that it provides health educational and social services.
It aims at moving preschool children and their families toward self-education, social services, health services, parent involvement and career development.
62 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION The importance and benefits of this project cannot be overemphasized when one considers the cognitive and affective impact on the children, and broadly, the value of less direct and specific intellectual-academic benefits from Head Start Project.
For instance, great mass of data that describe the characteristics of educationally disadvantaged children have been published (Cazden, l996; HcUmalh.
1967; Melchanbauin, 1972; D, Moore, 1071- Stodolsky and Cesser, 1967}.
These data have been designed to identify these children's behavioural deficits rather than their strengths.
Commonly reported deficiencies (Grotherg, 1969) among disadvantaged children include: 1.
Developmental language response patterns {e.g.
vocabulary size, sentence length, and syntax; 2.
Logical reasoning skills (e.g.
the ability to categorize concepts; deal with casual relations and exercise sequential thought); 3.
Auditory discrimination skills; 4.
Attentional responses (e.g.
high motor impassivity; and 5.
Selected social-emotional behaviours (e.g.
greater dependency conflicts, lessened intellectual achievement, responsibility and less consistency in relationship with adults.
With the objectives of the Head Start Project, all these deficiencies are adequately looked into and are corrected to the barest minimum through the provision of adequate facilities and resource materials, stable and well-organized model staff, staff satisfaction with the consultant services of model sponsors, and belief in the value of the model content (Bissell, 1973).
The broader contributions of Head Start include: the reintroduction of strong parental involvement and family life education with early childhood education.
It became increasingly clear that the programme success enhanced when intervention efforts are designed to parents activity and to educate them (Gordon, 1970; and Gray, 1068, McCaity.
1963; Weedart and Lamble, and Wiliman 1969).
63 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Four kinds of change in association with Head Start are: (1) greater involvement of the poor in making decisions about institutional policies that affect them; (2) greater employment opportunities within the public schools at the para professional levels; (3) increased emphasis upon the educational needs of poor and minority groups; and (4) more adequate health services for the poor, Ellis D. Evans [1975) believes that Head Start is among the most significant educational and social experiments in American history.
3.2 Creche Parentales (Parentales Creche) Association Collectives Enfants Parents Professional (ACEPP) France This project works with children and parents on migrant families; and those living in disadvantaged neighbourhoods.
The fundamental difference between other child care centres and creches parentales is that the parents work at the Creches.
Each crèche has a rate and each parent has work with the professionals once a week, mostly for a half a day.
They can therefore always talk to care givers about their children.
They also always know what is happening to their children in the crèche and can see the benefits of the system.
Though parents do get a lot out of working in the creches, in some cases it is difficult to fit the rate in with their work, they must have flexible working hours so that they can spend half a day.
ACEPP Project works not only in multicultural situations but also with it is advantaged people.
This means that not only do many of the project's families have different cultures from the mainstream French, but they are also in very difficult situations.
ACEPP want to give all children a good start in life.
They believe that children who speak his/her language would be immersed in the use of language of the country in a setting where there is no challenge or confrontation.
In the Creches care givers constantly speak in French, not in a difficult way, but can stimulate the children without the challenge that they will face later in the formal school system.
64 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION In the Creches there is a mixture of migrant children and French children in the same way.
However, ACEPP tries to train the care givers in a way that enables them to understand children's behaviour.
For example, a child may behave in ways that care giver perceives as strange and they may stigmatise that child, or assume that he or she Is not doing things correctly.
Creche Parentales try to make sure that the caregivers understand that cultural differences exist, even with the youngest babies.
Babies are born in and grow up in a certain culture and receive certain responses from their parents, which determine these behaviour patterns and habits.
Children talk in a certain language, they eat certain foods, they have a certain place in their society.
This is very important and must be understood by the caregivers.
Unfortunately, most of the caregivers receive very standardized training - they learn what appears to be the "Universal" way to raise children.
ACEPP's work is to make them realize that in fact the package of knowledge that they received in their training is a part of their own culture.
They then have to try to perceive what is going on in the family, in child rearing for example, in terms of cultural understanding.
ACEPP trains caregivers to be aware of these differences and to be prepared to talk about them with the parents without judgments.
They learn to understand how a culture works and how it is reflected in the behaviour of the children, for example, in certain cultures children may shout, while in others children are expected to be quiet.
The caregivers should not make a value judgment saying “this child is shy" - but should realize that it is just a part of the child's culture.
Similarly with children who make a lot of noise, this too may mean that a child is behaving the way children are expected to behave in his or her culture, ACEP works with caregivers to enable them to understand both the children and their parents.
They have to learn the attitude that welcome families to the crèches, and which enables them to feel comfortable enough to express themselves and feel very confident that their children are in these caregivers care.
3.3 The Early Child–Care Development and Education (ECCDE) – Nigeria Early Child-Care Development and Education (ECCDE Project] According to the FGN/UNICEF Master Plan of Operation for 1991- 1995 Programme of Cooperation, the major thrust of the ECCDE Project are to: 65 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION • Improve the overall development of children under the age of six years; • Strengthen the structures for appropriate ECCDE Interventions; • Reduce the shortage of trained personnel and the lack of adequate facilities; • Strengthen the provision of Informal, low-cost community - based pre-primary care and education in selected • Communities of the focus Local Government Areas (LGS) of the country.
Output Objectives of the Project The activities of the ECCDE Project were to benefit 142,000 children of pre-school age.
The output objectives of the project were to: i.
Set up 920 low-cost, community-based ECCDE Centres; ii.
Provide early stimulation through non-formal learning opportunities to 92,000 children aged between 3 and 5 years; iii.
Support and promote health and nutrition services to 50,000 children under 2 years of age; iv.
Train 5OOO child-care providers and 700 trainers and , supervisors in improved ECCDE techniques and practices; v. Orient 2,000 personnel from existing day-care centres (MPO 1991).
Approach The project was designed to: 1.
Use community based, low-cost ECCDE approaches to focus on the physical, psycho-social and cognitive development of children aged under mix years; 2.
Support and assist the revision of different curricula to include components and messages relevant to early child care and development.
3.
Assist in introducing appropriate, standardized and affordable teaching and learning materials; 4.
Assist the government to develop and introduce a comprehensive- certificated training course for ECCDE personnel in Nigeria; and 5.
Promote awareness of the need for ECCDE and Public participation in the planning and deliver of services to children of preschool age (NPE, 1991).
66 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.4 OMEP Early Child Care Development Education Programme in Nigeria: Organisation Mondiale Pour L'Education Pre-Scolaire (OMEP) The objectives of organization mondaile pour l'education prescolaire (OMEP) a French body which is translated in English as World Organisation for Early Childhood Educational Programme are: a. to promote the well being, development, and happiness of each child in the family, institution, society and the world at large and; b.
To assist in improving basic early childhood, through research, workshops, talks and seminars to caregivers and parents.
As a result OMEP's ideals for child care centres are: • Children who often wonder around when mothers are busy selling, have a chance to be looked after and cared for, • There will be less danger of accidents among these children.
The child will be able to socialize with other children and learn to share and play together.
• The health of the children will also be monitored.
The physical, emotional and educational needs will also be met.
• Parents will feel at ease about the safety of their children and the parent's output will improve.
• The centre will improve the children's language skill and opportunity for each child to attain his/her potential ability.
Since the early years of the child are the most important, it is good to give him/her an early start as this will also influence the parents at home, and the quality of life of the children will improve.
The funding of the centre is done through the following ways: • Parents pay token fees as determined by the project committee.
• Being a community-based project, appeals are often sent to the public and OMEP members for donations.
• Fund raising activities such as fun fare, bring and buy sales, parent's day, children's art exhibitions and so on are organized.
• Parents are involved in raising funds through the Market/women's Association and Women's Commission.
67 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.5 Bernard Van Leer Bernard Van Leer Foundation of the Netherlands Brief History Bernard Van Leer Foundation is a private grant making foundation which was established in 1949 and based in Netherlands.
The foundation funds and share knowledge about work is early childhood education.
For the past four decades, the foundation has been funding field work in over 40 countries of the world and disseminating lessons learnt through its publication.
The Mission The mission of Bernard Van Leer foundation is to improve opportunities for children up to age 8 who are growing up in socially and economically difficult circumstances.
The foundation views its work as both an end itself and a long-term means of promoting more cohesive, just and creative societies and right for all.
The foundation is guided by both a child rights framework which emphasizes children’s quality of life in the complementary belief that investment in early years pay long term social dividends by shaping the next generation of adults and families.
It is the belief of the foundation that attention to the material and physical well being of young children is not enough.
Children also need support to develop, socially, emotionally, culturally and spiritually.
The Approach The foundation works by primarily supporting projects which are implemented through local partner organization to ensure sensitivity to culture and context.
It has been funding field work that sought to build on the strength of communities and traditional family care giving practices.
It has consistently sought to identify low-cost and early replicable strategies to improve children’s well being and development.
Practice: The foundation is currently supporting over 200 projects through local partner organizations around the world.
Of these, around 50 are sub-Saharan African.
Half of these project deal directly and the other indirectly with young children in the context of HIV/AIDS.
The foundation has made over 100 grants to programmes focusing on young children affected by HIV/AIDS.
68 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Highlight different approaches used in achieving the objectives of ECCDE in Nigerian.
4.0 CONCLUSION The unit above discusses the various objectives and activities of childcare organization/agencies.
These childcare organisation are guided by child right framework which emphasises children’s quality of life through provision of health, educational and social services 5.0 SUMMARY In the unit above you have learnt about i.
Head start project U.S.A ii.
Creche parentales France iii.
The Early care Development Nigeria iv.
OMEP – Nigeria v. Van Leer – Netherlands ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1.
Use of community based, low-cost ECCDE approaches to focus on the physical, psychosocial and cognitive development of children aged under mix years.
2.
Support and assist the revision of different curricular to include components and messages relevant to early child care and development.
3.
Assist in introducing appropriate, standardized and affordable teaching and learning materials.
4.
Assist the government to develop and introduce a comprehensive – certificated training course of ECCDE personnel in Nigeria.
5.
Promote awareness of the need for ECCDE and public participation in the planning and delivery of services to children of preschool age.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and discuss two child care agencies objectives.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Akinbote, O.; Oduolowu, E.; Lawal, B.
(2001).
Pre-primary and Primary Education in Nigeria.
A Basic Text.
Ibadan: Stirling- Horden Publishers.
69 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION MODULE 3 PROGRAMME PLANNING IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Unit 1 Planning in Early Childhood Education Unit 2 Decision making in an Organisation Unit 3 Quality Control in Early Childhood Organisation Unit 4 Budgeting in Early Childhood Education Unit 5 Fiscal Management in Early Childhood Education UNIT 1 PLANNING IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concepts of Planning and Educational Planning 3.1.2 What is Educational Planning?
3.2 Purposes of Planning 3.3 Roles of School Administrator in Planning 3.4 Barriers to Educational Planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses one of the common sets of activities in management which is planning.
Simply put planning is setting direction for something and then working to ensure that direction is followed.
In order to ensure effective and smooth running in early childhood education adequate planning is needed.
The unit further discusses the purpose conditions and barriers of effective planning.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able: • to explain the purpose of planning in early childhood education • examine the conditions for effective planning • identify the roles of the administrator in school system planning • highlight barriers to educational planning.
70 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concepts of Planning and Educational Planning Planning is deciding now or in advance what is to be done in the future.
Planning is a general process of establishing priorities for future action.
It involves action, aspirations, and priorities of the organization.
The purpose of every plan therefore is to make it possible for the stated objectives of the organization to be accomplished.
Hence plan focus on the objectives or mission of the organization.
The success of the activities may not be realized unless factors such as objectives, necessary equipment, methods of handling the activities and duration of the programme are clearly understood.
Educational planning usually takes place at the National level, State levels, Local and Institutional level.
At the national and state level, the plans lay down broad objectives, strategies and targets while the details are worked out at the local and institutional level 3.1.2 What is Educational Planning?
Educational planning has no single definition that is universally acceptable and regarded as the only one.
Therefore there are several definitions of educational planning.
Beeby in (1967) defined educational planning as the exercise of foresight in determining the policy, priorities and cost of educational system, having due regard for economic and political realities for the system’s potential for growth and the needs of the country educational system.
Agabi (1995) equally defined it as the rational and scientific process by which a given society consciously directs its future actions in education with a view of optimizing available resources used in the pursuit of desirable educational goals.
As it is observed in this two definition of planning, we can see that the key elements in planning is the need of what to be done, (objectives) how it is to be done (rationally or scientifically) when it is to be done (future) and who is to do it (society or people) and with what (available resource) 3.2 Purposes and the Need for Educational Planning The purpose and the need for educational planning as identified by Agabi 1995 and Adepoju 1998 are to: 71 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 1.
Establish educational goals, objective and activities for achieving them 2.
Determine space, personnel and materials required to achieve educational goals 3.
Ensure adequate investment in education 4.
Avoid wastage of resources and enhance internal and external efficiency in the education system 5.
Channel the efforts and activities of operators of the system towards the achievement of set educational goals 6.
Allocate scarce resources required for education to satisfy as afar as possible the various competing needs in a rational way.
7.
Enhance educational growth and development Conditions for effective educational planning Effective educational planning must involve the following no matter the level of planning (Federal, State or a specific school system).
These are 1.
There must be a clearly defined goals/objectives 2.
The plan should be simple not complicated 3.
There should be provision for a proper analysis and grouping of standard for their functioning 4.
The plan must not only be flexible but must also be open to adjustments 5.
All available resources must be engaged 3.3 The Roles of the School Administrators in Planning The planning role of the school head teacher/administrator includes the following: a.
Definition of the objectives of the school within the overall national educational objectives b.
Planning of the school buildings and other physical structures c. Programme and activities planning d. Resource and facilities planning including school budget e. Allocation of duties and functions to school personnel f. Work scheduling i.e.
time table School objectives In order to plan the school head, at the beginning of each school year endeavour to meet with the parents and teachers to examine the school objectives and programme.
Generally, the objectives of any school is teaching and learning, therefore the overall aim at the end of each year and at the completion of the programme are clearly defined.
These 72 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION objectives should reflect the overall national and state objectives.
School Plant Planning The head teacher should consider with the teachers and parents how suitable the site, situation and location of the school.
They should set up the plans for the positioning of the classrooms, play grounds, and other conveniences, bearing in mind the nature and welfare of pupils and the staff.
The location must be accessible to every individual; within the school premises.
Programme Planning The school administrator should consult with parents, staff, ministry official and other interest group to prepare a comprehensive programme of activities for the school bearing in mind the objectives and general goals of education.
A good programme must be sequential, continual and integrated.
Both the extra curricular and curricular and co-curricular activities must relate to one another.
The National Curriculum for Early Childhood Education (FGN/NERDC, 2006) is a useful reference point in this regard.
Resource Planning The school administrator must note that funds and facilities for the school are limited, therefore he/she must make plan for ensuring continuous supply of those resources.
The plans for resource acquisition use and accounting depend on clear specification of the objectives and programme of the school as well as setting up a systematic programme of budgeting accounting and control.
Distribution of Function Who does what and how in the school should be specified.
Functions ordinarily stem from the nature and the types of programmes in the school.
This calls for the school administrators knowledge of his staff in terms of their training, experience and special interest.
The knowledge of this will assist him/her on how to place the staff on the job and assign befitting duties to them.
Work Scheduling This depends on the types of activities and or programmes of the school.
The administrator has to consider scheduling of work to involve the activities time span, time load of each activity, the most suitable or allocation time to each activity.
He/she then work out the true time table 73 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION or schedule for the total activities.
A well prepared time table will allow for proper implementation of the curriculum of the school.
The following questions will assist the administrator to accomplish the task of scheduling: a.
What specific activities will be required to attain the objectives of the school?
b.
What amount of task should be allocated with regards to the values of the programme to each activity?
c. Who should be responsible for each activity?
d. Where and when will the activity take place?
What facilities or resources are required or demanded by a given activity?
e. What relationships exist between activities?
f. How shall the activities time, period, teacher and other consideration in the school be presented on the time table?
The appropriate answer to these questions will be a good working sheet for the administrator to work with in the scheduling of activities.
3.4 Barriers to Educational Planning According to Atanda and Waheed (2006), most educational plans had failed in Nigeria as a result of the following: 1.
Lack of knowledge about the purpose and goal of the education system 2.
Lack of adequate information on the part of the teachers and other experts 3.
Bureaucracy in government parastatals 4.
Lack of continuity of the plan due to political instability 5.
Wide gap between the planner and the implementers 6.
Economics and financial problem 7.
Lack of adequate and reliable data 8.
Lack of adequate training for the planners and decision makers 9.
Lack of prior feasibility studies 10.
Poor monitoring and evaluation system SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the conclusion for and barrier to educational planning?
74 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have seen that planning is a method of guiding the administrators for effective decision making.
It is the first step in the management process.
Before the administrator can organize control or influence he/she must have adequate plan that will give purpose and direction to achieve the stated goals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about i.
Planning and educational planning ii.
Purpose and the need for educational iii.
Barriers to Educational Planning ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Barriers 1.
Lack of adequate and reliable data.
2.
Poor monitoring and evaluation system.
3.
Lack of prior feasibility problem.
4.
Economic and financial problem.
5.
Wide gap between the planner and implementation.
Conditions 1.
There must be a clearly defined goals/objectives.
2.
The plan should be simple not complicated.
3.
There should be provision for a proper analysis and grouping of standard for their functioning.
4.
The plan must not be flexible but must be open to adjustments.
All available resources must be engaged.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the concept of educational planning.
2.
Why do we need to plan in early childhood education?
75 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nwankwo, J.I.
; Nwokafor, J.N.
; Ogunsanwo, O.A.
(1981).
Education Administration and Supervision.
Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books.
Ozigi A.O.
1977.
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
76 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 2 DECISION MAKING IN EARLY CHILDHOOD ORGANISATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Decision Making?
3.2 How to make Decision?
3.3 Hints on Effective Decision Making 3.4 Committees and Decision Making 3.4.1 Advantages of Committee in Decision Making 3.4.2 Disadvantages of Committee in Decision Making 3.5 Decision Level in Educational Administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit set out to discuss one of the major functions of administration in making decisions about how things should be done.
The school administrator has to make important decision at the school level because it is on the basis of this major decision that the administrator can achieve effectively the aims and objectives of the school.
It also seeks to examine how effective decisions can be made.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • explain the meaning of decision-making • identify how decisions can be made.
• highlights the hints on effective decisions • explain committee and decision making • identify the decision level in Educational Administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Decision Making?
Decision making is defined as the selection of a course of action from various possibilities and alternatives.
A choice of what is to be done next 77 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION is always confronting the administrators.
A decision must always be made about who is to do what, how it will be done, when and where it will be done.
Decision making can be regarded as a conscious choice between alternative courses of action.
Effective decision making must be rational.
There are two main types of administrative decisions.
These are 1.
Organisational and Personal Decisions: A decision made by the administration may be organizational or personal.
Personal decision are the decisions which the administrator makes concerning himself/herself such as decision to go for further training or to retire from service.
While organizational decisions are decisions which the administrators makes concerning the school and its functioning.
2.
Basic and Routine Decisions:- Basic decisions are the type of decision that affect the goals, functions or services of the organization.
These decisions are unique and long range.
They concern issues like policies, large scale plans or investments, students enrolments, staffing, school plant and facilities.
Routine decisions can be regarded as minor day to day decisions taking in the school.
3.2 How to Make Decisions Administrative activities centres around decision making.
The following are ways to make decisions: i.
State the problem ii.
Recognize, define and limit the problem.
iii.
Analyse and evaluate the problem.
iv.
List the alternatives.
v. Select the best alternatives vi.
Establish criteria or standards by which solutions will be evaluated or judged as acceptable and adequate to the need vii.
Collect data viii Formulate and correct the preferred solution ix Put into effect the preferred solution a. Programme the solution b.
Control the activities in the programme c. Evaluate the result and the process 78 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3 Hints on Effective Decision-Making 1.
The environment must be conducive for a decision.
This means that a decision must be made at the right time, place and through the proper channel (due process) 2.
All those to be directly affected by a particular decision should in one way or the other be involved in the process of making decision.
This implies participatory, democratic or consultative decision-making.
Taking part in decision making will help the participants to develop a sense of belonging and boost the morale which promotes the spirit of cooperation in the implementation of the decision made.
3.
It is also important to explore as many alternatives as possible.
The more alternatives considered the more in arriving at a better decision 4.
Communication must be clear: This implies that effective channel and media must be employed in communicating the decisions to those that will execute it.
5.
Adequate control and direction must be provided to ensure that decision is conclusively executed.
3.4 Committees and Decision Making Administration involves group work.
In early childhood education the administrator i.e.
the headteacher has to deal with groups.
Hence there is need for committee.
There are committee such as finance committee, social committee, welfare committee, time table committee, sport committee etc.
these type of committee can be adhoc or standing committee.
Adhoc committees are usually appointed and they are temporary appointed and they are temporary.
They can be disbanded, while standing committee, may not be disbanded after their use.
It is sometimes called structural committee.
Their decisions are advisory like adhoc committee.
School administrator should take necessary steps to ensure that members of staff appointed to a committee will be good representative as well as individuals with different abilities and interests.
3.4.1 Advantages of Committee in Decision Making i.
It encourages group deliberations and makes the school system manageable or governable ii.
the result from committee decision is often superior to that which could have been obtained from any other member working 79 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION independently iii.
committee can increase teachers motivation level and generate support from different teachers of different status iv it enables the teachers to accept the implementation and recommendations because they also participate in such decision.
3.4.2 Disadvantages of Committee in Decision Making 1.
Setting up a committee on issues waste time.
Many of these committee may be too large and it takes time to arrive at consensus 2.
Lack of individual action can also be a disadvantage, sometime there are some things that are better accomplished by individuals than by committees.
3.
The need for agreement on a decision may tend to discourage aggressive people who may be creative.
3.5 Decision Level in Educational Administration The school administration can be broadly divided into three: 1.
Top Level: At this level the emphasis is on overall planning and strategic decision.
Decisions are taken on both exceptional and general issues such as resumption date, the school calendar.
The decision here are often executed by the commissioner for education, permanent secretary director general.
2.
Middle Level: At this level basic operation decisions are taken.
It is at this level that the decisions of the top level are translated to operational activities.
example of people at the middle level are chief inspector of education,, local inspector of education, head teacher, supervisors etc.
3.
Lower Level: At this level basic decision on teaching, classroom management are executed by the lower level management.
At times, the authority make certain decisions that are done by the lower level.
Examples of people at the lower level are class teacher, head of department.
80 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Organizational Pyramid for School Administration Minister Commissioner Top level for Education Permanent Secretary.
Chief Inspector Middle level Local Inspector Head teacher Heads of Department Lower level Classroom teachers etc SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Highlights the hints on effective decision making.
4.0 CONCLUSION From this unit, we have seen that the ability of the head teacher as an administrator is to make and or guide decisions.
This is important for the success of the school system.
The head teacher does not have to make all the decisions but he must assume the task of overseeing the decision made in the school is appropriate and adequate.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about 1. meaning of decision making 2. how decisions are made 3. hints on effective decision 4. committee and decision-making 5. the decision level in education administration ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Correspond your answer with 3.3 above.
81 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What do we mean by decision making?
2.
How can decision be made?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nwankwo, J.I.
; Nwokafor, J.N.
; Ogunsanwo, O.A.
(1981).
Education Administration and Supervision.
Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books.
Ozigi A.O.
1977.
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
82 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 3 QUALITY CONTROL IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Quality 3.2 Indices of Quality in Early Childhood Education 3.3 Quality Control in Early Childhood Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses the conditions that are expected in early childhood education programme.
It will discuss various indices of quality control in early childhood education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define quality control in education • identify various indices of quality delivery system in early childhood education • analyse quality control process.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept Quality Quality can be defined as the degree of excellence a thing possesses and it is considered in terms of accuracy and timeliness.
In education quality can be described as the longterm commitment and continuous improvement of learning with the active participation of both teaching and non teaching staff to meet as well as exceed parent’s or guardians expectation.
In other words quality means effective management.
83 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.2 Indices of Quality Delivery in Early Childhood Education Quality in education depends upon a number factors.
i.
Quality Environment: There must be highly hygienic and conducive environment for learning.
The classrooms must be spacious enough and the play ground properly maintained.
Landscaping and beautification of the compound with flower is a necessity.
All the school facilities must equally be designed and arranged to suit the objectives of the school programme.
ii.
Quality Personnel: The quality of staff is very important in the school organization.
The teachers are an indispensable factor in the school.
It is possible for a school to have a good curriculum, nice environment, adequate instructional materials, good classroom and other facilities.
However if there are no good teachers to make the best use of them, they are useless.
Therefore the quality of the staff in an important indicator in the quality delivery of the school.
Right from the recruitment of teachers to the school up to their allocation to handle specific classes, care has to be taken.
Any careless appointment of incompetent teacher can destroy whatever good intentions the proprietor may have for the school in the private nursery school, it is the proprietor/proprietress that employ the teachers and head teachers.
It is necessary that both headteacher and teachers are qualified and experienced.
But unfortunately in an attempt to cut cost they employ unqualified teachers who 'can be paid cheaply.
Nevertheless, the teachers employed must be training and adequate staff development programme should be arranged for them.
The training must aim at improving staff competencies and productivity such could include workshop, in-service training, seminar etc.
The school administrator should ensure that good personnel policies are formulated and implemented appropriately in the school.
The staff must equally be motivated so as to enhance decision of the staff towards the achievement of the school objectives.
iii.
Quality Resources: The administrator must ensure that quality resources are available in the school.
Quality and durable materials must be purchased.
The school library and health clinic must be well equipped and standardized.
He/she must ensure that there are appropriate and adequate teaching materials in the 84 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION school.
Various instructional materials, outdoor and indoor equipments must be made available in the school.
iv.
Quality of Output: The quality of output is the pupils if new parents or guardian will patronize such schools.
The administrator must ensure that everything is done to produce the best set of pupils.
The staff must be punctual, diligent relentless in teaching and discipline of the children.
There must be an effective and qualitative method of instruction that would yield good results in terms of pupils.
The curricular content must strictly adhere to what is stipulated in the policy or early childhood of the county.
When the parents (customers) are satisfied with the quality of output (pupils produced), there is the tendency for more parents to fall over each other for their children to get admitted into that school.
3.3 Quality Control in Early Childhood Education The issue of quality control in education is concerned with the measurement and judgement of the processes and outcome of the educational activities.
The purpose is to maintain the existing practice and if there is need a change can be instituted.
Therefore quality control in education is based on the premise that a good education can be better.
The following will guide the administration in quality control of the school.
1.
Collection of Data: Data collection assists the school administrator to know whether there is growth, improvement, effectiveness and success in all aspect of the school programme.
The data on population, financial activities, staff enrolment, etc will show whether there is reduction or increase in enrollment.
This can equally show the deviation and reasons for it.
2.
Evaluation: Evaluation means appraising or determining the existent to which the stated objectives have been achieved.
Whenever a judgement is made about the effectiveness of a programme, an evaluation has been made.
It involves taking inventory of all phases of the educational programme.
3.3.2 What is to be evaluated?
Curriculum: the school administrator has "the responsibility of determining whether the pupils are learning what they are supposed to know and whether they are making satisfactory progress individually or collectively.
Talking about curriculum evaluation.
These are 2 types: 85 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION a. Formative Evaluation: This type of evaluation is used to improve the quality of teaching for the advantage of pupils to ascertain what the pupils have failed to learn.
b. Summative Evaluation: This is aimed at testing the level or degree of understanding of a course and ending up with award of grades, reports or certificates 3.3.3 Pupils Evaluation Apart from the usual weekly, terminal or annual promotion examination which only show level of performance, there is need to evaluate the conditions and environment under which pupils learn.
This is to ensure maximum quality delivery of the school.
This can be done through interviews or discussion with the teachers and the supervisors.
The head teacher can get a cross-sectional view of the learning atmosphere of the school by occasional teaching in various classes.
This will ascertain various opinions and knowing the pupils more.
3.3.4 Staff Evaluation Evaluation of staff and their teaching effectiveness is important in ensuring the progress and determining the quality of the school To a great extent the quality of education provided depends on teaching effectiveness and attitudes of the staff.
The administrator therefore must attempt to know how each member of staff is getting on and how well he or she is performing the duties.
Staff evaluation should be a means of assessing effectiveness of a teacher in the performance of his job and where this shows a negative trends there is need to investigate the causes with a view of making him or her effective.
The following is the list of possible items that can be used in teacher evaluation: i.
Preparation of lesson notes ii Provision of instructional aids iii Knowledge of subject content iv Teaching methods and procedures v Relationship with pupils and staff vi Class and discipline of pupils vii Teachers appearance viii Conduct and administration of examination ix Punctuality and attendance x Cooperation with the headteacher xi Participation in co-curricular activities xii In-service course(s) attended xiii Additional qualification xiv Out of school report 86 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 3.3.5 Programme Evaluation In every educational institution, there is need for the school administrator to evaluate the performance of the school against the goals and objectives of the society and the community.
This is another measure of quality of the school.
This may be done in the form of an annual report, although unfavourable aspects of the school are usually not for public consumption.
The headteacher should have a proper look of his/her school at the end of school year and assess the success and failing in order to make amends in the subsequent years.
Such evaluation will result in giving the school a new attention towards the neglected area of the prescribed goals or complaint from consumers or immediate community to the school authority.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the quality control process in early childhood education?
4.0 CONCLUSION From this unit we can see that quality control is needed in early childhood education programme to enhance optimum performance.
Quality is what parents are looking for in schools.
If they get it they will be satisfied, that is why quality control is fundamental to the process and outcome in early childhood education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt about i.
Quality control in early childhood education ii.
Various indices of quality delivery in early childhood education iii.
Quality control process ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Check your answers with 3.3.1 – 3.3.5 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify the various indices for quality delivery.
87 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ozigi, A.O.
(1977).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
Nwankwo, J.I.
; Nwokafor, J.N.
; Ogunsanwo, O.A.
(1981).
Educational Administration and Supervision.
Nigeria: Heinemann Educational Books.
88 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 4 BUDGETING IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Budgeting 3.1.2 Advantages of Budgeting 3.2 Types of Budget in Education 3.3 Budget Preparation in Early Childhood Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION No school administrator can effectively administer his/her school without financial resources at his disposal.
In every school money is needed to attract, retain and develop both human and material resources, to renovate school building, procure instructional materials etc.
in order to fulfill these financial obligations successfully, funds should be planned effectively 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • define budgeting • enumerate the advantages of budgetting • identify basic types of budget • analyse the steps involved in preparation of budget.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Budgeting Budgeting in simple terms means the expected total revenue and expenditure for each year, and the estimated total revenue and expenditure for each year, based on estimate of income accruing to the government or organization.
Budgeting is the formulation of plans for a given future period in numerical or monetary terms.
An educational 89 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION budget is a document or statement of anticipated, results either revenue and expense and capital budgets or in non-financial terms as in budget of direct labour hours, materials, school fees and other income.
An educational budget must be based on general objectives of education as stated.
Budgets are always forecast of future activities.
They are detailed.
3.1.2 Advantages of Budgeting 1.
The budget enables the school administrator to identify the areas of need and the significance of respective services in the school 2.
Budget correlates planning and allows authority to be delegated without loss of control 3.
Budget assists in putting the responsibility for each school function to exactly where it belongs.
Each teacher or each departmental head taking responsibility for identifying the needs of his/her unit 4.
Budgeting encourages prudence and enhances economy in the use of materials.
It also prevents waste in that it limits the expenditure of specific functions 5.
Budget forces the administrator to study and or reexamine their operations and to search for the best means of obtaining maximum results from the limited resources.
6.
The school budget cautions the administrator against unrealistic optimism over unrestricted expansion of programmes or activities.
7.
The budget helps in co-ordination of the different units towards the general goals of the school It serve as a means of checking the inefficiency of the school activities, services and programmes.
3.2 Types of Budget in Education 1.
Revenue and Expense Budget: This budget spells out plan for revenue and operating expenses.
The principal income in revenue budget is the school fees.
Others are earnings from grants, donors and revenue from auxilliary enterprises.
Operating expense budget in early childhood education has to do with expenses classification and the units of organization in its structure.
These budgets may deal with individual items or department.
For instance salaries and allowances, of teaching and non teaching staff, expenses on educational toys, office equipment, outdoor and indoor equipment etc.
90 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 2.
Capital Expenditure Budget: This type of budget outline expenditure for capital project such as equipment inventories and other items it requires care because it gives definite form of plan for spending the funds for a particular purpose or enterprise 3.
Cash Budget: The cash budget is simply a forecast of cash receipts and disbursement against which cash experiences is measured.
This is very important in early childhood education because the availability of cash to meet obligations as at when due is the first requirement of existence.
cash budget shows the availability of excess cash which makes it possible to plan for profit making or investment surpluses.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Identify basic types of budget in early childhood education.
3.3 Budget Preparation in Early Childhood Education One of the major functions of school administrator concerns the management of school funds facilities.
He/she has to follow a procedure for school budget preparation.
This procedure are stated in stages: Stage I: The administrator prepares estimate of the expenditure and income for the coming fiscal calendar year.
The teachers or head of units are asked to submit a list of item on activities for the next school year.
Stage II: The list of estimates and request from different teachers and head of units are collated and reviewed during a special budget meeting, between the administrator and the account clerk or bursar.
Stage III: The school administrator submits the school budget to the proprietor or board of governor or the ministry of education in case of public schools.
On recurring the proposed budget, the budget is pruned to meet the available funds or to be in line with the established ceiling of expenditure.
Stage IV: An operating school system budget is prepared after the final approval by the appropriate authority.
This will indicate estimated revenue and expenditure for various items, services or units for the coming year.
Stage V: The prepared budget is implemented.
Here the approved budget requires periodic reports (weekly, monthly, quarterly, half yearly) comparing estimates with actual expenditure for specified period normally by school term.
91 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 4.0 CONCLUSION From this unit, we have learnt that budget is a plan for total annual estimate which is based on the income accruing to the school.
The school administrator is saddled with the responsibility of planning the budget by following the stated procedures bearing in mind the benefit of budgeting.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about 1.
Definition of budgeting 2.
Benefits of budget 3.
Types of budget 4.
Steps involved in preparation of budget 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define budgeting 2.
Highlight the steps involved in budgeting 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nwankwo, J.I.
; Nwokafor, J.N.
; Ogunsanwo, O.A.
(1981).
Educational Administration and Supervision.
Nigeria Heinemann Ozigi, A.O.
(1977).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
92 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION UNIT 5 FISCAL MANAGEMENT IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Fiscal Management 3.2 Cash Flow in Early Childhood Education 3.3 Managing Payments and Receipt 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Adequate and accurate financial management is vital to the development and success of schools.
The school as an organization has to calculate its profits or losses each year, specifically early childhood education demand a huge financial responsibility for the control and management of school finance.
The administrator is held accountable for all expenditure and revenue for the school.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: • explain fiscal management in early childhood education • examine the roles of fiscal management in early childhood education • explain cash flow and management payment and receipt.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Fiscal Management Fiscal management provides budgeting and accounting support to the school.
The fiscal management unit is responsible for the development of the school annual budget, from initial planning to final passage by the board of governor or the proprietor.
Fiscal management builds the fiscal infrastructure of the school, manages its ongoing accounting and report responsibilities of the school 93 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION to the public and prepare for external and internal audit.
In addition to these fiscal management, services equally include: i. Organization-wide budget as well as supporting a program level budgets ii.
Cost allocation plan iii.
Cash flow analysis iv.
Chart of accounts v. Templates for monthly and quarterly financial reports, including budget-to-actual comparisons vi.
Identifying providers and consultants to assist with other critical systems, including payroll, processing employees benefits packages and other human resource needs 2.
Implementation of financial reporting to include assistance with i.
Purchase orders ii.
Client billing: fixing fees to be paid for services in the school such as payment for school fees, midday meal, sport fees, etc iii.
Donor tracking/fund raising programme for the school iv.
Staff training 3.
Development of a customized fiscal policies and procedures manual 4.
Outsourcing accounting and fiscal management services to include i.
Processing donation and recording vendor payments ii.
Recoding payroll expenses iii.
Reconciling bank accounts iv.
Preparing financial reports packages v. Managing the financial reporting and vouchering process for grants and contracts.
5.
Audit preparation support SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examine the roles of fiscal management in Early Childhood Education.
3.2 Cash Flow in Early Childhood Education Cash flow is the inflow and outflow of money in an organization.
It involves movement of money into and out of the organization.
In school, there may be enough money to meet the obligation and services incurred by the school.
94 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION Cash flow allows the school administrator to determine the budget for different things as approved.
It also enables the school administrator to know what payment has been made and for what.
3.3 Managing Payments and Receipts The school administrator is expected to bank all incomes either fees or an item sold such as books, refreshment, uniform etc.
no matter how small the money may be it is supposed to be banked.
The administrators should avoid keeping cash in the office.
Any money paid to the bank must have a teller, which must be brought to the school office.
School receipt should be issued for teller given.
The receipt must be issued in serial orderliness.
Payments Payments can be made through the following: 1.
Petty Cash: A fixed amount of petty cash should be agreed upon.
Before taking another petty cash the previous one must be duly accounted for.
Petty cash paid must be signed for by the recipients on a petty cash voucher and receipt shown as a proof of payment of all items.
Another name for petty cash is imprest.
2.
Cheque Payment: Cheque payment must be minted on the cheque payment voucher.
All receipts and documents related to transaction must be attached for proof and ought to be carefully checked by auditors.
3.
Ledger: All money spent no matter how small must feature in the ledger book and must be traceable to petty cash voucher or cheque payment voucher.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What do you understand by cash flow?
4.0 CONCLUSION From this unit, we have learnt fiscal management is a monitoring activity of agency spending expenditures, equipment and commodities.
Fiscal management also monitors spending of grant and answers questions from the general public.
95 ECE227 ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE PROVISION IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt about i.
Fiscal management and fiscal management services ii.
Cash flow, management payment and receipt 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and discuss 5 fiscal management services.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Nwankwo, J.I.
; Nwokafor, J.N.
; Ogunsanwo, O.A.
(1981).
Educational Administration and Supervision.
Nigeria Heinemann.
Ozigi, A.O.
(1977).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan Education Limited.
96
