 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDA 851 COURSE TITLE: PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATIONEDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION COURSE GUIDE EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Course Developer/Writers Ajadi, Timothy O.
National Open University of Nigeria Dr. Adedeji Segun O. Dept.
of Educational Management University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria Course Editor Dr. Adeyemi Kola Head of Department Dept.
of Educational Studies & Management University of Benin Benin, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-282-7 All Rights Reserved iii EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………….. 1 What You Will Learn in this Course……………….
1 Course Aims……………………………………… 2 Course Objectives………………………………… 3 Working through this Course…………………….. 4 Assessment……………………………………….. 6 Tutor-Marked Assignment………………………... 6 Final Examination and Grading…………………... 7 How to Get the Most from this Course…………… 7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials…………………….
9 Summary………………………………………….. 10 Introduction EDA851: Principles of Institutional Administration is a 700 level course for all students offering M. Ed Administration and Planning.
The course is also suitable for anyone who wants to learn about administration and management of educational institutions in Nigeria.
The course exposes you to an understanding of many of the concepts of Institutional Administration and how these concepts can be administered in the management and administration of educational institutions in Nigeria.
The course also assists institutional administrators at all levels to be able to apply these concepts to the tasks and roles that they perform as institutional heads and chief executives of their various educational institutions.
The course consists of fourteen (14) units and a course guide.
The course takes you through the concept of institutional administration, principles of institutional administration, structure and functions of institutional administration, approaches to institutional administration, task area in institutional administration in Nigeria, socio-political context of institutional administration in Nigeria, institutional administration and quality assurance, resource situation in institutional administration, record-keeping in institutional administration, leadership responsibilities in institutional administration, training and development of institutional administrators, challenges of institutional administrators in Nigeria, motivation and institutional responsibilities, and Information technology and institutional challenges.
This Course Guide summarizes what the course is all about, the type of course materials you will be using and how you will work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you should spend on each unit of the course for its successful completion.
iv EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION The Course Guide will also give you some guidance on your Tutor- Marked Assignment (TMAs) which are available at the end of each unit.
There are regular tutorial classes provided by National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) at all its designated study centres throughout Nigeria at no extra cost to the learners.
You are advised to attend tutorial sessions at designated center close to you to interact with NOUN’s appointed facilitators for necessary support.
What You Will Learn in this Course The overall aim of EDA851: Principles of Institutional Administration is to introduce you to the basic concepts and meaning of institutional administration and acquaint you with some important skills needed for the application of administrative skills for effective institutional administration at various educational levels.
The understanding of Principles of Institutional Administration is vital because it serves as a framework for the application of management skills to administration of educational institutions.
On regular basis, institutional administrators need to take various decisions on the policies and programmes of government of the country as they affect educational institutions.
During this course, you will learn about institutional administration as a concept and the roles expected of institutional administrators in applying administrative strategies to daily routine in their various institutions.
The course will expose you to an understanding of various types of approaches and styles of leadership that are available for institutional administrators, which can assist them in arriving at a decision within a reasonable length of time.
Course Aims The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: • to provide students with an understanding of the concepts which underlie the use of administrative principles for institutional administration; • to enable students assess the appropriate application of administrative principles by institutional administrators; • to analyse the influence of institutional administrators on the achievement of institutional goals; • to define administration and other concepts in institutional administration; • to explain the significance and limitations of basic and general principles of administration; v EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION • to introduce the students to the major approaches to institutional administration and the implication of these approaches to various educational institutions in Nigeria; • to introduce the student to the nexus between school’s community and school administration; • to establish the interlink between politics, culture and education and their roles in the development of the society; • to identify various ways of building quality into administration of institutions; • to expose the students to various resources available for institutional administration to work with for a better results; • to identify various challenges confronting effective performance of institutional administrators in Nigeria; and • to explain the relevance of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) to institutional administration and identify some inhibiting factors against the successful application of ICT by institutional administrators.
Course Objectives To achieve the aims set out, the course sets overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives at the beginning of the unit.
You should read them carefully before you commence work on each unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should also look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
By doing this, you will be sure that you have followed the instructions in the unit Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives, you should have achieved the aims of the course.
On successful completion of the course, you should be able to: (1) define administration and institutional administration; explain what institutional administration is; (2) distinguish between administration and institutional administration; (3) identify the basic principles of administration; (4) state the general principles of institutional administration; (5) explain the significance and limitations of the principles of institutional administration; (6) explain the meaning of organisation structure; (7) explain the criteria for a good structure of an organisation; (8) distinguish between formal and informal organisation; (9) identify the major approaches to institutional administration; vi EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (10) describe succinctly each of the approaches with emphasis on the strengths, weakness and implication of their application in educational system; (11) identify the major tasks of school administrators; (12) define administrators responsibilities; (13) explain the roles of administrators; (14) distinguish the nexus between school community and school administration; (15) establish the interlink between politics, culture and education; (16) identify the role played by the society, politics, culture, private individuals and corporate bodies in the administration of educational institutions in Nigeria; (17) identify various ways of building quality into administration of institutions’; (18) describe the nature of resources available for educational administrators; (19) identify peculiar problems associated with provision of resources; (20) state the possible ways of averting the problems associated with provision of resources for educational institutions; (21) define educational records; (22) explain the purposes of keeping records in educational institutions; (23) describe leaders and leadership in educational institutions; (24) explain four (4) theories of leadership; (25) explain the kinds of leadership needed for effective administration of educational institutions; (26) identify various roles and responsibilities of an administrator as a leader; (27) identify training methods for institutional administrators; (28) identify training needs of institutional administrators; (29) appraise the implication of training programmes in human organisation; (30) identify the challenges facing school administrators; (31) distinguish between challenges facing educational institutions and political institutions; (32) suggest ways out of age long problems facing institutional administrators; (33) identify strategies of motivating workers in educational institutions; (34) identify the roles of administrators in motivating employees; (35) explain the concepts of motivation; (36) discuss the significance of motivation in educational institutions; (37) explain the relevance of ICT to educational administration; and (38) identify some contending factors inhibiting the successful application of ICT in institutional administration in Nigeria.
vii EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Working through this Course To complete this course, you are required to read all the study units in the study material, read set books and other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
You are also expected to familiarize yourself with an educational institution for necessary experience and skills needed for the course.
Each unit has self assessment practice exercises, and at regular intervals in the course, you are required to submit assignments/exercises for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, is a final examination.
The course should take you about 17 weeks in total to complete.
Below, you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
Units Titles of Work Number of Weeks to Spend Course Guide Module 1 1 Concepts of Institutional Administration 1 2 Principles of Institutional Administration 1 3 Structure and Functions of 1 Institutional Administration 4 Approaches to Institutional Administration 1 5 Task Areas in Institutional Administration 1 Module 2 1 Socio-Political Context of Institutional 1 Administration 2 Institutional Administration and 1 Quality 3 Assurance 1 Resource Situation on Institutional 4 Administration 1 Record Keeping in Institutional 5 Administration 2 Leadership Responsibilities in Institutional Administration Module 3 1 Training and Development of Institutional 1 Administration 2 Challenges of Institutional Administration 1 in Nigeria 3 Motivation and Institutional 1 Responsibilities 4 Information and v Communication i Technology and Institutional Challenges i Revision i Total  2 1 17 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Each study unit consists of one to two weeks work, and includes introduction, objectives, reading materials, exercises, conclusion, summary, tutor-marked assignments (TMA’s) and marking scheme, references/further reading and other resources.
The units direct your work on exercises related to the required readings.
In general, these exercise/practice questions, question you on the material you have just covered or/and to reinforce your understanding of the material.
Together with the tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
Assessment There are three aspects to the assessment of the course; the first is the self assessment/practice, second is the tutor-marked assignments; and the third is the end of the semester written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises/practices; you are expected to apply the information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines set by the authority of National Open of Nigeria (NOUN).
The tutor-marked assignments you submit to your tutor will count for 40% of your total course mark At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of three hours duration.
This examination will also count for 60% of your total course mark.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are fourteen (14) tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You are advised to submit all the fourteen assignments; in which case, the best four of the fourteen will be counted for you.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions/practice exercises for the units in this course will be contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
However, it s desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with the TMA (Tutor-Marked Assignment) form to your tutor.
Make sure that ix EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline set by the authority of National Open University f Nigeria (NOUN), which will be made known to you through your study center.
If for any reason, you cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due for submission to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extension will not be granted after the due date unless in exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for EDA851 (Principles of Institutional Administration) will be of three hours’ duration and have a value of 60% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the types of self-testing, practice exercises and tutor-marked assignments you have previously attempted.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-tests, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the course.
How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study unit will tell you when to read other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate time.
Each of the units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
x EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from a Reading Section of some other sources.
Self-help practices interspersed throughout the end of the units.
Working through these practices will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and examination.
You should do each self-test exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to assist you when you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to assist you.
(39) Read through this Course Guide thoroughly.
(40) Organise a study schedule.
Refer to the Course Overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the units.
Important information e.g.
details of your tutorials, and the date of the first day of the semester will be made available through the study center.
You need to gather all these information in one place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you should decide on and write in your own dates for working through each unit of the course.
(41) Once you have created your own schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please keep your tutor informed before it is too late for help.
(42) Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
(43) Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the “Overview” at the beginning of each unit; you will always need both the study unit you are working on and the one of your references, on your desk at the same time.
(44) Working through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the units, you will be instructed to read sections from your other sources.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
xi EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (45) Well before the relevant due date, check your assignment file and make sure you attend to the next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the objectives of the course and, therefore, will help you pass the examination.
Submit all assignment not later than the due date.
(46) Review the objectives for each study unit; confirm that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
(47) When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
(48) When you have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking, do not wait for its return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor- marked assignment form and also on the comments written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have questions or problems.
(49) After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the course guide).
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are tutorial hours provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of these tutorials, together with the names and telephone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must submit your tutor marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date.
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
xii EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Contact your tutor if (50) You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
(51) You have difficulty with the self-test or exercise.
(52) You have a question or problem with an assignment with your tutor’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face-to-face contact with your tutor and to ask questions, which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussion actively.
Summary EDA851 (Principles of Institutional Administration) intends to introduce the concepts and theories of Institutional Administration to you.
Upon completion of this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of the important concepts of Institutional Administration and the importance of Institutional Administration to educational institutions.
You will be able to answer these kinds of questions (53) What is institutional administration?
(54) What are the differences between administration and institutional administration?
(55) What are the basic principles of an administrator?
(56) What are the general principles of administration?
(57) What are the criteria for setting up a good structure for educational institution?
(58) What is the difference between formal and informal organisation?
(59) What are the major approaches to institutional administration?
(60) What are the tasks of institutional administrators in Nigeria?
(61) What are the responsibilities of an administrator?
(62) What are the differences between the school community and school administration?
(63) What are the roles of the society, politics and culture in administration of educational institutions in Nigeria?
(64) What is the relevance of quality assurance in the administration of educational institutions in Nigeria?
xiii EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (65) How can administrators build quality into administration of educational institutions?
(66) What are the problems associated with the provision of educational resources in Nigeria?
(67) How can you avert the inadequate resource situation in our educational institutions?
(68) What is record keeping?
(69) What are the reasons advanced for keeping accurate records in educational institutions?
(70) Mention some records kept in Nigerian Universities?
(71) What are the types of leadership we have?
(72) Which type of leadership will you recommend for educational institutions in Nigeria and why?
(73) What are the kinds of training available for institutional administrators?
(74) What are the implications of training programmes in human organisation?
(75) What are the challenges facing a school principal in your state?
(76) What are the challenges facing the political institutions in Nigeria?
(77) What are the strategies of motivating workers in educational institutions?
(78) What is the relevance of Information and Communication Technology to institutional administration?
Of course the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the above list.
To gain the most from this course you should try to apply the principles and concepts of Institutional Administration to the practice of administration of educational institutions.
xiv EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Course Code EDA 851 Course Title Principles of Institutional Administration Course Developer/Writers Ajadi, Timothy O.
National Open University of Nigeria Dr. Adedeji Segun O. Dept.
of Educational Management University of Ibadan Ibadan, Nigeria Course Editor Dr. Adeyemi Kola Head of Department Dept.
of Educational Studies & Management University of Benin Benin, Lagos NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA xv EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No.
5 Dar es Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II, Abuja Nigeria e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by National Open University of Nigeria Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-282-7 All Rights Reserved Printed by: xvi EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 ……………………………………………… 1 Unit 1 Concepts of Institutional Administration…… 1 Unit 2 Principles of Institutional Administration ….. 8 Unit 3 Structure and Functions of Institutional Administration……………………………… 18 Unit 4 Approaches to Institutional Administration … 26 Unit 5 Task Areas in Institutional Administration….. 36 Module 2…………………………………………………….
42 Unit 1 Socio-Political Context of Institutional Administration………………………………… 42 Unit 2 Institutional Administration and Quality Assurance…………………………….. 49 Unit 3 Resource Situation on Institutional Administration……………………………….. 55 Unit 4 Record Keeping in Institutional Administration.
63 Unit 5 Leadership Responsibilities in Institutional Administration ……………………………….. 71 Module 3…………………………………………………….. 90 Unit 1 Training and Development of Institutional Administration………………………………… 90 Unit 2 Challenges of Institutional Administration in Nigeria………………………………………102 Unit 3 Motivation and Institutional Responsibilities… 109 Unit 4 Information and Communication Technology and Institutional Challenges………………… 117 xvii NoneEDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION MODULE 1 Unit 1 Concept of Institutional Administration Unit 2 Principles of Institutional Administration Unit 3 Structure and Functions of Institutional Administration Unit 4 Approaches to Institutional Administration Unit 5 Task Area in Institutional Administration in Nigeria UNIT 1 CONCEPT OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of Institution 3.2 Meaning of Administration 3.3 Institutional Administration 3.4 Ways to Achieve Institutional Effectiveness 3.5 Institutional Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Every institution operates governance and administrative structures that provide for the attainment of the set goals of the organization.
Some call these organizational structures/charts.
They also make available financial resources needed to support and ensure the stability of the institution.
Stability and security are crucial to the institutional well-being and accountability.
Every institution must plan for all the support necessary towards accomplishment of institutional goals.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •define administration and institutional administration •explain what institutional administration is •distinguish between administration and institutional administration •identify various ways of ensuring institutions continuity.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 1 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.1 Meaning of Institution Institutions are essential filter of, and guide to, the development process.
Kiggundi et al (1983) stated that “over 70 per cent of the world’s population lives in developing countries that face challenging administrative problems in trying to survive”.
The challenge is clear enough.
When applied to urban development, the challenge is compounded.
Cheema (1987) suggests that: The impact of government programmes aimed at providing urban shelter, services and infrastructure depends upon the quality of institutions responsible for planning and implementing these programmes.
The institutional machinery provides the channel through which the urban sector issues priorities are articulated, projects are planned and implemented, and inter-sectoral complimentary is accomplished.
(p.67) For Shabbir (1987), institutions serve the most crucial intervening factor through which economic resources and human skills are utilized, among other things to promote urban development.
Salmam (1992) also reinforced the pivotal role of institutions to societal development.
He opined that: Institutions are central to sustainable and beneficial economic growth.
They create policies, mobilize and manage resources, and deliver the services which stimulate.
Growth and prosperity are unlikely to be maintained if the institutions which guide them are dysfunctional.
(P.124) Adamolekun (1990) in his own submission on what institution is, said: Institutions’ weakness is a roadblock to development in developing countries.
This problem of institutional weakness is reputed to be most severe in sub – Saharan Africa where the UN Development Decade, the 1980s has been written off as a lost decade.
(p.77) It should be noted that some people use the term “institution” and “organization” interchangeably.
However, there are organizations that are not institutions, and there are institutions that are not organizations, so also we have organizations that are institutions (and vice versa).
For example, taking the arena of law, a new legal firm is an organization, the law is an institution and a court is both.
2 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Blasé (1986) is more circumspect in his analysis, he said clearly that enough variations in the connotation of the term institution exists to acquire careful reading to determine the meaning attached to the concept by various authors.
But Esman and Bruhns (1995) suggested that an organization is primarily a technical instrument, meant to reach certain objectives, but never an end in itself; while institutions are concerned with purposes and values, which extend beyond the immediate task at hand.
The term “institution” and “organization” means the same thing in applied social sciences.
Any college is an organization, since it involves the conscious planning of work through formal allocation of roles and tasks, governed by the hierarchical structuring of authority.
Uphoff (1986) opined that the extent to which an organization qualifies as an institution is to ask whether, if it were to disappear, people in the community, not just members or direct beneficiaries, would want it back and to what extent people would act or sacrifice to preserve the institution in question.
Whether an organization has become institutionalized depends on people’s evaluation of it.
Whether it is seen as having acquired value beyond direct instrumental consideration.
From the above, institutions are not only instruments for action but have inherent value beyond their mere instrumentality.
An institution is seen to have two primary characteristics: it is an instrument for action, and it has inherent value to its recipients, beyond its mere instrumentality.
In essence, institutions are fundamental to the development process of any society.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
In your opinion give a brief definition of an institution and 2.
Highlight the crucial roles played by institutions in your country.
3.
What are the characteristics of institution?
4.
“Institutions “and “Organizations” means the same thing.
Discuss.
3.2 Meaning of Administration According to Blunt (1990) the ruling paradigm of modern administration is contingency theory; the idea is that there is no best way to administer, or to manage or to organize.
He further stated that: 3 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION A contingency approach must be built around a core of organizational values and imperatives concern, the organization’s functional alignment, coordination and control, and accountability and role relationship.
(P.142) Werlin (1991) had a similar view but with a different analysis.
In his own view, he opined that: There is no best way of organizing…no best policy, approach or technology,… we suggest what might be called a “political software” approach, referring to the quality of human relationships essential for organization’s political software to effectively carry out whatever policies, programmes or techniques they attempt.
(P.73) He drew on the example of the various US local government systems.
He noticed that there is no evidence that any of the major forms of local government works better than the others.
The level of their success depends on the quality of political relationships maintained.
Administration cannot be divorced from a political economy and a theory of development.
It is assumed that there is identity between administration and modernization, the later understood as Westernization.
The function of administration was chiefly that of midwife for Western development.
The new paradigm suggests that administration is no longer the rational instrument for transferring Westernization per se to the host government and its populace.
Instead, it should be seen as the process of self determination where the host government is seeking a locally – defined answer to the development problem it faces.
Administration should negate the rationalist Westernizing construction but recognize the political nature of the process.
Administration consists of those activities that are related to the general administrative operations and services of an institution.
These activities include: the administration of personnel programme, facilities and space management, purchase and maintenance of supplies and materials, communication and transportation services, health and safety.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1.
What is administration?
2.
Distinguish between administration and institution.
4 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.3 Institutional Administration The administration of an institution of higher education has the responsibility for bringing together its various resources and allocating them effectively to accomplish goals.
Although, the organizational pattern of an institution is important to the institution’s development and affects the morale of all its members.
Blunt and Collins (1994) referred to institutional administration as all those activities carried out to provide for both the day-to-day functioning and the long-range viability of the institution as an operating institution.
The overall objective of the institutional administration is to promote efficiency and provide for the institution’s organization efficiency and continuity.
The principles of institutional administration are pertinent to governance, organization effectiveness and financial/physical management of the institutions.
It is expected that each office/unit will establish goals, which derive from and support the purpose of the institution, it evaluates the process in achieving these goals, and use the evaluation in making appropriate modifications in resources, programmes and management.
a.
Ways to Achieve Institutional Effectiveness To achieve effective performance in any institution, the institution is expected to provide for: (i) planning and executive direction; (ii) administrative and logistical services; (iii) services and conveniences for the institution’s employees; (iv) enhancing relationships with institution constituencies; and (v) recruiting and admitting students to the institution’s educational programmes.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Apart from the above listed ways of ensuring institutional effectiveness, think of other ways by which you can ensure the effectiveness of an institution.
b.
Institutional Development Institutional Development is the reinforcement of the capacity of an institution to generate, allocate and use human potentials and financial resources effectively to attain development objectives, (public or 5 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION private).
Institutional Development is basically aimed at improving and strengthening: (i) internal organizational structures; (ii) management systems, including monitoring and evaluation; (iii) financial management and planning system; (iv) personnel management, staff development and training; (v) inter-institutional relationships; (vi) institutional structures of sub sectors or sectors; (vii) legal framework; and (viii) government regulations and procedures.
Horbery and Marchant (1996) remarked that Institutional Development is to create or strengthen the capacity to manage programmes, developing structures which strengthen the responsibility of the environment, and which provides incentives for individual and collective action.
Institutional Development is a long term project which is more than mere policy formulation.
It must be tailored to suit the local, political, economic and cultural conditions of the community.
The fundamental principle in institutional development is the relationship between the institution and its environment.
This is because; the institution is to induce change in its environment.
However, every institution should decide on how to arrive at the best institutional development strategy that suits it, considering both the internal and external variables of the environment.
4.0 CONCLUSION Various institutions have governance and administrative structures showing hierarchical arrangement of authority relationship in the institution.
The role of institution is paramount to the type of development in a society because institution is an instrument of change.
It should be noted that learning is essential to institutional development.
Every institution should consider the political environment they are relating with when formulating its policies.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the meaning of institution and the role of institution in the society, we are able to see that administration are those activities that are related to general operations and services of an institution and that there is no best way of administration, the situation at hand should determine the type of administrative approach to adopt.
We also discussed the meaning of institutional administration and ways to ensure institutional effectiveness and institutional development.
6 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Distinguish between “institution” and “institutional administration”.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adamolekun, L. (1990).
Institutional Perspectives on Africa’s Development Crisis: Public Sector Management.
Blasé, M (1986).
Institutional Building, A Source Book.
University of Missouri Press: Columbia.
Blunt, P (1990).
“Strategies for Enhancing Organizational Effectiveness in Third World”.
Public Administration and Development: London.
7 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 THE PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Basic Principles of Administration 3.2 Fayol 14 Principles of Administration 3.3 General Principles of Administrative Practice 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses the principles that guide the operations of institutional administration.
Good and effective organisation does not exist in a vacuum or by mere coincidence; instead, it is the outcome of considerations of some fundamental principles or rules.
It should be noted that although the emphasis in the principles is organisational survival and goal attainment.
Administrative efficiency is a prime consideration in their formation.
Administrative efficiency is measured in terms of the extent of its contribution to the attainment of organisational goals and how well it creates an environment conducive to the survival of the organisation.
You will therefore learn about basic and general principles of institutional administration and their applications in this unit.
Their significance and limitations would equally be discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit you should be able to: •identify the basic principles of Administrator •state general principles of institutional administrator •explain the significance and limitations of each of these principles in their application.
8 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Basic Principles of Administration The basic principles that are essential for the realisation and administration of formal institution are identified and discussed below.
A.
Principle of Single Executive: the effectiveness of an organisation is enhanced by having a single executive head.
The executive has to provide central coordination for all the activities of an institution.
It is not uncommon to have several leaders in an organisation but one of them would serve as the coordinating head of the institution.
This is because, it would be impossible to achieve the goals of an institution where central leadership is divided.
This principle enhances responsibility and accountability.
In a school for instance, there were different departmental and faculty heads as well as sectional/unit heads but one central administrator (vice-chancellor - in case of a university).
The organogram of every institution reflects the structure and line of interaction.
B.
Principle of Unity of Purpose: the effectiveness of an institution is enhanced by clear definition of goals and purposes.
It is obvious that unless goals are clearly defined in a complex institution like school system, there is a likelihood of conflict among members of groups within the system.
C. Unity of Command; this principle emphasises that order and instructions to a staff in any institution should come from only one superior officer so as to afford organisation's efficiency.
Organisation efficiency is pronounced when members know what are expected of them and to whom they are responsible.
Also, this principle averts conflict and confusion, which often lead to poor performance.
D. Division of Labour: since it is not possible for a head of an institution to perform all tasks and functions alone, there is need, therefore, to divide or break the work down into number of task, such that others are charged with the responsibilities of carrying out those tasks.
This principle leads to specialisation and engenders high efficiency and productivity.
9 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION E. Span of Control: this is otherwise known as span of administration, management or supervision.
Institutional administrator can only be effective and efficient in the course of achieving goals and objectives of the institution when he has under him the required number of staff that can be directed or supervised.
Span of control must not be too large and/or too small.
It is determined by a number of interacting factors such as: (i) administrator's ability and competency; (ii) nature of the job; (iii) experience of the administrator; (iv) qualification; (v) physical/technicality of the organization; and (iv) stability of operation.
F. Delegation of Authority and Responsibility: this principle demands that all responsibilities must be accompanied with commensurate authority.
The effectiveness of the institution is enhanced when the administrator delegates works to his/her subordinates and with appropriate authority to carry them out successfully.
Apart from making administrative functions fast and timely, it equally strengthens confidence of the subordinates as well as preparing them for administrative functions.
G. Standardization: this is the development of a uniform standardized procedures for routine administrative operation and measuring the performance of an individuals against the standards so as to determine the level of efficiency and effectiveness.
Several operations within the institution such as accounting, data gathering, and statistical reporting and record keeping could be standardized.
Standardization saves labour and the procedure is essential for data collection and the establishment of management information systems.
H. Stability: the rationale behind this principle is that an institution should continue with policies and programmes until the results or outcomes can be evaluated.
It emphasizes that constant changes of policies that are not based on sound institutional principles would render the organisation ineffective and committed resources become wasted.
Also, such an act does not help in establishing a favourable ratio between input and output.
I.
Flexibility: this principle makes provision for innovative ideas and change.
The need for flexibility of administration and organisation increases in the period of rapid change and development.
Schools’ policies, programmes and procedures 10 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION must be broad in order to allow innovations and accommodate necessary change when the need arises.
J.
Defined Structure: the principle maintains that a defined and definite structure should be established such that a clear system of selecting members and leaders would be known.
There is also the need to state and define in an unequivocal term, the functions of each staff.
K. Security of Tenure: institutional effectiveness is guaranteed when there is provision for security of staff.
Although individual needs vary, the need for security is universal.
The need has to be met regardless of the nature of the organisation.
When security is adequately provided, employees can devote their utmost attention to their duties without having to bother about this universal need of man.
L. Proper Setting: proper setting and conduciveness of an institution determine to a greater extent the efficiency and effectiveness of such institution and the promotion of individual professional development.
A school system for instance is established to promote knowledge and to develop individual members.
This could be achieved only when there is proper setting and conducive working environment as well as adequate opportunities for advancement and training.
M. Personnel Policies: as a complement to the preceding principle of proper setting, good personnel policies evolve from good personnel administration.
Good and effective policies and programmes relating to staff welfare should be incorporated to allow job satisfaction for the members of staff and increased productivity.
These policies include selection of competent staff, training and good reward system.
All these combine to reduce labour turn-over and increase efficiency of labour.
N. Evaluation: this allows the review of performance and the juxtaposition of both plan and implementation to know what has been achieved and what has not been achieved.
Evaluation should be a constant system to enable the institution achieves its objectives and goals.
However, classical and scientific theorists listed some key principles of institutional administration and examples of how they are reflected in the Nigerian educational system.
An examination of Fayol's 14 principles of administration would suffice enough in this discussion.
11 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.2 Fayol 14 Principles of Administration Apart from the five administrative functions, which are equally referred to as the basic elements of administration, which include: planning, organising, coordinating, commanding and controlling identified by Fayol in his book “General and Industrial Management”.
He cautioned administrators to be dynamic in the adoption and application of the following principles.
These principles are •Division of work •Authority and Responsibility •Scalar Chain/Chain of Command •Unity of Command •Unity of Direction •Espirt de corps •Centralization •Subordination of individual miniature interest •Discipline •Order •Equity •Stability of Tenure •Remuneration of Personnel 1.
Division of Work: this is the breaking down of work into smaller units in which experts are assigned to the departments where they can most function.
This often leads to increased productivity and greater efficiency can be achieved.
It also encourages specialization.
2.
Authority and Responsibility: according to Fayol, authority and responsibility always go together whereby any official assigned specific responsibility must be given a commensurate authority to enable him perform as expected of him.
3.
Discipline: this believes that superiors have a right to obedience, application of due energy and outward marks of respect from employees.
4.
Unity of Command: this implies that employees should receive order from one source - superior only.
This will reduce the problem of frictions and confusions.
12 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 5.
Unity of Direction/Purpose: according to this principle work or activities that are related to a group or department and with the same goals must have a leader and a plan.
6.
Subordination of Individual Interest: this principle stipulates that the corporate goals of an institution should take precedence over individual goals.
7.
Remuneration of Personnel: a fair remuneration and method of payment that could afford maximum possible satisfaction to employees and employer is emphasized by this principle.
This would prevent chaos and its attendant consequences.
8.
Centralization: The idea of centralization believes that a central point should be identified as the source of authority.
It is not uncommon that policy formulation and decision making in organisation are carried out by few people at the top of the structure.
9.
Scalar Chain: this is also known as chain of command or line of command which shows the flow of authority from the highest to the lowest rank.
10.
Order: order means a proper arrangement and combination of human and material resources in a way that would make working relationship effective and efficient.
11.
Equity: loyalty and devotions should be elicited from personnel by a combination of kindness and justice on the part of managers or administrators when dealing with subordinates.
There should be fair treatment of all workers without any partiality, favouritism or prejudices.
12.
Stability of Tenure: this stipulates that there should be security of job for personnel.
This will enhance long term commitment and reduce the rate of attrition or turnover.
Institutional administration should be conducive enough to guarantee the stability of workers.
13.
Initiative: this principle allows workers to be natural and resourceful in the process of plan execution.
Employees are not to dogmatically follow the procedures of the past but where necessary, they should apply their initiative to get things done well.
13 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 14.
Espirit de corps: this principle upholds unity and harmony among workers so as to accomplish the goals of the organisation successfully.
General Principles of Administrative Practice The modern institutions and their structures had demanded a versatile principles applicable for the survival of the organisation and individual employee as well, since everything seems dynamic - society, people as well as organisations, a more flexible principle would rather be effective for the attainment of the corporate and individual goals within a system.
In this vein, the general administrative principles are classified into five which include (A) The fundamental principle, which are (i) responsibility (ii) delegation of Authority (iii) communication (B) The Humanitarian principle, which are (i) democracy (ii) justice (iii) human relation (C) The prudential principle, which are (i) economy (ii) responsibility and authority (iii) loyalty (D) The principle of change, which are (i) adaptability (ii) flexibility (E) Bureaucratic principle, which are (i) discussion of work (ii) hierarchy (iii) impersonality in official matters (iv) Record Keeping 14 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION A.
The Fundamental Principle This principle emphasizes that certain guiding rules are basic to all forms of organisation.
They are primary and crucial.
The characteristics which institutions observe without any bias under fundamental principle are the following i.
Responsibility: this holds that individuals within any organisation should perform their duties or assigned responsibilities with utmost sincerity of heart.
Workers are responsible and accountable for any obligation assigned to them.
This principle makes it obvious that every worker has a role to play to achieve the institutional objectives and such effort is recognised, however, minute it could seem.
ii.
Delegation of Authority: this principle holds that no single person can do everything in a modern-complex organisation.
Functions have to be delegated to ensure efficiency.
This gives rise to sections, units, departments.
Functions are entrusted in the hands of people based on expertise, geographical location, position or roles.
iii.
Communication: the major ingredients that foster unity among people is good communication.
Therefore, the principle maintains that easy and quick flow system of information would serve as a life-wire in any organisation.
B.
The Humanitarian Principle i.
Democracy: this principle claims that in recognition of individual worth within an organisation all employees are to be considered and duly represented while deciding on rules and policies that affect them.
In other words, workers should be involved in the decision making process and each be given due recognition.
ii.
Justice: this implies equal and fair treatment of all according to the established rules and regulations without any bias, prejudice or favour.
iii.
Human Relation: as a principle, human relation entails that workers should be seen and considered as human beings who have personal needs and desires that must be satisfied.
There should be respect for human person and dignity irrespective of positions or offices.
15 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION C. The Prudential Principle i.
Economy: this principle emphasises that resources are scarce and limited and needs to be met are more.
With this inverse relationship between resources and need, there must be effective allocation and optimal utilization of resources to achieve maximum output.
ii.
Responsibility and Authority: this demands that all responsibilities must be accompanied with commensurate authority.
This will ensure the functions being delegated to be effectively performed.
iii.
Loyalty: sincere loyalty and trust of the workers must be given to the organisation.
This is usually reflected in their level of D. commitment and enthusiasm displayed at work.
The Principle of Change: this principle holds that changes are bound to take place in organisation which could be as a result of societal or organisational development.
It could also be as a result of invention, creation and research.
All that should be considered is that, such changes should be incorporated and allowed to take i. place only when necessary.
This principle encapsulates Adaptability: it demands that organisation must be able to adapt ii.
to change to stand the test of time, and to survive many threats.
Flexibility: flexibility as a principle requires that organisational policies and programmes as well as objectives and system should be made flexible enough rather than rigid to accommodate iii.
necessary changes and innovations.
Stability: in the cause of dynamism or change, there are some productive and workable plans, policies and programmes considered suitable for effective function of the organization.
Such policies, plans and programmes must be considered or preserved even at the height of change.
Such attributes are needed E. and essential for the survival and continuity of an organisation.
The Bureaucratic Principles.
This principle was propounded by Max Weber in 1946 with four basic characteristics.
It is a pyramidal, hierarchical organisational structure in which all power for making decision flow from super ordinates to subordinates.
Bureaucracy makes for a free working environment with a minimum friction and confusion.
The characteristics which are objective in nature are: 16 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION i.
Discussion of work ii.
Hierarchy iii.
Impersonality of official matters iv.
Record keeping 4.0 CONCLUSION A good institutional administrator must be able to perform the basic administrative functions: planning, organizing, coordinating, commanding and controlling.
He must also be cautioned in the adoption of other management principles for efficiency, such as the Fayol’s principles of administration.
Educational institutions today had demanded versatile principles needed for the survival of their institutions and staff since no one can exist in isolation 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have seen that there are some basic principles needed for the realization of institutional goals such as principles of single executive, principle of unity of purpose, unity of command, division of labour and span of control, and so on.
We also discussed that the general administrative principles are classified into: the fundamental principle, the Humanitarian principle, the prudential principle, the principle of change and bureaucratic principle.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the significance and limitations of the principles of institutional administrator.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Henry, F (1949).
General and Industrial Management, Trans Consonance Stows, London: Sir Isaac Pitman.
Obilade, S (1989).
An Introduction to Educational Administration, Nigeria: Odusote Bookstore Ltd. Peretomode, V.F (2003).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives, Nigeria: Joja Educational Research and Publisher Ltd. 17 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION UNIT 3 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINSITRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Structure of Institutional Administration 3.2 Criteria for a Good Institutional Structure 3.3 Formal and Informal Structure 3.4 Functions of Institutional Administrative Structure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit will intimate you with a framework that guides the operations of institutional administrators.
You will also learn the line of authority as well as the justifications or functions of institutional administrative structure.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit you should be able to explain: •meaning of Organizational Structure •criteria for a good structure of an organization •formal and informal organization structure •functions of institutional administrative structure.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Structure of Institutional Administration The structure of any institution is like the architectural plan of a building (Newman 1972).
Structure can be described as a designed framework or arrangement of things, it implies the framework within which people act.
Thompson (1977) referred to structure as “the internal and patterning of relationships.” Stieglitz (1971) defined institutional structure as the process of logically grouping activities delineating authority and responsibility, and establishing work relationship that will enable both the organization and individuals to realize their mutual objectives.
Edgar and James (1977) described institutional design and structure as a powerful way to change and influence peoples behaviour.
18 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION In another sense, we can refer to structure as a frame of reference by which the pattern of relationship and authority among levels of operations in a particular system or organization is defined.
It shows the chain of command and the type of relationship that exists between two individuals – the super-ordinates and the subordinates.
When viewed as bureaucracy, institutional structure involves five major variables: Centralisation or the hierarchy of authority; Specialization or division of labour; Standardization or formalization; Unified duration and Stratification or chain of command.
A good institutional structure or designed framework or organogram is that which clearly shows the pattern of relationship among various level of performance and line of authority among individuals in an organization.
Apart from showing a behavioural pattern, organogram reveals order of command and communication in hierarchical order.
A discussion on the criteria for designing a good structure of an organization would be more relevant at this juncture.
3.2 Criteria for a Good Organisational Structure An institutional structure is regarded as a system that provides a network of interrelated subsystems each charged with accomplishing some objectives, which are parts of the overall goals of the supra system.
Therefore, to design such a holistic plan, certain criteria must be met which are discussed below: 1.
Effectiveness 2.
Efficiency 3.
Division of work and specialization 4.
Adaptiveness/Flexibility 5.
Functional definition of authority and responsibility 6.
Job Satisfaction 7.
Claim of command 8.
Channel of contact or type of relationship 9.
Agreed procedure A brief discussion of each variable would expand your knowledge.
1.
Effectiveness: effectiveness has to do with production of an organization, which is measured by the number of units produced and the rate of increase in these per year.
To Hage (1965), the higher the volume of output and increase in volume, the more productive or effective the organization.
Any workable structure must create a conducive atmosphere for effective organizational performance.
This could be made possible through provision of 19 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION easy and convenient interaction among various units or sections within the organization.
2.
Efficiency: this implies minimizing cost and maximizing production.
It is measured by computing the amount of money (cost) used to produce a single unit and the amount of idle resources.
The lower the cost per unit, the more efficient the organization.
An institutional structure should be designed to bring about efficient production system – a network that should enhance reduced cost of production per unit.
3.
Division of Labour and Specialisation: a good structure of an organization should enable the division of work into various units or departments and also provide framework for interaction and effective communication system among these various departments.
This would in no small measure enhances specialization and increase productivity.
4.
Adaptiveness Flexibility: this refers to the organizational ability to respond to or adapt to changes in its environment.
Adaptive systems as noted by Silver (1983) are dynamic organizations that changes reality as new technologies emerge and as the community evolves.
They also adjust their programmes to meet the changing needs.
Two main indicators of adaptiveness are (1) the number of new programmes in a year and (2) the number of new techniques introduced per year.
The higher the rate of changes the more adaptive the organization.
5.
Functional Definition of Authority and Responsibility: a good organizational structure should clearly define the functions and the degree of authority to be exercised by functionaries in their offices.
Job is well performed and responsibility well carried out if backed up with a commensurate authority.
6.
Job Satisfaction: central to any appointment and administration in any institution is goal attainment.
The organization has its several goals to achieve so also an individual employee has some needs to meet while working in an institution.
There should be job satisfaction at both ends in order to bring about the achievement of the goals desired.
Therefore, the structure of an institution should be to produce high level of job satisfaction to both parties – employer and employee – in terms of space, working materials, reward/compensation, flexibility in rules application, etc.
all of which must be adequate.
20 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 7.
Channel of Contact: a good structure should mete out the channel of communication among staff.
The process of communication should be easy and convenient to allow a productive communication system.
This could be horizontal or vertical or both channels.
All that is required is that the channel of contact between one production unit and another should be relatively short and convenient; this enhances faster and effective communication.
8.
Chain of Command: the relationship between superordinate and subordinate in terms of giving and taking order is what Fayol considered as scalar chain of command.
With this, Fayol emphasized that the line of authority is from top to bottom of the administrative structure.
This downward flow of command equally defines the line of authority and communication flow as should be practised in any formal and informal institutions.
However, any meaningful structure of an institutional administration should take into consideration and should portray the above criteria for its workability.
Having done this, let us look into formal and informal organization system.
3.3 Formal Organisation and Informal Organisation Institution can be formal and informal depending on the formation, operation and principles guiding the relationship or interaction among staff and between workers and employers/administration.
Let us examine the nature and characteristics of each form of organization for better understanding.
Formal Organisation Organisation is said to be formal when the behaviours and activities of the members are guided by an established or laid down rules and regulations.
These rules and regulations determine the extent to which members can participate in the organisation’s activities and decision making process.
Its origin and existence are usually official and has an undeterminable life span.
A formal organization has a structured - programmes and routine-based rules of behaviour.
The administrative process in this system is highly impersonal with the human considerations completely absent.
While defining formal organization, Max Weber (1946) identified some basic characteristics that are prominent in formal system.
They include.
(1) The existence of rules and regulations with which human behaviours and activities are coordinated.
21 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (2) Hierarchy of authority, which emphasizes the order of responsibility and directives.
It also shows the level and pattern of relationship and communication between the management and staff.
(3) Impersonal Orientation which removes every sign of personal considerations or influence on matters concerning the organization.
(4) Career orientation explains the consideration of qualities and competency of an individual before appointment.
Employees are appointed to perform special rules based on their technical-know- how or specialization.
In this whole, there is virtually no mis- match between the staff and task/activities.
Promotions are determined by seniority and achievements.
(5) Documentation and Official Record Keeping are characterized with proper documentation of transactions and keeping of official record for reference purposes.
This makes it highly official.
(6) Continuity: Formal organization has a growing concern irrespective of who comes in and who goes out.
It is believed that there is continuous existence of the organization even though one administration and/or staff may succeed the other.
(7) Division of labour and specialization: this enables competent hands to perform each task or activity.
It has been unequivocally argued that such practice enhances efficiency and effectiveness in the organizational performance.
(8) Proper accountability of responsibility: an individual works for the organization, representing a “superordinate” to whom he or she is accountable.
Apart from all these features, it can still be inferred from the words of Obilade (1989) that formal organization is that, which has a definite taste, definite allocation of responsibilities, formal communication system, and usually official group of individuals.
Schools and Companies are examples Informal Organisations These are social groups or cliché, which develop and operate within a formal organization with a prime aim to meet the social needs of its members.
It is guided by unstructured or unprogrammed rules and regulations.
It forms a network of personal and social relationships, which are not established or prescribed by the formal organization.
22 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION According to Davies (1981) informal organization arises from the social interaction of people.
Its origin is traceable to people’s needs for relatedness, affiliation, friendship and security.
It should be clearly stated that no formal organisation can operate effectively without the informal ones.
They are so significant in that they help to decrease the basic causes of conflict, frustration and failure within formal system.
They also help to increase communication flow among workers.
Memberships are bound by group solidarity and it is made formidable by the cooperative and collective action of its members.
Informal organization tends to be more concerned with membership goals at the expense of organizational goals.
Its membership is voluntary and not prescribed by rules and regulations.
However, the exit of members from the organization terminates the life of informal organization.
Informal organization helps to increase flow of communication among workers known as grapevine even though wrong information and rumour mongering through them could engender organizational success.
Types of Institutional Structure Two major kinds of Administrative Structure are common to all institutions.
According to Obilade (1989:63) these structures are Flat and Tall Structures.
It is noteworthy that the type of span of control adopted will influence the shape of the organisational structure.
A wide span of control means that the administrator supervises a large number of people or has a large number of people reporting to him.
This situation is referred to as flat structure.
A narrow span of control requires that the institution has more levels in the hierarchy and the structure looks very much like a pyramid; this is known as tall structure.
By implication therefore, a tall administrative structure is characterized by many hierarchy levels between the lowest and the highest positions in the hierarchy.
Obilade observed that classical bureaucratic institution have very tall institutional structures characterized by narrow spans that allows the administrator to exercise tight control over a few subordinates under him.
Although such structure increased the distance between the chief administration and the subordinates, however, such an arrangement allows for effectiveness in the operations of the organization.
In the same manner, the short hierarchical distance between the subordinate and the top administrator in flat structure notwithstanding, this does not make the contact between people at various levels in the hierarchy better off.
However, flat structure is more relevant and could be adopted in organizations with high level of competency among workers with low rate of turnover.
It has also been criticized on the ground that it can overburden the chief administrators to the point that 23 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION little time and attention could be devoted to all their subordinates.
This could eventually affect the performance level of the organization.
Before we examine the functions of structure of institutional administration, I want you to attempt these questions: (79) Examine an institution in Nigeria and describe its administrative structure.
Draw out the organogram and comment briefly on it.
(2) Make a vivid comparison between a flat and a tall administrative structure.
Examine the flows and the strength of each.
3.4 Functions of Institutional Administration Structure The structure of institutional administration; flat or tall is of great significance for the following reasons (1) It shows the pattern of communication flow between the Chief Administrator and the subordinates.
(2) Organisation structure presents at a glance the flow of authority and responsibility among staffers.
(3) Through the structure, the act of responsibility and accountability is made simple.
Individual is conscious of who is accountable to who.
(4) Institutional administrative structure makes delegation of responsibility and authority possible and easier.
(5) The performance of individuals and their contributions can easily be assessed and evaluated.
(6) As a frame of reference, administrative structure presents the true picture of the institution to the outsider.
It reflects a genuine formal organization.
(7) Organisation or structure of the organization classifies functions of each unit or level thereby averting the situation of conflict or clash.
(8) It shows the order of promotion of staff thereby making every staff significant in the organization.
4.0 CONCLUSION Every human organization formal or informal has a frame of reference with which it is identified and defined.
Such is called structure which could be flat or tall depending on the pattern of relationship and flow of 24 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION authority between the top administrator and the subordinates.
It is expected that every bit of production activities should be coordinated and supervised either at a close range or from a relatively distant space depending on the skill and competence of the worker.
This in no small measure enhances effectiveness and efficiency.
However, any attempt to design any administrative structure should put into consideration certain factors, which include chain of command, channel of contact, job satisfaction, flexibility, specialization efficiency, among others.
With this, it would be able to actually perform the role or functions for which it is designed.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we discussed the meaning of structure of institutional administration and the criteria that guide the designing of any workable structure.
You also learned that organization could be formal or informal even though the life of informal depends on the formal system; yet both are significant to each other.
The concluding part of this unit unraveled the functions performed by good administrative structure of any type – flat or tall more significantly in conflict resolution.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT What do you understand by structure of institutional administration?
With practical illustration of a named institution, justify the need for structure in any system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Gerald, H (1965).
An Axiomatic Theory of Organization, Administrative Science Quarterly: Vol.
10.
Obilade, S (1989).
An Introduction to Educational Administration, Nigeria Odusote Bookstores Ltd. Silver P.F (1983).
Educational Administration: Theoretical Perspectives on Practice and Research, New York: Harper and Row Publisher.
4.
Peretomode, V.F (2003).
Educational Administration Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives, Nigeria: Joja Educational Research and Publisher Limited.
25 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION UNIT 4 APPROACHES TO INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0.
Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Classical Approach to Institutional Administration 3.2 Human Relation Approach 3.3 Behavioural Science Approach 3.4 The Contingency Approach 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Having discussed the structure and functions of institutional administration in unit three of this series.
It becomes imperative at this point to examine some major approaches to institutional administration around the world and the implication of their applications to educational institutions.
This will enable you to identify these approaches and apply them to a practical situation where and when necessary.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objectives of this study entail that at the end, you should be able to: •identify the major approaches to institutional administration •describe succinctly each of these approaches with emphasis on the strength, weakness and implication of their applications in educational system •appraise each of the approaches.
Approaches to Institutional Administration The tendency in man to afford efficiency and effectiveness, in spite of congruent relationship between the resources and demand move especially in the industrial or production sector, led to the development of series of assumptions.
This assumption were proved by applications and research and eventually turned out to theories and/or approaches.
Various classifications of these approaches evolved among various theorists and scholars.
For instance, Hughes (1975) suggested four approaches that include: the behavioural, the economic, the managerial 26 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION and the political approaches.
He emphasized that the approaches overlap in their applications when he said that any behavioural approach must necessarily be concerned with political attitudes and action; and any economic approach with managerial techniques for resources allocation and control.
Similarly, managerial techniques may have highly political overtones and the behavioural sciences of sociology and social psychology fuse in organization theory and analysis.
However, a more popular classification which are expressed by Obilade (1989) would be considered in this study.
According to him, Obilade classified approaches to institutional administration into four as follows (i) The classical approach (1900 – 1930): this includes the scientific management and administrative management approaches.
(ii) Human Relations Approach (1930 – 1950s).
(iii) Behavioural Science Approach (1950s – 1995).
(iv) Newer Perspective (contingency) approach (1975 – Present).
We shall now examine each of these approaches one after the other.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Classical Approach to Institutional Administration This school of thought championed by Fredrick Taylor (1856 – 1915) described administration as a systematic process of carrying out a definite task which includes planning, organizing, staffing, directing, coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
Having had accumulated experiences as industrial employee, Taylor noted that people could be made to work efficiently as machine by employing scientific methods as opposed to intuitive approach.
Though this new method, he argued that wastages and inefficiency would be avoided.
The key to the scientific approach is the “concept of man as machinery”.
With this, he proposed that financial reward (motivation) is a major factor that can make workers work more efficiently.
According to Villers (1960) Taylor’s major prints are as follows: 1.
Time Study Principle: all productive efforts should be measured by accurate time study and a standard time established for all work done in the shop 27 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 2.
Piece Rate Principle: wages should be proportioned to output and their rates based on standards determined by time study.
3.
Separation-of-Planning-from Performance Principle: this implies that management should take over from the workers the responsibility for planning the work and making performance physically possible.
Planning should be based on time studies and other data related to production, which are scientifically determined and systematically classified.
4.
Scientific-Method-of –Work-Principle: management should design a scientific methods of work and train the workers accordingly.
5.
Functional-Management Principle: organisation should be designed to serve the purpose of improving the coordination of activities among the various specialists.
In his administrative management approach, Henri Fayol (1841 – 1925) identified five administrative functions, which are common to all organizations, these include planning, organizing, commanding, coordination and controlling.
To plan means to study the future and arrange the plan of operations.
To organize means to build up materials and human organization of the business, organizing both men and materials.
To command is to make staff do their work.
To coordinate means to unite and correlate all activities.
To control is to ensure that works are done according to laid down rules and regulations.
Implication of Classical Approach in Institutional Administration The implications of elements of administrative process in institutional administration include On Planning: administrators should engage in planning to give direction to the activities of institution or system by designing workable time plan, job schedule, determine activities and arrange them well to avoid personality or function/duty clash.
They should also see to smooth implementation of the plans and they should study the future and arrange the plan of operation.
28 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Organising: administrators should arrange the subdivisions of tasks in order to enhance unity of operation.
Duties and responsibilities could be delegated to individuals or group.
As well, committee could be set up to perform different function all of which must be oversees by the administrator.
Also, administrator mobilizes material and financial resources necessary to promote institutional programme and job implementation.
Directing: administrators stimulate quality performance among workers by intimating them the job specifications for the day if different from what are being done.
According to Gulick, directing is a continuous task of making decisions and embodying them in specific and general orders and instructions and serving us the leader of the enterprise.
Directing is synonymous with leading, commanding, stimulating and influencing.
Coordinating: the activities of various departments must be coordinated and united to ensure that no section is doing contrary to the specified activities.
Through coordination, one can ensure that every individual and unit is working towards the same objective.
Coordination fosters team spirit, eliminates unnecessary rivalry and reduces the possibility of working at cross-purposes.
It is the bringing of all activities into unity or the unification or individual effort to wholesome unit.
Controlling: this sees that activities are done accordingly and any deviation must be corrected.
Coordinator should devise a strategy for checking that instructions given are carried out.
Also, individual level of performance should be measurable enough to determine their output or contribution with which he/she is rewarded.
In summary, proper control involves not only monitoring progress and checking to ensure that assigned tasks are being properly executed, but also taking corrective and appraisal action where necessary.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Classical approach to institutional administration is more or less systematic.
Explain this statement.
3.2 Human Relation Approach The main proposition of human relationists is towards a good welfare of the human factor of production.
According to Follett (1868 – 1933) the fundamental problem in all organization was in developing and maintaining dynamic and harmonious relationships.
She found out in her study that much achievement could be recorded in any organization 29 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION if adequate attention is given to the human factor.
She advocated that every individual within the system should be given enough opportunity to develop through better human relationship and interpersonal communication.
She however, faulted the proposition of the scientific approach that equates man with machine.
While Mercy Follett can be regarded as the first great exponent of the aspect of human relations in institutional administration, it was Etton May and his associates (Roethlisberger and Dickson) who supplied empirical data in support of such a view.
In two of their empirical studies, they found out that human variability was an important determinant of productivity rather than physical factor.
Because of this following propositions were emphasized.
1.
Economic incentive is not the only significant motivator.
In fact non-economic social sections limit the effectiveness of economic incentives.
2.
Workers respond to management as members of an informal group not as individuals.
3.
Production levels are limited more by the social norms of the informal organization than by physiological capacities.
4.
Specialization does not necessarily create the most efficient organization of the work group.
5.
Workers use informal organization to protect themselves against arbitrary management decisions.
6.
Informal social organizations will interact with management.
7.
A narrow span of control is not a prerequisite to effective supervision.
8.
Informal leaders are often as important as formal supervisors.
9.
Individual are active human beings not passive cogs in a machine.
According to Mayo, wages and working conditions were although important to the workers, but not as important as what he called “a method of living in a social relationship.” The significance of this approach or school of thought is two ways according to Kimbough and Nunnery (1983).
These were: (i) increasing efforts to democratize the practice of institutional administration; and (ii) growing emphasis on the utilization of concepts from the social sciences.
30 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION However, the implication of this approach on institutional administration are listed below.
(a) That educational administrators were responsible for the promotion of relations between organizational members that were mutually satisfying.
This means, that harmony and high staff morale were considered essential for improved institutional activities.
(b) Administration is considered as a service activities, a tool or agency through which goals institutions could be fully and efficiently realized.
(c) There should be participation and cooperative process of decision-making.
(d) Administrator should exercise group authority within the legal framework of the institution.
(e) Administrator should advance steps towards achieving or satisfying psycho-social and economic needs of employees.
Although this school of thought is credited for bringing attention to people and not to technology or economics; the adoption of multi dimensional model of motivation and the emergence of participation decision-making, it has been criticized on the following ground.
(1) It proposes a manipulation tendencies/techniques to make people work instead of bringing administrators to an understanding of human nature.
(2) It over-emphasized human social needs at the expense of needs for accomplishment or responsibility.
Therefore, there was lack of comprehensiveness in the notion advanced.
(3) The efforts of the human relation theorists did not result in the demise of the numerous applications of classical theory.
(4) Some of the postulates advanced by human relationists did not give rise to derivations that were subject to empirical testing.
(5) There was a lack of evidence to confirm some of the derivations from the postulates advanced.
(6) Human relationists’ ideas posed certain dilemmas without solutions offered.
31 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Examine the major postulations and flaws of human relation approach to institutional administration.
3.3 Behavourial Approach This approach came into use in the early 1950s.
According to Peretomode (2003) Behavourial Approach focuses on the human behaviour in a working environment, usually in formal organization.
It is the study of observable and verifiable human behaviour on organization using scientific procedure.
Ideas and methods are drawn from psychology, sociology and anthropology.
The basic assumption of the behavioural science approach is that, administrators should know how to deal with people and handle their attitudes.
Chester Bernard and Herbert Simon were the first two proponents of behavioural approach.
A brief examination of the works or contribution of each of them would suffice at this juncture.
Chester Bernard Chester Bernard was the first to relate administration to the behavioural approach in his book.
“The function of the Executive” in 1938.
Apart from emphasizing universal character of formal organization, the book also provides a comprehensive theory of cooperative behaviour of workers in the organization.
He emphasized the inevitable interaction between formal and informal organization for efficient and effective operation.
By effectiveness, he opined that it is system oriented and has to do with the achievement of the goals which efficiency is person oriented which has to do with feeling of satisfaction derived for being a member of an institution.
According to Obilade (1989), Bernard’s work noted for the first time, the interrelationship of organizational achievement and individual satisfaction.
This idea put the work of Taylor and Fayol who concentrated on organizational achievement, and Follett and Mayo who centred on individual satisfaction, in appropriate perspective.
He proposed that worker cooperation and motivation were related to the balance between incentives and contributions.
Incentives are the sum total of financial and non financial rewards available to employees in exchange for their effort on contribution.
Bernard classified incentives to two specific and general inducements.
While specific incentives include material benefits, personal opportunities and desirable working conditions; general incentives include association attractiveness, 32 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION opportunity for enlarged participation and social integration.
Further explanation was done on his work by Herbert Simon.
Herbert Simon He is a professor of computer science and psychology who extended Bernard’s work.
In his book “Administrator Behaviour” (1947), Simon demonstrated the use of behavioural sciences in the analysis of institutional administration.
He analysed organizational behaviour from the standpoint at decision making particularly in its non-national character.
He asserted that organization is an exchange system in which inducements are exchanged for work and the administrator as a mediating factor between the organization (inducer) and the employees (effort producer).
Administration according to Simon is a process of rational decision making that influenced the behaviour of members of the organization.
Although Simon argued that there are no best solutions to any given problem but some solutions are more satisfactory than others.
This he called “cognitive limits on rationality” and spoke of “satisfying” rather than ‘maximizing or optimizing’.
Implications The implication of Behavourial Approach to administration include among other things: 1. human beings (employees) have insatiable needs or desires, rather than attempting to provide best solutions to all these needs, administrator should decide with alternatives a more satisfactory offer; 2.
administrators should use inducements as rewards to compensate employees efforts so as to boost their morales; 3.
administrators should provide opportunities for personal and professional advancement of their employees; 4. dialogue and democratic principles should be used for decision making and conflict resolution; and 5. not only should administrator be coordinating personal oriented goals and system oriented goals but must also ensure a better way of achieving efficiency and effectiveness in the organization.
33 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 “Efficiency and Effectiveness” are the bedrock of human and material resources of an organization.
Discuss how these could be achieved using behavioural approach.
Contingency Approach Perhaps the criticism mounted against the classical human relation and behavioural science approaches and/or the suggestion of Simon Herbert diverted the focus of theorists to contingency approaches.
Simon, in his argument, submitted that there is no best solution to any given problem, but some solutions are more satisfactory than others.
Contingency approach emphasizes that there is no one best way to organize this does not mean that any way of organizing is as good as any other.
Rather, it implies that an organizational structure is a function of a number of contingencies.
Among such contingencies were the organizational goals, characteristics of its members, the kinds of tasks that it utilizes and the stability of the environment in which the organization functions.
However, all these contingencies are to be reckoned with when designing and administering organization.
In his contribution, Vroom (1983) asserted that the best approach to administration or institution should be adequate to deal with the complexities of the underlying processes.
This implication is that administrators should examine the prevailing situation in the organization to address any issues that require attention.
A combination of different principles or method of administration would go a long way to put administrators at the saver end.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 How would you apply contingency approach in administering a named organization/institution?
4.0 CONCLUSION Institutional administration has been viewed from different stand points including the classical, the behavioural, human relation and contingency approaches.
It is not worthy that while the classical postulates that workers should be likened to machinery that could be made to work continuously in order to maximize productivity, human relation approach emphasizes that workers as members of an organization should be considered as a factor that deserves special welfare packages so as to make them perform more efficiently and effectively.
34 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Behaviourists hold the view that the behaviour of employees are products of the interaction of the work environment.
However, the contingency approach is borne out of the fact that no single approach is adequate enough to produce a satisfactory working system in any institution; rather a combination of some approaches would ensure attainment of organizational goals.
5.0 SUMMARY Our study in this unit intimates us with some major approaches applicable to institutional administration with emphasis on the strength and criticisms of each.
Also, the major proponents of each approach were identified with their major arguments.
You would equally have learnt that no single approach is adequate enough to guarantee authentic goals achievement than a combination of various approaches to solve any existing problems.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT As an administrator of public institution identify and describe the approach you would adopt to overcome the challenges of ineffectiveness and inefficiency.
Justify your choice.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Villers, R (1960).
Dynamic Management in Industry, Englewood Cliff: Prentice Hall.
Henri, F (1949).
General and Industrial Management, Trans, Constance Storrs, London: Sir Isaac Pitman.
Peretomode, V.F (2003).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspective.
Lagos.
Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. 35 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION UNIT 5 TASK AREA IN INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Major task Areas in Administration 3.1.1 Schools-Community Relationship 3.1.2 School-Curriculum Relationship 3.1.3 Student-Personnel 3.1.4 Staff-Personnel 3.1.5 Equipment and Facilities 3.1.6 Finance and Business Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Administrative tasks are areas of activities to which school administrators are concerned.
In other words, they are the extent towards which any institutional administrator should focus.
The general level of performance of any school administrator is evaluated in his ability to maintain balance in all these connected responsibilities.
It is noteworthy that, the traditional function, which the school administrator is to champion, include; planning, organizing, staffing, coordinating, controlling, directing and budgeting, among others.
All these are crucial areas where school administrators’ functions reside.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •identify major tasks of school administrators •define administrator responsibility •explain administrator roles •distinguish the nexus between school community and school administration.
36 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Major Task Areas in Administration Campbell (1971) and Nwankwo (1981) identified six major administrative tasks in school administration, which include: i. school-community relationship; ii.
school-curriculum relationship; iii.
student-personnel; iv.
staff-personnel; v. equipment and facilities; and vi.
finance and business management.
i. School-Community Relationship This considers the relationship between the institution and the immediate and larger communities where it is located.
It is expected that a peaceful co-existence among the institutions and the entire community affect the general performance of the school.
Especially, it is anticipated that the outcome of this institutions are to be absorbed into the community.
In this regard, the administrator of educational institution must be able to: •determine the level of aspiration, interest and desire which the people have for the institution; •ascertain the disposition of the school community; • disseminate useful information about the school to the community through the mass media, parent teacher association, and board meeting; and •adjust school activities, where applicable to incorporate society’s culture and practices so as to further the level of peaceful coexistence of both the institution and the community.
ii.
School-Curriculum Relationship This is another key task which school administrator must perform.
This school curriculum assignment of the school administrator involves: •initiating student-centered programme of instruction; •ensuring continuity of curriculum design in each area of study in the school; •distinguishing between the general and specific instruction; •identifying instructional problem and hindrances to effective or purposeful teaching learning situation 37 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION •establishing and maintaining school-wide commitment to the academic achievement of all the students’ •developing a uniform system of evaluation for staff performance •helping teachers to gain more insight into learning styles of children and introduce them to theories that are useful for the job •ensuring effective supervision and evaluation of teachers and students performance over a period of time; and •ascertaining that school programme and curriculum of instruction correlate with student’s future vocational achievements.
iii.
Student Personnel This involves the realization of the aims of education of the students/pupils in the school by the administrator and the cohorts that make the school system.
The administrator is charged with the responsibility of ensuring conducive atmosphere for effective child growth and unrivalled development through proper direction; by imparting the right kind of knowledge.
Ideal administrator ensures that every student is given adequate opportunity, attention and motivation to learn at his own pace.
Provision must be made for individual differences, aspiration and needs.
This could be realized through various ways, which include: i. maintaining proper discipline of the students; ii.
making school activities child-centre so as to realize all-round growth and development of the child; iii.
exposing each child in the school to move functional and meaningful education; iv.
associating himself with the problem and needs of the child in the school and making provision for meeting these problems and needs; and v. Providing opportunities for the all round development of children’s potentials.
Institutional administrator should also see students as the essential inputs towards the realization of the objectives of the school system.
iv.
Staff-Personnel As much as the school administrator is obliged to assist the students in achieving their academic and moral goals in the school, he should also be aware of his leadership roles and functions not only to bring about functional staffing but also to create an enabling environment for individual staff development.
He has to integrate staff needs to school needs were applicable since both cannot be divorced.
He must be fully skilled in human resource management motivation and training.
38 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Administrators should consider the following roles in order to bring forth effective and efficient staff personnel in the school.
i.
He should consult and involve his staff on matters relating to decision-making.
ii.
He needs to communicate in advance, all important matters and decision that affect staff.
iii.
He should make provision for individual staff growth and development.
iv.
Create a high sense of morality and professional commitment He should delegate responsibility with enough authority.
v. He should avoid nepotism and favouritism in all its ramification.
vi.
He should always keep confidential matters about staff secret.
vii.
He should design motivating strategies for teachers on equal grand.
v. Equipment of Facilities To realize educational goals and objectives of the institution and school system, equipment and physical facilities are not only essential but are also of immense value.
Apart from the acquisition of these equipment and facilities, proper maintenance of them must be taken seriously.
School administrator must ensure that essential and basic equipment and materials are provided in adequate quantity and in good time.
He should also see to the satisfactory storage of various school item and their records.
In addition, the maintenance of all physical facilities such as school building, libraries, laboratory, gymnasium, hostels facility etc should be considered inevitable.
vi.
Finance and Business Administration Funds and finance are very important area on school and the effectiveness or otherwise of an administrator can be determined through this ability to prepare, and maintain good budget and accounting systems.
This is a sensitive task in school management.
The generation of funds and the disbursement of the financial allocations to the school require a great deal of accountability.
Therefore, to ensure proper budget and accounting system, school administrator should: •see that receipts are issued for all forms of transactions and money collected; •keep proper record of all items of expenditure on which imprest is expended; 39 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION •see that the allocation in the school budget is spent according to the directions of the government and in accordance with the financial regulations and procedure; • ensure that the school bursar/accountant maintains good system of accounting in line with the accounting procedure laid down by the government; •equip himself with good system of budgeting and accounting through seminar, workshop and other training programme; and •be financially prudent and disciplined.
Apart from these specific tasks, institutional administrators are equally charged with some general tasks, which include: •organization and conduct of meeting and conferences; •handling of delicate interpersonal situation; •resolving personal/interpersonal conflict; •directing the works of administrative assistants; •publicize the work of the institution; •diagnose the strengths and weaknesses of school programmes; •attending school functions and meetings; •responding to correspondence; •preparing reports for visitors to the school such as government, auditors, etc; and •scheduling school programmes.
4.0 CONCLUSION Every institution administrator should focus on task areas that will influence the achievement on institutional goals.
The success of any institutional administrator at any level is adjudged by the level of his ability to strike a balance among the various administrative tasks and his ability to carry out the functions of administrator without bias.
5.0 SUMMARY We have identified the major task of school administrator as maintaining good school community relationship, school-curriculum relationship, student personnel, staff personnel, equipment and facilities as well as finance and business management 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Examine the various tasks that are relevant to institutional administration in Nigeria.
40 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Campbell R.F., Bridges, E. M. & Nystr and R. O.
(1971).
Introduction to Educational Administrator, Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc. Nwankwo J. I & Lul.segged, A. M. (1981).
Educational Administration: Theory and Practice, New Delhi: Vicas Publ.
House P. V. T. Ltd. 41 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION MODULE 2 Unit 1 Socio-Political Context of Institutional Administration in Nigeria Unit 2 Institutional Administration and Quality Assurance Unit 3 Resource Situation in Institutional Administration Unit 4 Record Keeping in Institutional Administration Unit 5 Leadership Responsibilities in Institutional Administration UNIT 1 SOCIO-POLITICAL CONTEXT OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA 1.0 INTRODUCTION There is an interplay among culture, society, politics and education more especially in the pluralistic society like Nigeria.
While the culture forms the core of curriculum contents, the activity of any society which revolves round their culture, are organized and coordinated by the political system operating within that society.
Education remains the channel, through which the culture of the society is divulged into the wider world and a vehicle that conveys spatial development elsewhere to the local area.
It trains up those that determine the operation and activities within the society hence the trio (culture, society and politics) are interlinked with education.
This discussion presents in a clear term the role of individual stake-holders – the society, government (politics); individual and corporate bodies in the administration of education in Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The learners should be able to: • establish the interlink between politics, culture and education • identify the roles played by each of the society, politics, culture and private individuals and corporate bodies in the administration of education in Nigeria.
42 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Interlink Between Politics, Culture and Education Culture is described as the total way of life of a people in a given society.
Mendoza (1973) cited in Owolabi (1996) defined culture as a learned and shared way of life that is socially transmitted from one generation to the next.
Culture covers all aspects of man’s life including religion, artifacts, politics, relationship, marriage, belief, custom, organisation, etc.
By nature, culture is learned and shared; it is organic and inorganic; it is dynamic yet static, it is expressed and manifest.
There is material aspect of culture such as dressing, food, house, tools, etc and there are non-material culture including systems, institutions, attitudes, customs and norms; principles and practices.
To be useful and acceptable members of a society, we need to learn and share the customs, beliefs and values of that society.
These are the contents of culture.
In other to have a sense of belonging, the newly–born anxiously learns the custom (language, etc.
), beliefs and values of his people (Owolabi; 1996) through the process known as socialization.
In its broad sense, education means socialization; by this education is seen as a process of learning to live as a useful and acceptable member of the community (Farrant 1964).
It is necessary to point out that not all elements of culture are worthwhile to be included in education.
This is why Owolabi (1984) narrowed the context of education to mean a process where individuals are exposed to selected knowledge, skills and attitudes through such institution as schools, colleges and universities.
This definition makes education more formal and organised.
Emphasis has to be laid on the purpose of education at this juncture.
Generally, education is aimed at making a complete responsible individual who would not only live in but also contribute to the development of the society where he lives.
Such an individual would not only be developed in cognitive and affective aspect of life but also the psychomotor domain that would enhance his manipulative skills.
All those attributes will make him relevant, adaptable and integrated with the world around him.
In both the traditional and modern setting, no matter the perception or view, a cultured person is regarded as an educated person.
This establishes an interlink between education and culture.
43 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Politics cannot be separated from education.
In the word of Eastern (1959) quoted in Owolabi (1996), politics is defined as a “social process through which authoritative allocation of values takes place”.
The educational sub-system of the society derives its authorization and continuous existence from the support provided by the political system.
The party in power forms the government.
The government thereby is vested with allocative power and thus invests in education; the human, financial, and material resources.
It determines the dimensions and direction of education enterprise by formulating policies and controlling for quality.
Whereas politics provides services to the education industry, the political culture of the society is transmitted in an educational system.
However, it should be mentioned here that the trio: culture, politics and education operate within the state or society.
Therefore, state /society provides an avenue or atmosphere for effective operation of each of culture, politics and education and the state owes its survival and continuity to the effectiveness and success of education, politics and culture.
See the figure below for clarity Fig.
1:Education – Culture – Politics Interactions Education Culture Politics Society / State 44 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Summarily therefore, education is the process by which a society transmits its cultural heritage from one generation to another; politics provides the live wire of education (resources) just as education is a veritable instrument in the playing of modern politics.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Critically examine the interlink between each of culture, politics, society and education.
3.2 The Role of Government (Politics) in Administration of Institution As earlier pointed out in our discussion on the interlink between politics and education that government invests some resources in education so as to control quality and quantity of output from the system, the general and specific tasks (roles) of government in educational administration are highlighted below.
1.
Policy Formulation: government through its ministries and agencies formulate education policies, which regulate the establishment, operation and accountability of the system.
This gesture intends to maintain standard and uniformity in all aspects of education.
2.
Planning and Implementation: government through various institutional agencies draws out educational plans and explains the strategies for its implementation.
It is not uncommon that most plans and decisions are made in good intentions but are usually defeated at the implementation level.
This calls for adequate attention.
3.
Resources Allocation: government makes provision for recruitment training appointment and placement of human resources i.e.
administrators.
Apart from this, it allocates financial resources in form of direct funding, grant-in-aids, supplies of properties, sponsoring of programmes, construction of structure (offices, classrooms, laboratories, libraries, etc) and so on.
These are necessary for any effective administration of our institutions.
Over the years, both state and federal government concurrently provide for education in their annual budgets having understood and acknowledge the significance of the performance of education in nation building and national development.
4.
Supervision and Control: government at various levels-federal, states, local-set up agencies and commissions which monitor and 45 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION control the operations of education industry.
The activities of these agencies cover the use of resources allocated to the system, content and pedagogy of instruction, quality of staff and performance, curriculum and its content, and the aggregate level of performance in relation to attainment of goals.
In the long run, recommendations are made to the government on their findings.
5.
Consumption Role: in most cases, government absorbs the outputs from the school system by giving them appointment or offer opportunities for responsibility.
In this sense, government is able to see level of performance of its investment.
Graduates are employed as teachers or civil servants who would be expected to put into practice all that they have learnt in the school.
This is a dimension by which educational system makes an impact on the society.
The failure of these individuals to perform up to expected end would describe the level of standard of the system and thus posing a challenge for policy consideration by the government.
3.3 The Role of Society in Institutional Administration It should be made clear that educational institution is a sub-system within a larger society.
Apart from providing conducive environment for educational purposes, the society through its various organs endeavours to enthrone harmonious relationship and cooperation among various sub-systems including education.
We need to emphasize also that the society housed the natural resources, which are the mainstay of our economy.
The standards of economy at the global level invariably plays dominant role on the level of resources made availably to educational system.
On this note, the society ensures that every system within it is efficient enough to complement one another.
3.4 The Role of Governmental /Non-Governmental Bodies in Educational Administration Various bodies and organisations are set up and do play one role or the other in educational administration.
Such bodies include WAEC, NECO, JAMB (UME/PCE) NUC, NCCE, NABTEC etc.
In the recent times the National Association of Proprietress and Proprietors of private school (NAPPS) also ensure quality and standard in various private schools.
They ensure that standard and regulated curriculum is used and that environmental provisions of these schools are monitored.
46 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.5 Role of Private Individuals and Corporate Bodies Private individuals and corporate bodies are also stakeholders in education industry.
For this reasons, they are to perform certain role to ensure efficiency of this unique system.
The roles are explained below.
Funding and Resources Provision: it should be pointed out that, although government subsidizes educational cost to a large level, this does not imply that education is free.
Private individuals or households make contributions for provision of education for youths.
Apart from paying tuition fees, accommodation, and other school charges, provision of educational materials and supporting facilities are also borne by them.
In the same vein, corporate bodies and non-governmental associations assist in funding education through direct funding (allocation of funds) in terms of donation, sponsorship or through such indirect funding like construction of building, donation of materials, scholarship awards and so on.
In the control and supervision aspects private and public agencies are responsible for the control of educational input and output.
This is because; some of the output (graduates) is to be absorbed into private and corporate enterprises.
They offer valuable suggestions for policy consideration on the direction and dimension of educational curriculum.
The input of private individuals and bodies becomes significantly necessary in the recent past when the principle and practice of private partnership in education financing and control came to stay.
The input of private owners of schools and their interests are considered in formulating policies.
While WAEC is charged with the conduct of examination for senior secondary and private candidates who intend to make up for their deficiencies in one subject or the other, NECO provides similar services, and in addition conducts the Junior Secondary School final examinations throughout the country.
JAMB coordinates matriculation examinations into higher institutions (Universities, Polytechnics and Colleges of education) and conducts selection exams examinations for many parastatals and organizations.
NBTE coordinates the curriculum, policies, decisions, policy, implementation, for technical education while NABTEB conducts examinations that are related to business, trade, vocational and technical education in Nigeria.
NUC sees to supervision, establishment, approval/ disapproval of university, it upgrades and allocates resources to universities.
It is also in charge of ensuring standards in all universities and the affiliated institutions across the country.
NCCE and NBTE replicate such roles in colleges of education and polytechnics respectively.
47 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 4.0 CONCLUSION The foregoing discussion unveiled the inter-connectivity of politics, culture and education.
Culture of the society forms the curriculum contents upon which the objectives and goals of education are set, the allocation of resources (human and non-human) is vested in politics.
However, both education and politics are sub-systems within the larger society.
This nexus compels us to identify the roles of politics, culture and the society in the administration of educational institutions.
The conclusion is that the administration of educational system is a joint responsibility of both the public, private individuals and corporate bodies.
5.0 SUMMARY From the above, we have seen the role of individual stake holders – the society, government (Politics); individuals and corporate bodies in the administration of education in Nigeria.
It has been established that no institution can exist in isolation; there is close relationship among the society, culture, politics, and education.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT How would you describe the role of each of: a. the government b. private individuals and other bodies, in the administration of educational institutions in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Owolabi.
S. (1989).
Political and Cultural Context of many Education in Personnel Performance and Capacity Building, Edited by Adedayo Ajayi and J.
A. Akinwumiju.
Department of Educational Management: University of Ibadan.
Ambrose N. O.
(1986).
Administering Education in Nigeria – Problems and Prospects, Heinemann Educational Books Nig.
Ltd. Farrant J.
(1964).
Principles and Practices of Education for Use in African Training College, London: Longman.
Mendoza M. G. and Napoli V (1973).
System of Society, Toronto: Health and Co. 48 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION UNIT 2 INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION AND QUALITY ASSURANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Quality Assurance Defined 3.2 Relevance of Quality Assurance in Institutional Administration 3.3 Factors Influencing Quality Assurance in Nigerian Universities.
3.4 Challenges to Quality Assurance in Nigerian Institution 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Administration is an essential part of an organisation and effective administrative system would guarantee a successful performance of any institution.
There is no gain-saying the fact that proper administration is required in the process of achieving educational goals and objectives of any institution.
For the effectiveness of administration in the institution, qualitative and quantitative aspect of resources must be guaranteed.
Crucial indeed is not only the availability of these resources but their functionality, relevance and utilization.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this study, students should be able to: • acknowledge the relevance of quality assurance in the administration of educational institutions • identify ways of building quality into administration of institutions.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Quality Assurance A lot of definitions have evolved on what constitutes quality.
It is said to mean the totality of features and characteristics of a product or service that bear upon its ability.
Assurance means will, activities and functions concerned with the attainment of quality.
49 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION In the same vein, quality assurance is viewed as a system for programming and coordinating the efforts of the various groups in an organisation to maintain or improve quality, at an economical level which allows for customers satisfaction.
Quality assurance differs from quality control.
While the former relates to all pre-purchase efforts made towards, ensuring that supplies perform up to expectations (i.e.
supplying the right quality); the latter means an array of post purchase activities carried out in order to ensure that the materials purchased conform to specifications and ensuring the good quality of the products of the buying organisations from the foregoing discussion, it could be deduced that, quality assurance i. originates from the producer.
ii.
is directed towards a specific need of the consumer; and iii.
requires a feedback mechanism.
Retrospection and Concurrence in Quality Assurance Barnet et al (1978) emphasized that quality assurance must be based on evaluation of the worth of the particular process or outcome of the process through collection and presentation of data relating to past events.
He was of the opinion that quality assurance combines the elements of quality assessment (identification of deficiencies in quality of service) and the systematic application of remedial measures.
According to him, the two types of feedback in quality assurance are: retrospection and concurrence.
In retrospection, the information concerning system performance is selected and analyzed.
It has the potential importance of defining the needs for continuing education of the staff and for identifying weaknesses in institutional procedures.
The emphasis in concurrent feedback is on identification of specific deviations in the individual behaviour within a system rather than analyzing pattern of group behaviour.
It implies and depends on monitoring and timely feedback so as to enhance quality of outcome.
3.2 Relevance of Quality Assurance in Institutional Administration In any educational system, the extent to which the issues that are related to quality are being upheld will determine the level of patronage.
Patronage is a pre-requisite towards profit making and public modeling.
To this end, we can sum up the significant relevance of quality assurance in institutional administration as follows: 50 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION •it shapes the focus of administrators of institutions to specific areas of need; • it enables continuity in standard of service and of output of any educational system; •it hastens development and dynamism of any institution.
•it averts the incidence of wastages and unproductiveness among staffers; •builds quality assurance into institutional administration; and •reduces the work of the administrators since it would serve as control- check against any deviance.
3.3 Factors Influencing Quality Assurance in Nigerian Universities A lot of factors are actually militating against quality in our institutions.
Some of these influencing factors are discussed below: 1.
Funding: scholars have identified inadequate funding as one of the problems facing Nigerian schools especially higher institutions.
This has in no small measures hindered their optimal performances over the years (Ajayi & Akindutire: 2007).
Such predicament adversely affects the administration of the institutions across the country.
Consequently, delayed salaries and staff remuneration, poor infrastructional provision, shortage of basic learning amenities, poor maintenance of structures and poor staffing are prevalent.
Most institutions in the country are poorly financed and the consequence of this is more felt in the quality of the output from these schools.
The trend of performance of students in qualifying examinations and even, in internal examinations over the years has been revealing.
As an alternative means to success, students at various levels settle with examination malpractices of various forms.
Apart from this, dearth of study materials in our institutions, inadequate facilities, deplorable equipment, financial crises between staff and management or government, which often degenerate to various reactions such as strike, are some of the evidences of poor funding.
2.
Staffing: one of the reasons for low quality assurance in Nigerian university system is a severe shortage of both teaching and non- teaching staff.
Most Universities’ staff/student ratios are very high, while academic/non academic staff ratios are lopsided.
Consequently, the output from these institutions becomes short of standard.
51 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.
Physical Facilities: the state of physical facilities in many of the higher institutions in Nigeria is not encouraging.
Apart from shortage of these facilities, studios and workshop, many of the facilities are in deplorable conditions.
The situation appears to be worse in the state universities.
4.
Enrolment Crisis: it is not debatable that high enrolment would result in overcrowded classrooms and its attendant consequences such as –ineffective instructional delivery, examination malpractices, and inadequate recreational and learning facilities and so on.
5.
Political Interference: politics has almost led to loss of focus in most of our institutions.
Decision making and policy formulation have become subject of politics.
Selections, appointment, promotion and changes are no longer based on merits and hence the recurrent failure in most areas of development.
Until politics is divorced from the process of administration in Nigerian educational institutions, there may be difficulty in the road to quality output.
6.
Poor supervision: it is sad that most of the financial commitments of the government and private individuals to our institutions are not well supervised and controlled, for better performance.
The yearly record of discrepancies between expected result and actual performance of these institutions could be the result of poor monitoring and supervision or lack of it.
Ways/Strategies for Building Quality into Institutional Administration in Nigeria A lot of ways are opened by which quality could be built into institutional administration.
Some of these are 1.
Inspection and Supervision: there is need for genuine inspection and supervision of curriculum delivery, process and contents, facilities on ground and human factors.
The extent to which institutional practices could help educational system to achieve its goals should be a matter of concern to inspectors and supervisors of institutions and their administrators.
2.
Good Monitoring and Regular Visits: inspectors should be monitored by higher authorities to ascertain the authenticity of 52 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION their report.
However, visits should be as frequent and as regular as assessment and examinations in schools.
3.
Better Financial Allocation: there should be improved funding of institutions through improved resources allocation to schools so as to enable them to be more effective in their financial responsibilities.
4.
Good Staffing and Welfare Packages: recruitment, motivation, training and development of staff are also conditions necessary for quality assurance in institutional administration in Nigeria.
Apart from qualitative and quantitative consideration in staff recruitment, more important is also motivation of staff through prompt, regular and handsome salaries and compensations.
Others are conducive working environment, opportunities for self development and self-actualization of workers through seminars, workshops, conferences and research grants, good communication, participatory decision making, etc 5.
Adequate Facilities: provision of more physical facilities and supporting facilities would go a long way to enhance quality administration of institutions.
Although government alone cannot be held responsible for this, individual and corporate bodies need to participate to ensure qualitative administration of our institutions.
6.
Total Quality Management (TQM): this principle implies that everyone is involved and accountable for the success or failure of the operation and administration of any institution.
It requires high sense of dedication, loyalty and rectitude to ensure total and absolute success of the operation.
Concerted effort of all allied units/department of the institution is necessary.
Total Quality Management aims at achieving the most desirable quality at the most minimal cost.
It is based on the principle of democracy and collective responsibility.
4.0 CONCLUSION The achievement of the general and specific goals of the Nigerian education industry depends largely on the level of administration, which in turn is dependent on the level of quality assurance model built around it.
It is noteworthy that the state of quality assurance in Nigerian schools, particularly higher schools is unsatisfactory and worrisome.
This is consequent upon the prevailing problems like poor funding, poor supervision and inspection, deplorable state of physical facilities and so on.
In the light of the above, it is argued that improved financial 53 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION allocation to the system, recruitment of adequately qualified staff, staff training and development, better supervision and effective monitoring are some of the important ways by which quality assurance can be built into institutional administration in Nigeria.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have discussed the meaning of quality assurance as it applies to institutional administration, the relevance of quality assurance in educational institutions, factors influencing quality assurance in Nigerian universities, as well as strategies for building quality into institutional administration in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Enumerate and explain the need for quality assurance in institutional administration in Nigeria.
2.
With particular reference, state the factors constraining quality assurance in Nigerian educational institutions.
In your own view, how could such constraints be eliminated?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Knezevich, S.J (1975).
Administration of Public Education, New York: Harper and Row Publishers.
Babalola, J.B et al (2006).
Educational Management thoughts and Practice, Ibadan, Nigeria: Codat Publications.
Barnet, G.O et – al (1978).
Quality Assurance through Automated Monitoring and Concurrent Feedback using a Computer-based Medical Information System, Journal of Medical Care Nov. 1978 Vol.
XVI no II.
Akindutire, I.O and I.
A. Ajayi (2007).
The Unresolved Issue of Quality Assurance in Nigerian Universities - in Journal of Sociology and Education in Africa: Vol 6.
No 1.
January 2007.
UNIT 3 RESOURCE SITUATION IN INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 54 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Nature of Resources in Institutional Administration 3.2 Classification of Resources 3.3 Problems Associated with Resources Availability and Utilization in Institutional Administration 3.4 Practical Solution to the Identified Problems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION All materials and non-material factors that are necessary and are contributive to the attainment of goals in any institution are regarded as resources.
The human component of resources interacts with certain facilities and equipment at certain time to bring about production of output.
The quality and quantity of this output are to a greater extent dependent on the quality and quantity of resource input and the manner of processing.
By implication therefore input and output are significantly responsive to administration.
Administrators of institutions have role to play in ensuring effectiveness and efficiency within and outside the institution, not only in the procurement or acquisition of resources but also in their organization, coordination, control and maintenance.
The main focus of this discussion is to expatiate on the nature and characteristics of resources, identify problems associated with resource provision and utilization and advance ways of solving the problems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this discussion, you should be able to: • describe the nature of resources, identify some problems associated with provision of resources • state possible way of averting the problems.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nature of Resources in Institutional Administration 55 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION There is no single definition that can perfectly answer the question “what are resources?” Rather than attempting to define the concept, descriptive approach had been mostly supported.
Resources are considered to be all those human, materials and non- material factors combined together in a workable manner to facilitate production.
In accounting sense, resources are linked to asset that equals to the sum of capital and liabilities.
This description undermines, human and time and other invisible but contributing resources.
An outline dictionary provides a list of description of resources, few of them are stated below.
Resources are available source of aid, support or wealth; a new or reserve supply that can be drawn upon when needed.
A resource is anything that has identity e.g.
electronic document.
This description cautions that not all resources are network retrievable e.g.
human being, corporation, and bound books in library (source: enwikipedi.org/wiki/resource/computer).
In project management, resources are required to carry out the project task.
They can be people, equipment, facilities, funding or anything else capable of definition, {usually other than labour} required for the completion of a project activity.
The lack of resources will therefore be a constraint on the completion of the project activities.
A resource is also described as anything used or consumed while performing a function.
The categories of resources are time, information, objects, (information container) or processor (ability to use information) specific examples are CPU, time, terminal connectivity.
etc.
A resource in biological or health sense is a person, thing or action needed for living or to improve the quality of life.
In production, resources are input to be used in an activity.
This includes human effort, time, raw materials, machine, etc.
In a technological system, the basic technological resources are energy, capital information, machines and tools, materials, people and time.
Resources to a state or government are those things that are available and can be used to advantage e.g.
human resources and natural resources.
56 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION From the foregoing, one can conclude that: 1. resources vary from one situation to another; that is, what constitute resources in a system may not be regarded so in the other system; 2. resources may be natural or artificial; 3. resources are input needed for production; 4. their supply must be consistent and continuous; 5. the lifetime of a resource is bound by the lifetime of the connection over which the resources was created; 6 some resources are network retrievable, while some are not; 7 shortage or lack of resources constitutes constraints to production process; and 8. resources are relatively scarce and limited in supply; 3.2 Classification of Resources Resources can be classified into the following: i. material/physical resources; ii.
financial resources; iii.
time resources; iv.
human resources; and v. supporting resources-light.
i. Material/Physical Resources These are the tangible resources that can easily be seen and observed in any institution.
In fact they are the more pronounced resources without which any production can be done.
The physical resources include the structure, the machines, raw materials, vehicles, and other tools, which can facilitate organizations; processing and dissemination of organization product.
The physical resources are not the same in all organization.
In educational system, the physical resources would include the classrooms/lecture rooms, staff offices, vehicles, health centers, library, laboratory, and so on, which directly or indirectly contribute to the achievement of goals.
Bajah (1977) maintained that it is not the availability of these resources alone that guarantees effective performance of school, but their adequacy and effective utilization.
ii.
Financial Resources 57 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION This is indeed a more critical element with which other factors of administrations are created, maintained and sustained.
It can be regarded as the life-wire of any system.
In school administration, funds are necessary for the procurement of facilities, equipment, electronics and communication gadget needed for effective performance.
Apart from this, funds are needed to pay the salaries of administrative, academic and non-academic staff.
A robust financial allocation for institutional administration would not only enhance good attainment but its sustainability.
Plan and policy implementation are responsive to funds availability.
In short, funds are needed for the acquisition of fixed and current assets and to settle current liabilities and expenditures incurred in the course of administration.
iii.
Time Resources Time is considered as one of the scarce resources known to man.
(Adedeji; 1998).
The significance of time over all other resources is its non-recoverable nature.
Once used, it cannot be called back.
Time utilization or the use of the time refers to the proper allocation of time to the various stages and tasks of administrative activities.
In other words, time utilization could be explained in the framework of doing the right thing at the right time in the work place.
Identifying time, and other resources necessary for the accomplishment of the task.
Time is the most expensive of all resources.
The application of hours of duty to organizational activities is to ensure equal combination of time with other resources.
The use of time is one of the parameters to measure an effective administration.
It determines the degree of productive activities and its proper use makes for effective discharge of responsibilities.
Fafunwa (1996) said time is the major index to measure the successful completion of an academic programme.
In summary, time utilization affords administrator the opportunity of getting the best from every minute spent in their programme.
iv.
Human Resources The major proposition of Human Capital Theory is that investment in human component of production resources would yield the best optimal returns to any system.
With this background, it could be pertinent to consider human factor as an “Armstrong” of any organizational effectiveness.
Human resources is not only responsible for planning, organizing, coordinating, controlling, manipulating and maintaining other forms of resources, its administrative and forecasting ability placed it ahead of other forms of resources.
The availability of human resources is not only required in institutional administration, but also their quality and quantity must be considered if effective and efficient administration is to be guaranteed.
According to Likert (1969) all 58 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION activities of any institution are initiated by the person that makes up that institution.
Plant, offices, computer, automated equipments, and all else that a modern firm uses are unproductive except for human effort and direction.
Human beings design or order the equipment; they decide on where and how to use computer; modernize or fail to modernize the technology employed, they secure the capital needed and decide on the accounting and fiscal procedures to be used.
Every aspect of an institution’s activities is determined by the competence, motivation and general effectiveness of its human resource.
Harbison (1974).
There must also be arrangement for manpower development.
This becomes imperative in order to improve their quality.
It is noteworthy that the quality of educational system depends on the quality of personnel.
(Hallak: 1977).
v. Supporting Resources These are resources that contribute to the effectiveness and efficiency of the combination of other resources earlier discussed.
Apart from facilitating their organisation, supporting resources also help in the processing of input to output and in the transfer of both the material and human resources from one place to another.
They include electricity, which generates power for most machines and electronics, water, refrigerator, fans, cars, etc.
vi.
Information Technology The significant role of ICT in Administration had been discussed in unit fourteen.
Information and communication are vital resources in any establishment more particularly for planning, policy making and decision making.
Apart from enabling the public to be aware of the existence, activities and products of any organisation, information and communication serve as means of getting the feedback from the public, clienteles and consumers.
Some of the information communication technologies in school administration include the global system for mobile communication (GSM) telephone, intercom, television, overhead and film projector, internet/radio, cable, etc.
All these enhance quality communication within and outside.
Other resources for institutional administration include: calendars, journals, periodicals, reference books, year planner, consumable items, cabinets, files, etc All of these combine to influence effective performance of administrators on daily basis.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 59 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 1.
Identify and discuss some major resources needed for effective administration.
2.
Let us consider some problems associated with resources allocation or availability and utilization in educational institution.
3.3 Problems Associated with Resources Availability and Utilization in Institutional Administration Some perennial problems that are associated with resources availability and utilization include 1.
Shortage of Funds: this could account for the poor performance of administrators of academic institutions.
At all levels of institution in Nigeria funds have always been inadequate and consequently there has been gap between the expected level and the actual attainment.
Funds are necessary for the acquisition, securing and maintenance of other resources; once the supply is insufficient, production suffers.
In this sense, government and private individuals should prioritize education sector and its administration, more especially in the area of finance so as to be able to meet their recurrent and capital expenses.
2.
Political Issues: politicians have hijacked resources allocated to education and thus their priorities were not directed towards the system.
This had culminated in inefficiency in the system.
The quality and quantity of resources allocation to educational system is determined by the concern that incumbent political leaders have towards the system.
Over the years, the “Kick-back” scenario that dominates approval of allocation among political leaders has not been going well with the educational industry in Nigeria.
3.
Misuse of the School Facilities: school personnel could misuse the physical and material facilities in the school.
There could also be disuse and overuse of school facilities.
4.
Poor Management: some Administrators of institutions are not left out from mismanagement acts and corrupt attitude as regards funds allocated to their institutions.
The tendency and urge to become wealthy often lead to such practices.
Pilfering of school facilities, lack of maintenance and proper inventory are all managerial problems.
Other problems for discussion are: 60 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION •poor maintenance culture in Nigeria; •diversified Nigerian economic etc.
•the laize-faire attitude of the personnel in the school community; and •poor attitude to human development.
3.4 Practical Solution to the Identified Problems a.
School administrators should be encouraged to develop method of prudent resource management to increase the efficiency in the use of resources.
b. In-service training and refreshing courses should be organized on regular basis for school’s administrators and personnel in all the institutions.
c. The government has to increase the quality and quantity of resources (human, financial and material) allocated to schools.
Also, the government should attempt to bridge the wide variation in resources availability to educational institution by putting in place a resource allocation parameter that will provide adequately for schools.
d. Individual personnel in the school should develop a positive attitude in the use of the physical facilities provided for the schools.
e. Government at various levels, educational administrators and planners should mount special campaigns presumably through special appeal or the use of the press to create awareness of the importance and the need for proper utilization and maintenance of school resources.
f. Regular supervision will enhance early detection of problem of any sort concerning the available resources and thus prevent breakdown of facilities.
It will also enable proper utilization and maintenance of the facilities.
g. Modern facilities should replace the old ones and personnel should be given enough training in their utilization.
This will make them more effective and efficient in the discharge of their duties.
4.0 CONCLUSION Adequate and appropriate resources are indispensable in the administration of institution.
The proper management and use of these 61 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION resources will not only boost the morale of human resources but also ensure the attainment of goals.
Meanwhile, shortage or inadequacy of these resources is inimical, to goal achievement of institutional administration.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have been able to discuss resources as all human, materials and non-material factors brought together for a defined purpose.
For institutional administrators to be successful, he must be provided with enough resources to work with.
Problems associated with resources availability and utilization in educational institution were also discussed with solutions to the identified problems enumerated.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Examine the nature and kinds of resources in institutional administration.
2.
Identify the problems associated with the provision and use of these resources and state ways of resolving the problem.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Harbison, F. (1947).
Scientific Management, New York: Harper and Row Publishers Inc. Likert R. (1967).
The Human Organizational: Its Management Value, New York: McGraw Hill Book Company.
Adedeji S. O.
(1998).
“The Relationship between Resources Utilization and Academic Performance in Vocational Education in Osun State Secondary Schools”: Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of Ibadan.
UNIT 4 RECORD KEEPING IN INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 62 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Records Keeping: Towards a Definition 3.2 Purpose for which Records are Kept 3.3 Types and Classification of School Records 3.4 Procedure/Nature of Record Keeping 3.5 Tips for Keeping School Records 3.6 Challenges of Records Management in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education laws required that school administrators should keep all statutory and other important records in the school so as to ensure easy access to information on students, staff and school programmes on daily and periodical bases.
Records keeping thus become an important aspect in school administration rather than just an optional task.
The purpose of keeping records and the type of records to be kept will therefore form the focus of this lecture.
Also the strategies that can be used to keep records effectively in educational institution within the context of the challenges facing educational institution will also be discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •define record keeping •explain purpose for which records keeping •identify types of school records kept in school •strategies that can be used to keep records.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Records Keeping: Towards a Definition Record keeping is an essential aspect of institutional administration.
Record management is the practice of identifying, classifying, and documenting records.
Record keeping is a management skill needed by every institutional administrator.
The main aim of record management is to provide control over the records and files in order to enhance the efficiency of the system.
A systematic plan to control records in an 63 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION educational institution is necessary to ensure that information is available for utilization in a truly and cost effective manner.
Therefore, every institution’s administrators must have some professional knowledge about record management.
Such administrator especially in institutions where lecturers become administrators who will combine his professional job with administration must be trained in record keeping.
There are institutions where records are kept at departmental or college levels, it becomes very necessary to train lecturers/staff who eventually found themselves in the post of administration to be trained for that purpose.
Institutional administrators at any level of educational system cannot plan, lead, or control effectively without accurate information.
Records are regarded by institutional administrators as information kept and used when needed, either in the present or in the future.
Records are the main source of information in any institution, be it educational (primary, secondary or tertiary), ministries or parastatals.
Ridway (1976) describes records as adequate and complete account for the operations, diagnosis and appraisal of everything happening in any institution.
A well-kept record reduced administrative bottlenecks.
Record is regarded as ‘recorded information in any form including data in computer systems created or received and maintained by an organization or person in the transaction of business or the conduct of affairs and kept as evidence of such activity’ (As 4390.1 Australia Standard Records Management).
The practice of ensuring that information are easily accessed or retrieved when occasion demands is known as record keeping.
Good record keeping practices ensure that all school records, whether hard copy or digital are discoverable, accessible, inviolate and credible at any point in time when reference is made.
To achieve this, records should be managed by appropriate filing strategies and storage systems.
These practices apply also to inactive records that are to be retained.
According to Adewale and Olaniyi (1992) records keeping are not only desirable, it is also imperative to a purposeful school administrator.
The process of record keeping emphasizes that all data necessary are available up to date in as much as these records constitute one important source of data for educational planning and policy formulation, analysis and evaluation.
3.2 Purpose for which Records are Kept Record keeping is an important ingredient for decision-making.
Policy formulation and performance appraisal in educational institutions, rely greatly on the existing records and information.
More competitive reasons are springing up daily to further uphold the need for record keeping.
Among such reasons are: 64 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 1) to meet the legal requirements under the Public Records Act, which emphasized the audit of public agencies including school at interval, record keeping is necessary to ensure continuity of administration; 2) it guarantees up-to-date and correct information; it ensures credibility, accountability and confidence in school administration.
3) it facilitates administrative works, it serves as indices for assessing and evaluating performance; 4) it provides useful information not only for members of the school community but also for members of the public, employers of labour, researchers and government; 5) it saves the school from unnecessary embarrassment as well as legal tussle; 6) it puts the teachers and other school facilities at a saver end by revealing individuals differences among students; 7) it is an inevitable tool in making workable decisions, and provides useful information to employers of labour for recruitment, placement transfer, promotion, demotion, discipline, education and training; and 8) it also enables inspectors of education to offer useful advice, suggestions, recommendations and proposal for improvement in the school system.
From these reasons and many others, records need to be kept in school to assist administrative effectiveness more especially in recognizing the background, problems, needs and contributions of individual member of the school community.
Meanwhile, the various purposes for which records are kept and used bring to bear that not a single kind of records are kept in the school.
The various records kept in school are discussed in the next section of this write-up.
3.3 Types and Classification of School Records Different scholars had classified schools’ records into different classes using different parameters.
The user approach method identified three categories of school records which include: •the academic records; •administrative records; and •financial records.
Whereas a legal approach grouped school records into two namely: statutory records and non-statutory records.
Each of these classifications is discussed below.
65 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION User Classification a.
Academic Records: these are the records that have to do with academic performance of the students in school.
They are records that have to do directly with the general assessment of the students, teachers and administrators as well as the school as a unit.
They are usually kept by school administrators e.g.
the headmaster, the principal/vice principal, etc.
b.
Administrative Records: these records contain information relating to general administration in the organization (school – system).
They include students’ enrolment records, admission register, staff, on roll and other administrative matter.
c. Financial Records: financial records are those records that contain information on all financial transactions, purchases and receipts in the school.
These records show the financial capability, collection and spending of school funds.
They are needed to guard against fraudulent practices and wrong use of school funds.
Other Classifications d. Statutory Records: these are records that are mandatory and made compulsory under educational law.
The public education edict (1974) of the former East Central State and the Education Law of the former Western Region of Nigeria (1955) identified the following statutory records, which must be kept by every educational institution to facilitate effective administration of the institution.
i.
Admission Records/Register: this is a permanent records showing the necessary information about a child in his first admission to the institution.
Every individual student opens a file on admission to school and such files are kept for immediate and future reference.
Admission register contains names of students, dates of admission and admission number.
ii.
Attendance Register: this keeps the records of students’ attendance at school on daily, weekly and termly bases.
With such register, the school and parents would be able to evaluate the level of consistency or otherwise of students in school.
It is marked twice in a day, morning and afternoon.
iii.
Log Book: this records serious daily activities or events in the school.
It is a good source of information, especially while making plan.
66 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION iv.
School Budget Book: this contains records of financial transaction of the school.
It shows the line of course of actions and project to be executed over a period of time and the financial implication of such project.
It equally reveals the source from which funds can be generated, and also shows allocation pattern.
v. Daily of Work/Report: this contains information on nature of work done, the time, date and cost of the work.
vi.
Time Book: this is to indicate the time when the academic and non-academic staff arrive for duty and close from work on a daily basis.
It is used to regulate staff movement and to instill discipline.
Other statutory records are: •The lesson plans/notes •Continuous Assessment book •Visitors’ book; Educational Policy Book; •School time book •Corporal punishment/Black book etc •Approved Educational curriculum, syllabus and scheme •National Policy on Education •Copy of Educational Law.
a.
Non Statutory Records: health records books, stock book; account book; duty roster book; staff records; fee register, staff minutes book; PTA minutes book, inventory book, movement book, record of physical structures and development; subjects allocation chart, etc.
However, these records can be kept or filed in different ways depending on the cost, accessibility, and other social and environmental factors.
3.4 Procedure/Nature of Record Keeping Information is kept in different ways but it is worthy of mentioning that a lot of factors determine how records are kept.
It is to meet immediate need of the administrator, while some would not be needed until after a relatively long period of time.
Apart from this, some are retained to meet the legal and fiscal requirements or future administrative needs, while same are of historical significance to the institution.
It is therefore imperative for administrative officers in schools to understand well the nature of information contained in any school records and keep such in appropriate place.
The two ways of keeping records are as follow 67 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Hard Copy and Soft Copy Filing (a) Hardcopy: this is the documentation of records or information in written or printed form usually in books.
This required filing of these documents in appropriate section of the cabinet or shelf from where it could be retrieved when needed.
Information contained in this form can easily be accessed without delay.
Most information or records in schools are kept in this format and can be physically handled.
(b) Software: this is also known as electronic filling of record.
It implies keeping information in electronic devices where it can be accessed at any period of need.
It overcomes the problem of non- secrecy of records and the problem of fire and theft to which documented records are exposed.
However, most of these storage devices such as computer, electronic tape, disc, diskette, etc require the supply of electricity and susceptible to system breakdown and are therefore backed up by hard copy.
3.5 Tips for Keeping School Records 1.
File records in files that are practical for normal use and will keep the record intact for however long it needs to be kept – use standard paper file covers, box files, lever arch file, flopping 2. disks, CD-Rom, USB, etc.
Store paper files on shelves that support files in an upright 3. position without squashing or crushing them.
Keep a list of school records and check from time to time that all 4. files are accounted for.
5.
Minimize environmental hazard.
Develop a school computer systems security that includes 6. protecting password.
7.
Store records away from areas at risk from flooding or leaks.
Keep records clear of potential hazards such as heaters or 8. electrical installation.
9.
Keep record storage areas clean and pest free.
Identify the records your school needs if it must continue to function and store them in the safest areas.
10.
Keep records out of sunlight.
11 Be clear about what is a school record.
12 Create accurate records.
13 Develop a process for keeping your school record.
14 Identify a key person to coordinate your records process.
15 Ensure that records can be found when needed.
68 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.6 Challenges of Records Management in Nigeria Records management would continue to be relevant in any organization, be it organic or inorganic.
However, the corrupt rate, daily consumption and use of information pose a lot of enduring challenges to administrators.
Such challenges include: - funds generation; - materials procurement; - staff training; - shortage of trained manpower; - volume of information; and - supply of information/Access to information; etc 4.0 CONCLUSION Records are as much important as human resource in the administration of any form of institution.
Apart from making information readily available for everyday operations of these institutions, record keeping enhances prompt and qualitative decision making by preserving necessary data for the decision makers.
However, administrators are charged with many responsibilities, which are crucial to the survival of the institutions.
Therefore, to be able to cope well, there is need for effective management of records and information.
5.0 SUMMARY We have been able to see how important record and record keeping are to the success of operation of any organization.
We equally discuss the various types of records kept in educational institutions and their relevance to goal achievement.
The challenges of record management in Nigeria were also highlighted.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Examine the relevance of Records and Record keeping to an administrator of any institution.
2.
Discuss the different classification of records.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ibukun, W.O (1997).
Educational Management Theory and Practice, Ado Ekiti: Bamgboye & Co. Press.
69 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION NIEPA (2000).
Educational Planning and Administration in Nigeria.
Fadipe J. O.
& Oluchukwu E.E.
(eds).
UNIT 5 LEADERSHIP RESPONSIBLITIES IN INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 70 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Leadership?
3.2 Who is a Leader?
3.3 Theories of Leadership 3.3.1 The Trait Theory 3.3.2 The Behavioural Theory of Leadership 3.3.3 Situational/Contingency Theories 3.3.4 Path-Goal Theory 3.4 Kinds of Leadership 3.5 Leadership Style 3.5.1 Democratic Leadership Style 3.5.2 Autocratic Leadership Style 3.5.3 Laissez-faire Leadership Style 3.5.4 Transactional Leadership Style 3.5.5 Pseudo-Democratic Leadership Style 3.6 Leadership Role of Institutional Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit discusses the particular importance of leadership in institutional administration because of its far reaching effects on the accomplishment of institutional programmes, objectives, and the attainment of goals.
You will learn the theories of leadership and various kinds of leadership as well as their styles.
Equally, you will be intimated with the major roles of an administrator as a leader.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •describe a leader and leadership •explain the theories of leadership •state the kinds and styles of leadership •identify the various roles and responsibilities of an administrator as a leader.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Leadership?
Leadership is a complex concept.
In spite of the numerous studies and writing on the subject, there is yet to emerge a universally accepted 71 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION definition.
As pointed out by Stogdill (1974) in his survey of leadership theories and researches, “there are almost as many different definitions of leadership as there are persons who have attempted to define the concept”.
However, a look at some of these various definitions will show that the concept of influence is often emphasized.
Leadership is considered as a relationship between two parties in which a super-ordinate ensures a significant influence on the behaviour of the other towards achieving a common goal.
Davies (1967) stated that ‘leadership is a part of management but not all of it.
It is the ability to persuade others to seek defined objectives enthusiastically.
He considers leadership as the human factor, which binds a group together and motivates it towards goals.
Szilalgyi (1981) considered leadership as a process involving two or more people in which one attempts to influence the other’s behaviour towards the accomplishment of some goals.
In the word of Liphan (1964) leadership is the initiation of a new structure or procedure for accomplishing an organization’s goals and objectives or for changing an organization’s goals and objectives.
This implies that leadership means a frame of reference by which goals and objectives are achieved.
In another sense, leadership is seen as a process.
According to Stogdill (1950) leadership is a process of influencing the activities of an organized group towards goal setting and goal achievement.
Also, Hodgetts, and Altman (1979) viewed leadership as the process of influencing people to direct their efforts towards the achievement of some particular goals.
Morphet, John and Reller (1982) defined leadership as the influencing of the actions, behaviour, belief and goals of one actor in a social system by another actor with the willing cooperation of the actor being influenced.
This definition emphasizes social order between the leader and the follower.
Adepoju (1998) conceived leadership in two ways: (i) as an organizational position, and /or (ii) as an influence process.
According to him, leadership as an organizational position refers to an individual who has been placed in a leadership or decision-making role by government.
According to this view, all managers are leaders by definition.
The other view emphasized that a leader inspires others to follow.
It suggests the dynamics of leadership; that is leadership as a process of influencing others towards the achievement of the organisational goals.
72 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Meanwhile, Burns (1964) in his opinion stated that ‘Leadership’ induces followers to act for certain goals that represent the values and the motivation-the wants and needs, the aspirations and expectations of both leaders and followers.
The implication of this definition is that, unlike naked power-wielding, leadership is inseparable from followers’ needs and goals.
From the foregoing discussion of leadership, the following could be inferred.
• Leadership involves other people, followers or subordinates.
There can be no leader without followers, therefore leadership is relational (it exists between two parties).
• Leadership involves the use of influence to induce behaviour or effect changes.
• Leadership is a process that encompasses the connection of certain activities.
• The leadership process involves an unequal distribution of power among leaders and group members.
• Leadership focuses on the accomplishment of goals.
In summary therefore, you should understand that it is difficult to pin down the definition of leadership to a particular point.
This could be attributed to a number of factors among which are the conceptualizing leadership as: (i) an attribute of an office or position; (ii) a characteristic of a person (iii) a category of actual behaviour; (iv) the personal characteristics of the leader; and (v) the nature of task and the character of the social context in which leadership is to be exercised.
Halpin (1969) also stated that this dilemma of definition emerges from the fact that we have incorporated into the term leadership both ‘descriptive’ and evaluative components, and have thus burdened this single word with two connotations.
One refers to a role and the behaviour of a person in this role, and the other is an evaluation of the individual’s performance in the role.
Having attempted the concept of leadership from the definition angle, we need to describe a leader and the characteristics or qualities that describe him.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 How would you conceptualize leadership as a social concept?
Give the basis upon which your view is built.
73 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.2 Who is a Leader?
At the close of our discussion on leadership, we saw the need to examine who a leader is and the attributes of a good leader; this forms the basis of this discussion.
A leader is the one that leads a group of people towards achieving a set of goals.
It is common to all human organization to have someone or few individuals who are charged with the responsibilities of championing the course of the group action towards achieving the goals.
This is the leader (or leaders).
Hicks and Gullet (1976) while differentiating leader from manager emphasized that leaders have more influence over the followers than managers.
They pointed out that leader is more related to informal system while manager is common to formal system.
According to Sandra (1989) the concept of leader and leadership has attracted many scholars and thus had been viewed differently.
She said that some theorists see leadership as the process of influencing the activities of an organized group towards goal setting and goal achievement; others view it as “the ability to persuade others to get things done.
However, a leader is therefore considered as the force that initiates action among people, guides activities in a given direction; maintains such activities and unifies efforts towards common goals.
This implies that, a leader is the one who influences people to direct their efforts towards the achievement of some specific goals.
A good leader displays certain characters.
A leader should possess some of the attributes listed below.
i.
He must be intelligent and knowledgeable.
ii.
He must be well confident and firm.
iii.
He must be academically and professionally sound.
iv.
He must be sociable and possess good communication skill.
v. He must be accessible to his subordinate and people.
vi.
He must possess good human relation.
vii.
He must be well disciplined, morally and ethically upright.
viii.
He must be humane and modest at all times.
ix.
He must have a well developed intuition.
x.
He must have a stable character to make sound and rational judgment.
xi.
He must have consideration for others.
etc.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 1. Who is a Leader?
2.
Define the concept of leadership 3.
Identify some qualities that an effective leader must possess.
74 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 3.3 Theories of Leadership The theories and approaches relating to leadership had been broadly classified into three.
These include the Trait theories, the Personality – behavioural theories, and the situational or contingency theories.
The major propositions of the proponents of each of these theories are discussed below.
3.3.1 The Trait Theory This theory is built on the premise that leaders are “born and not made”.
This among other things implies that some attributes are naturally endowed in potential leaders at birth, which are not acquired or got by any other means.
It is also referred to as the “great man theory of leadership”.
Scholars at one time or the other had embarked on one study or the other in an attempt to identify and compare the leadership traits, which distinguish leaders from the followers.
Efforts were also directed towards drawing the line of difference between the characteristics of effective leadership and the ineffective ones; although most researchers were not so keen on this latter aspect.
Most studies on leadership traits focused extensively on identifying intellectual, emotional, and physical characteristics of successful leaders.
Let us consider some of their resolutions.
a.
Intelligence Stogdill (1974) in a review of thirty three (33) studies found that there is a general trend, which indicated that leaders are more intelligent than followers but extreme intelligence differential between leaders and flowers may be dysfunctional.
This implies that leader’s intelligence should be close to that of their followers.
Stogdill emphasized that the average person who occupies a position of leadership exceeds the average member of his group in the followership category in respect of (1) social activity, (2) scholarship (3) dependability (4) responsibility (5) social activity, (6) high originality and (7) socio-economic status.
He therefore concludes that “a person does not become a leader by virtue of the possession of some combination of traits, but the pattern of personal relationship to the characteristics, activities, and goals of the followers”.
Thus, leadership must be conceived in terms of the interactions of variables, which are in constant flux and change: b.
Personality 75 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Personality trait such as: alertness, integrity, originality and self- confidence are associated with effective leadership.
(Argyris, 1955).
Ghiselli (1963) also found that initiative, ability to act and initiate action independently and self-assurance are associated with effective leaders.
c. Personal Characteristics Physical characteristics such as age, weight, physical stature, height and appearance that have been studied provided contradictory results in terms of their relationship to effective leadership.
To this end, we may not associate personal characteristics as determinants of effective leadership.
d. Supervisory Ability Using leader’s performance rating scale, Ghiselli (1963) found a positive relationship between a person’s supervisory ability and his or her leadership effectiveness.
Supervision is another major role of a leader apart from leading and directing.
A leader oversees the activities of his followers and he delegates towards achieving common goals.
He corrects any errors detected and aligns all derailments.
However, as much as trait theory could have been so applauded in the study of effective leadership, contemporary studies had unraveled that innumerable traits of successful and effective leadership are yet to be discovered even after several new ones.
Aside, some leaders who possessed the attributes earlier discovered have not been effective whereas, others without those variables have been effective.
All these bring about confusion to scholars on the qualities of an effective leadership (Bass; 1982).
Also, Cartwright and Zander (1968) emphasized that effective leadership does not depend on a particular traits but how well the traits match the requirements of the situation he or she is facing.
In the same vein, Szilagyi (1981) opined that some of the identified traits in leadership studies may have been learned, while performing a leadership role.
Also, this approach undermines the significant effect of the subordinates on the job accomplishment of a leader.
In conclusion, an effective leadership does not depend on the number of traits combined but rather on what the leader does and how well he/she adapts to the varying requirements of different situations.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 1.
Examine the major propositions of the trait theory of leadership.
76 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 2.
What are the major criticisms of this theory?
3.3.2 The Behavioural Theory of Leadership The general dissatisfaction with the trait approach to the study of leadership, motivated management scholars to shift their attention to the analysis of the actual behaviours of leaders.
The two major pedagogical advantages of this method as pointed out by Halphin (1969) are: 1. it is possible to deal directly with observable phenomena and make no a priori assumption about the identity or structure of whatever capacities may or may not understand these phenomena; and 2. it enables us to identify how leaders behave and the effectiveness of such behaviour in respect of specified performance criteria.
3.
The behavioural theory seeks to explain leadership not on the basis of what leaders are, but in terms of what they do so as to identify the relationships, which exist between behavioural pattern and work group performance.
Similarly, the behavioural approach sought the “one best” style of leadership that would be effective in all situations and ignored situational factors.
In other to study these two key dimensions of leadership were identified which had attracted variety of labels.
The dimensions are: i. concerns for organization; and ii.
concern for relationships of individual.
The table below presents further explanation on the two dimensions.
Table 1: Dimensions of Leadership 77 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Experts agree that leadership style is defined by the extent to which the THEORIST CONCERN FOR CONCERN FOR ORGANISATIONAL INDIVIDUAL TASKS RELATIONSHIP Tannenbaum Schmidt B oss Centered Subordinate centered (1979) leadership leadership.
Barnard (1938) Effectiveness Efficiency Etzioni and Parsons I nstrumental Needs Expressive Needs (1961) Cartwright and Goal Achievement Group maintenance Zander (1953) Getzels and Guba Nomothetic Idiographic (1957) Halphin (1956) Initiating Structure Consideration Kahn Production Orientation Employee Orientation Bale (1954) Task leader Social leaders Browers and Seashore Goal emphasis Support (1966) Work facilitation Interaction facilitation leader seems to show concern for or seems orientated towards either the organizational task or individual relationship.
Often, the phrase task- oriented (T.O.)
is used to refer to tendencies the leader shows for work accomplishment and relation –oriented (RO) for the leader’s tendency to show concern for people in displaying leadership behaviour.
According to Hony and Miskel (1987), the dichotomy between concern for people and concern for the task effectively differentiate between the human relations movement and the scientific management movement.
However, scholars and institutions had carried out researches on the two dimensions of leadership styles with a view to identifying /determining the better leadership style between the two (T O and R O) that leads to the most effective group performance.
Notable groups in such studies are the Ohio State University and the University of Michigan.
A brief discussion of the focus and findings of each group will suffice at this juncture.
1.
The Ohio State University Studies (a) Initiating structure and consideration.
The studies were conducted by the Bureau of Business Research of the University under such people as Stogdill and Feishman shortly after World War II.
The focus of their work was to study behaviour.
The researchers isolated two dimensions of leadership behaviour namely: “Consideration” and “initiation structure”.
(The two 78 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION terms correspond to task-oriented and employee oriented styles respectively) (b) Initiating structure involves behaviour in which leader organizes and defines the relationships in the group, tends to establish well- defined patterns of organization and channels of communication, and ways of getting the jobs done.
Leaders who initiate structure emphasizes goals and deadlines, make sure employees are assigned tasks and know what performance is expected of them (Stogdill; 1974).
Consideration involves leaders’ behaviour, indicating friendship, mental trust, respect, warmth and rapport between the leaders and subordinates (Halphin, 1966).
Leaders in this category support their employees, use employee ideas, and frequently allow them to participate in decision making.
The finding of the group clarified the different between the two independent leadership dimensions as follows: Table 2: Independent Leadership Dimensions Initiating Structure Consideration 1.
He makes his attitude clear He does personal favours to staff.
to staff.
He does little things to make it 2.
He tries out his new idea pleasant as a member of staff.
with He is easy to understand.
the staff.
He is friendly and approachable.
3.
He criticizes poor work He finds time to listen to staff 4.
He speaks authoritatively He looks out for the personal 5.
He assigns staff specific task welfare of individual staff members.
6.
He maintains definite standard of He treats all staff members as his performance.
equals.
7.
He emphasizes the meeting of H e is willing to make changes.
deadlines.
8.
He encourages the use of uniform He makes staff members feel at ease procedures when talking with them.
9.
He ensures that his part He puts suggestions made by the in the organization is understood by all 10.
He asks staff members to follow standard rulers and staff into operations.
regulation.
11.
He makes staff members He gets staff approval on important know matters before going ahead.
what is expected of them.
He employs the Management By 12.
He does to it that staff members are working up to capacity.
Objectives (M.B.O) in administration 13.
He sees to it that the He is employee-oriented.
work of staff members is coordinated.
79 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION However, the Ohio State University studies dichotomized the two dimensions into High and low, four quadrants of leadership styles.
(see the figure below).
A quadrant scheme for describing leader’s behaviour on the initiating structure and consideration dimensions.
Fig 1: A Quadrant Scheme for Leadership Behaviour e Low (-) Consideration High (+) r u ct Quadrant II Quadrant I u High consideration (+) r High (+)Low consideration (-) St High initiating structure (+) High initiating structure (+) ng Low consideration (-) High consideration (+) ati High initiating structure (-) High initiating structure (-) niti Quadrant III Quadrant IV I Low (-) Consideration High (+) Source: Adapted from Andrew W. Halphin, The superintendent’s effectiveness as a teacher.
From the table above, while quadrant I is characterized by high- initiating structure combined, while high consideration is associated with favourable group attitudes and with favourable changes in group attitude, quadrant III is often ineffective and characterized by chaos and lack of leadership.
Also, there is some tendency for superiors and subordinates to have contrary opinion on the evaluation of the leader behaviour dimensions to the effectiveness of leadership.
While superiors may tend to emphasize initiating structure, the subordinates may be more concerned with the consideration factor.
Criticisms of the Ohio State University Studies The Ohio State University behavioural theory of leadership has been subjected to a number of criticisms.
Vroom (1983) and Gibson, et-al (1976) believed that because of its over simplified promise, it lacked generalizability.
Korman (1966) faulted the studies and pointed out that: (i) most of the research studies yielded generally insignificant correlation between leader behaviour measures and effectiveness criteria; and (ii).
the theory has not provided any answer to the question of casualty.
80 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 2.
The University of Michigan Studies Production - centered and employee – centered leaders).
These studies were conducted by the institute for social research of the University of Michigan under the supervision of Likert, Katz, Kalm and others.
They classified leaders into two distinct styles of leadership – production centered and employee –centered.
These two groups correspond to the dimensions of initiating structure and consideration respectively.
To this group, the production-centered leader emphasizes rigid work standard, employee’s tasks, and methods used to accomplish them.
He closely supervises the subordinates, provides instructions, checks on performances and acts in a punitive manner towards subordinates.
The employee - centered leader emphasizes the employees, their personal needs, advancement and achievement, and maintains a good interpersonal relationships.
He frequently delegates responsibilities and authority making process.
He grants considerable level of freedom to accomplish their tasks, provides a supportive environment and ensures high performance by inspiring trust and respect.
The style of leadership in this context is unidimensional as could be found in the figure below.
It polarizes the two styles.
Production Employee-centered style Task-centered style The finding of the Ohio State University and Michigan State University had led to the Managerial Grid of Blake and Mouton (1964).
According to them, two dimensions of leader behaviour are concerned for people and concerned for production; as equally proposed by the earlier studies.
Five specific leadership style identified by the grid one 1,1; 1,9; 9,1; 5,5; and 9,9.
9 1,9 9,9 8 7 6 5 5,5 4 3 2 9,11,1 Implies that 1,1 81 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION the leader has low concern for both people and production in the organization .1 1,9 Indicates that the leader has high concern for people but low for production (people – centered leader).
9,1 Grid shows a leader with high concern for the production but low concern for people.
(Production –centered).
5,5 Shows a balanced concern for both the people and production; He is described as transactional leader.
9,9 The grid indicates that a leader has high concern for 82 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION both people and production.
This implies that he combines and has high initiating structure and high consideratio n. It is described as the best grid.
3.3.3 Situational/Contingenc y Theories The criticisms that flooded the trait theory and the behavioural approach made scholars to consider the situational theory.
With this, opinion shifted from “leaders are born, not made” to leaders are made, not born”.
The situational approach attempts to identify any distinctive characteristics of a setting to which the leaders behaviour can be attributed.
Tannebaun and Schmidt (1973) quoted in Adepoju (1998) identified three variables to be considered in choosing leadership patterns as follows: 1. forces in the manager such as value system, 83 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION confidence in subordinate and personal characteristics; 2. forces in the subordinate such as high need for independence, willingness to accept responsibility, etc; and 3. forces in the situation, such as the type of organization, the problem itself, the pressure of time and group effectiveness (Ajayi, 1986).
4.
5.
In the word of Vroom (1983) and Stoner (1978) the focus of the situational theories is that the situation with which a leader finds himself will dictate his actions or behaviours.
They argued that no theory could be regarded as the best, hence the situation would determine the course of action.
6.
7.
For the singular fact that total dependent on situational factor for leaders to act could truncate or impede progress of the organizations; therefore, scholars submitted that 84 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION rather than applying a single method of leadership, a combination of approach in referred to as contingency theory.
8.
9.
Contingency approach emphasizes that different leadership traits and skills are required in different situations.
There are various theories emanating from contingency approach.
One of such is the Path- Goal Theory.
10.
11.
3.3.4 Path–Goal Theory 12.
13.
This theory proposes that a leader clarifies path for reaching goals of an organisation.
It was promulgated by Evans (1970) but later modified by House (1971).
The theory draws so heavily on the expectancy theory of motivation by Vroom (1964).
It emphasizes that leaders is a key factor in bringing about subordinate’s motivation; 85 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION satisfaction and efficiency.
House and Mithchell (1974) as cited in Peretomode (1991:1991) came up with two important propositions of path-goal theory of leadership.
14.
15.
(1) Leaders behaviour is acceptable and satisfying to the extent that subordinates perceive such behaviour as an immediate source of satisfaction or as instrumental to future satisfaction.
16.
17.
(2) Leader behaviour will be motivational to the extent that it makes satisfactions of subordinates needs contingent on effective performance and it complements the environment of subordinates by providing the guidance, clarity of direction and rewards necessary for effective performance.
18.
19.
Other situational – contingency based theories of 86 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION leadership are: Likerts four systems of Leadership; Reddin’s 3-D Theory; Fielder’s contingency theory of leadership, Vroom –Yetton Leadership Theory and The Herseeg – Balanced Life Cycle Theory of leadership.
Students should read further on these from texts.
20.
21.
SELF- ASSESSEMENT EXERCISE 4 22.
23.
Examine the pros and cons of either the trait theory of leadership or the behavioural theory of leadership.
How can it be applied in institutional administration?
24.
25.
Kinds of Leadership 26.
27.
There are divergent views on the concept and theory of leadership and consequently, there are various ways by which leaders are classified.
However, three types of leadership described by 87 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Knezerich (1975) shall be discussed in this study.
The three kinds of leadership are the: 28.
(i) charismatic leadership; (ii) formal/situational leadership; and (iii) functional leadership.
1.
The Charismatic Leadership: the leader, also known as symbolic leader is an individual who is endowed with natural capacity and personality traits or qualities to lead.
He stimulates and unifies the activities of others along certain paths because of the way he looks and his personality.
They are said to be born or natural “great men” and thus become leaders because of the innate personality qualities such as ambition, patience, pride, humility, wisdom, friendliness, dependability, force and endurance.
Jesus Christ, Muhammed, Hitler, Nkrumah, Obafemi Awolowo, Nnamdi Azikwe, among others are examples of charismatic leaders.
(iv) 88 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (v) 2.
Formal or Situational Leadership: a formal leader is one who occupies a position recognized in the formal organizational chart as a leadership post.
It is an achieved title assumed by achieving certain abilities or qualifications considered essential for the culture of the group.
Examples of formal leaders are the King, Emirs, Chief, Obis, Obas etc.
Also, heads of institutions, organizations and formal groups are formal leaders.
Meanwhile, the criterion for formal leadership is essentially situational relative.
This implies that the criteria for selection of leaders in one group may not satisfy the criteria for another group or different situations.
(vi) (vii) 3.
Functional Leadership: this kind of leadership is concerned with the role performed 89 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION within an organized group.
Leaders is chosen or elected by virtue of his certain technical, social, political or economic competencies considered essential for the survival of the group or necessary for the achievement of the goals of the organization.
Such leader is likely to be nominated, appointed, selected or accredited from among equals.
(viii) (ix) 3.5 Leadership Style (x) (xi) Leadership style simply can be described as the manner by which a leader presents him or her before the followers.
It describes the kind of relationship, which exists between the leader and the followers usually in decision- making and 90 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION flow of communication.
(xii) (xiii) The principal leadership styles a leader may adopt is as follows: (xiv) (xv) i. democratic leadership style; (xvi) ii.
autocratic leadership style; (xvii) iii.
laissez-faire leadership style; (xviii) iv.
transactional leadership style; and (xix) v. pseudo- democratic leadership style.
(xx) 3.5.1 Democratic Leadership Style (xxi) (xxii) This type of leadership involves the full participation of people (subordinates) in the organizational administration, decision- making and policy formulation.
In this process, self-expression, creativity and 91 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION group interaction are allowed.
It emphasizes both nomothetic and idiographic dimensions of the organization; therefore it is both person and task-oriented.
It is also referred to as participative style because, decision are made after due consultations with the staff.
(xxiii) (xxiv) This style is more effective in more enlightened institutions only that decision- making process could take more time and at times, it may not apply to any state of emergency.
(xxv) (xxvi) 3.5.2 Autocratic Leadership Style (xxvii) (xxviii)This is otherwise known as one- man rule or authoritarian 92 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION style of leadership where an individual leader takes decisions without any consultation.
It is characterized by: (xxix) (xxx) a. the dictation of all policies and procedures by the leader with little or no group participation in decision-making process; (xxxi) b. the imposition of tasks and methods on subordinates; (xxxii) c. an absence of effective communication between the leader and the group; and (xxxiii) d. nagging and suspicious brooding on the part of the leadership (Edem, 1982).
(xxxiv) (xxxv)An autocratic leader is task- oriented and he gives no attention to his subordinates.
He does not allow any group inspired decisions.
This 93 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION type of leadership hinders interpersonal relationship between the head and subordinates and also between the different administrative structures.
The leader decrees what to do and does not delegate authority or permit subordinates involvement in policy matters.
(xxxvi) (xxxvii)3.5.3 Laissez- Faire Leadership Style (xxxviii) (xxxix)This leadership style allows complete freedom to the group and individuals in the organization to do their wishes.
It is characterized by indecision, vacillation and indifference about his responsibilities (as leader and supervisor).
To 94 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION achieve organizational goals and objectives with a loose leadership style is often difficult if it is possible at all.
It is devoid of rules and regulations but the leader supplies materials.
(xl) (xli) (xlii) (xlii ) 3.5.4 Transactional Leadership Style (xliv) (xlv) This leadership is aware of both the organizational needs and the needs and expectations of the group.
He therefore finds means of integrating or reconciling the two.
He is a dynamic leader in the sense that, at one time his orientation is directed towards the welfare of the members and at another time he is production – 95 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION orientated.
(xlvi) (xlvii)3.5.5 Pseudo- Democratic Leadership Style (xlviii) (xlix) This kind of leadership demonstrates democratic rules to the group but realistically, he displays autocratic rules.
The leader asks for suggestions and opinion of members but, never utilizes them.
He is more of autocratic than democratic.
The subordinates only play a supportive role rather than participatory.
(l) (li) SELF- ASSESSMEN T EXERCISE 5 (lii) (liii) Examine the various styles of leadership you know and in your own opinion, which one do you consider most effective?
Give 96 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION reasons for your answer.
(liv) (lv) 3.6Leadership Role of Institutional Administrator (lvi) (lvii) Institutional administrator as a leader has some fundamental role to play both within and outside the organization.
Some of these roles are structured, programmed or routine-based, while some are not but based on his value judgement and intuition.
Apart from managing all the resources (human, material and finance) at his disposal, administration also guides and coordinates all efforts of staff towards achieving the present goals and objectives.
(lviii) (lix) In the modern time, the leadership role of administrator 97 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION is classified under the following.
(lx) (lxi) a.
Administration /Management role.
(lxii) b. Instructional /Academic role; and (lxiii) c. Community/ public-based role.
(lxiv) (lxv) a. Administratio n /Management Roles; include: (lxvi) (lxvii) i. planning staff activities; (lxviii)ii.
organizing activities and timetable; (lxix) iii.
management and maintenance of physical structure equipment and other facilities; (lxx) iv maintenance of proper order and discipline among staff.
(lxxi) v. management and control of institutional finance and other businesses; (lxxii) vi.
assisting the staff of develop themselves; (lxxiii)vii.defining the 98 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION tasks to be carried out; (lxxiv)viii.
maintenance of good working condition for staff and (lxxv) establishme nt of high moral among them; (lxxvi)ix.
keeping all statutory records of the establishment; and (lxxvii)x. socialization or/and orientation of new staff.
(lxxviii) (lxxix) b.
Academic Roles of Administratio n include: (lxxx) (lxxxi) i. planning and development of curriculum in relation to the aims and objectives of the system; (lxxxii) ii.
discussing emerging issues, theories and changes brought about by new development in the system; (lxxxiii)iii.
supervising the instructional activities of the staff; 99 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (lxxxiv)iv.
he encourages staff development though seminar, workshops, conferences and other staff training programmes; and (lxxxv) v. establishing method of evaluating, examining and reporting staff progress.
(lxxxvi) (lxxxvii)c. Community/P ublic-based Roles include (lxxxviii) (lxxxix)i. ascertaining the composition and the character of the institution- community; (xc) ii.
supplying of necessary information to the public about the institution, and gathering useful information from the community; (xci) iii.
participating in community development projects;and (xcii) iv.
making known and interpreting institution’s government policies and programmes to the people.
(xciii) (xciv) All these roles 100 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION are necessary for an administrator to achieve the goals of the institution and, the level of discharge of these roles determines the effectiveness of the administrators as leaders.
(xcv) (xcvi) SELF- ASSESSMEN T EXERCISE 6 (xcvii) (xcviii)Is an institutional administrator a leader?
Examine his leadership roles within and outside the institution.
(xcix) (c) 4.0 CONCLUSI ON (ci) (cii) You have learnt in this unit that every human organization requires an effective leadership so as to be able to achieve the present goals and objectives.
101 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION The emergence of leaders varies and thus the characteristics of leader depend solely on the kind of situations and problems at hand.
With this various theories postulated by scholars in order to identify the best kind of leadership.
In all, it was concluded that no single best kind of leadership but rather, a combination of leadership styles would be more favourable to any organization.
(ciii) (civ) You equally learned that an administrator has some leadership roles and responsibilities to observe within and outside the organization; the extent to which he is effective in the discharge of 102 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION these roles will determine his level of effectiveness and efficiency.
(cv) (cvi) 5.0 SUMMARY (cvii) (cviii) In this unit, we have seen that leadership is taking a position of authority to influence others’ behaviour towards achievement of organizational goals.
We have also examined various theories of leadership; such as the trait theory, the behavioural theory, the situational/conti ngency theory, path goal theory.
Various kinds of leadership and styles are available: Democratic, Autocratic, Laissez-faire, Transactional or Pseudo- democratic.
(cix) (cx) 6.0TUTOR- 103 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION MARKED ASSIGNME NT (cxi) (cxii) 1.
Discuss briefly the three basic leadership theories.
Enumerate the strength and weaknesses of each.
(cxiii) 2.
Using suitable diagram, explain concisely either Ohio State University studies or Michigan state leadership studies.
(cxiv) (cxv) 7.0 REFERENC ES/FURTHE R READINGS (cxvi) (cxvii) Adepoju T. L (1998).
Fundamentals of School Administration, Planning and Supervision in Nigeria, Alafas Nig.
Company.
(cxviii) (cxix) Adesina S. (1980).
Some Aspects of School Management, Ibadan: Boards Publication Limited.
(cxx) (cxxi) Bass.
B. M. (1982).
Stogdill’s 104 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Handbook of Leadership, New York Free Press.
(cxxii) (cxxiii) Blake, R. and Mouton, J S. (1978).
The New Managerial Grid.
Houston: Gulf Publishing.
(cxxiv) (cxxv) Peretonmode V. F. (2003).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives.
Lagos.
Joja Educational Research and Publishers Limited.
(cxxvi) (cxxvii)Halphin A. W. (1969).
“How ‘Leaders Behave” in Freed D. and Thomas J. Sergiovanni, (eds.)
Organisations and Human Behaviour of School Superintendents, Columbus: College of Education, Ohio State University.
(cxxviii) (cxxix) Obilade, S. (1989).
An Introduction to Educational Administration, Ibadan: Odusote Bookstores Ltd. (cxxx) (cxxxi) Liphan J (1964).
“Leadership and 105 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Administration” in Griffiths, D. E (ed).
Behavioural Science and Educational Administration.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
(cxxxii) (cxxxiii)Morphet, E. L., Johns, R. L., and Reller T. L. (1982).
Educational Organisation and Administration: Concepts Practices and Issues, Eagle Wood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall Inc. (cxxxiv) (cxxxv)Stogdill R. M. (1974).
Handbook of Leadership: A Survey of Theory and Research.
New York: Free Press.
(cxxxvi) (cxxxvii)Tannenbaum, R. and Schmidt, W. H. (1973).
How to Choose a Leadership Pattern, Harvard Business Review (May-June).
(cxxxviii) (cxxxix)Vroom V. H. (1973).
A New Look of Managerial Decision-making; Organizational Dynamic, Vol.1.
(cxl) (cxli) Knezevich, S.J 106 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (1975).
Administration of Public Education, New York: Harper and Row Public.
(cxlii) (cxliii) (cxliv) (cxlv) (cxlvi) (cxlvii) (cxlviii) (cxlix) (cl) (cli) (clii) (cliii) (cliv) (clv) (clvi) (clvii) (clviii) (clix) (clx) (clxi) (clxii) (clxiii)MODULE 3 (clxiv) (clxv) Unit 1 Training and Development of Institutional Administrators (clxvi)Unit 2 Challenges of Institutional Responsibilities (clxvii)Unit 3 Motivation and Institutional Responsibilities (clxviii)Unit 4 Information and Communication Technology (ICT) and Institutional Challenges 107 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (clxix) (clxx) (clxxi)UNIT 1 TRAINING AND DEVELOPMEN T OF INSTITUTION AL ADMINISTRAT ORS (clxxii) (clxxiii)CONTENTS (clxxiv) (clxxv) 1.0 Introduction (clxxvi)2.0Objectives (clxxvii)3.0 Main Content (clxxviii)3.1 Meaning of Training and Developmen t (clxxix)3.2Purpose of Training (clxxx) 3.3 Analysis of Training Needs of Administrat or (clxxxi)3.4Types of Training (clxxxii)3.5 Methods of Training (clxxxiii)3.6 Training Process and Evaluation (clxxxiv)4.0 Conclusion (clxxxv)5.0 Summary (clxxxvi)6.0 108 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Tutor- Marked Assignment (clxxxvii)7.0 References/ Further Readings (clxxxviii) (clxxxix)1.0 INTRODUC TION (cxc) (cxci) One of the propositions of human capital theorists is the training and development of manpower or human factor of production.
They argued that increased productivity can only be attained when avenue for advancement and training is opened for the workforce.
As much as there is recognition and more claims for continuous training of workers in an organization so as to bring about development, the need for administrators of institutions to acquire new 109 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION skills and competences through training becomes highly imperatives.
(cxcii) (cxciii)Both cognitive and affective training and development are necessary to complement the one of psychomotor or technical know- how.
As leaders and mentor, an administrator must be a knowledgeable individual who can provide guidance, inspiration and consolation to his or her colleagues and subordinates.
This unit examines the necessity for effective training and recommends effective training methods and approaches.
In this lesson, you will learn the process of training as well as the implications of administrators training for 110 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION institutional development and goals attainment.
(cxciv) (cxcv)2.0 OBJECTIVE S (cxcvi) (cxcvii)This study is prepared to equip the learners with the ability to: (cxcviii) • discuss concisely the meaning and purposes for administrators’ training • identify training methods and kinds of training for institutional administrator • appraise the implications of training programmes in any human organization.
• • 3.0 MAIN CONTENT • • 3.1 Meaning of Training and Development • • Many definitions have been advanced towards defining the concept of training.
Training is perceived as a 111 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION formal process of acquiring skills and technical know-how in a specific field so as to enhance competency and expertise in the use and manipulation of modern technology and in handling technical issues in all human endeavours.
• • Beach (1980) described training as the organized procedure by which people learn and acquire knowledge or skills for a definite purpose with the objectives of achieving the aim of change in behaviour of the trainees.
Baker (1984) considers training as all the efforts made in facilitating the processes of learning which results in latter-on- the-job positive behaviour of a member of an organization.
• • Training is a learning process by which people develop a 112 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION relatively permanent positive change of behaviour, skills or attitude to perform a specific task with a view to increasing to perform a specific task with a view to increasing productivity.
Apart from the fact that training aims to improve productivity, it is equally a deliberate attempt to improve the performance of the individuals on their jobs by correcting any deficiency in human efforts.
• • Training is human oriented.
According to Datey (1970) it deliberately attempts to improve a person’s skills at a task”.
Similarly, Betta (1975) says, it is an “understanding” aimed at raising the performance level of the employee.
The manpower service commission (1981) concluded that training has a 113 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION purpose of developing the ability of an individual and to satisfy the current and future manpower needs of the organization.
• • From the foregoing, it can be concluded that: • • i. training is a process; • ii.
it is directed towards improving performance; • iii.
it is human oriented; • iv.
it could be carried out in a formal or informal setting; • v. both managers and employees need training; • vi.
it is future oriented; • vii.
training is practical oriented; • viii.
level of training can be evaluated; • ix.
training is a continuous exercise; and, • x. training is a necessity for human and organizational development.
• • SELF- 114 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 • • Examine the concept of training.
What are the common characteristics of training?
• • 3.2 Purpose of Training • • Training is considered as a necessary factor for improving the performance of an individual as well as the organization through the quality and quantity of output.
Having discuss extremely on the meaning of training therefore, let us look into the purpose (s) for which training is more important for both an individual and the organization.
• • 1.
One of the purposes or rationale for training in any organizations is to improve the skill of the employee.
Both the administrator and the subordinates need an improvement in carrying out their specific responsibilities, which 115 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION can only be attained through training.
• • 2.
In the same vein, training is designed to increase the quality and quantity of output per unit production in an organization.
• • 3.
Training is essential for an organization to achieve its goals and objective.
• • 4.
It updates employees with the new development in the society in the area of new knowledge and skills.
• 5.
Training averts future death of manpower need of an organization.
• 6.
It is a motivation strategy for employees’ advancement.
• • 7.
Training equips an individual with new skills and technical know-how in handling new technology and machineries.
• 8.
Training also makes administrators handle situation more technically so as to enhance continuous existence of the organization.
116 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION • • 9.
Training makes administrator more flexible and dynamic in discharging his/her duty.
• • 10.
It lessens operational task and cost over a relatively long period of tunic.
You can even think and write more of the rationale for training.
• • SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 • • Identify the rationale for training administrators in an organization.
• • 3.3 Analysis of Training Needs • • A systematic training procedure is the pivot of a successful implementation of organization policies and identification of training needs is the first step in the process of training.
Just like any other systematic process, its success or failure will 117 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION correspondingly affect the subsequent steps.
The difference between the expected level of knowledge, skills and attitude (KSA) for effective performance and the actual level of knowledge, skills and attitude displayed by incumbent personnel marks the training needs of such an individual.
While training needs also exists both at the organizational, group and individual levels, instrument required for its success include job analysis, performance appraisal, observation, brains-storming, interviews and questionnaire, among others.
• • Definition of Training Needs • • Need implies that something is lacking, while this lack can be supplied by systematic training.
Boydel 118 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (1975) concluded that training need exists when the application of systematic training will serve to overcome a particular weakness.
Thus, it could be inferred that a training need is an observable gap between the kind of performance or competence an employee has and the kind of performance or competence an employee is expected to have.
This gap grows out of operating problem; and hence requires to be bridged through systematic training.
• • Egunyomi (2000) submitted that the need for training and specifically the type of training needed is usually determined by the specific defect (s) that exists or that is anticipated in the organisation.
• • • Kind of training needs • 119 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION • There are various kinds of training needs, depending on the level or time.
This includes the following.
• • a.
Training Needs at the Level of Individual Employee: here the deficiencies in particular knowledge, skills, or attitude of an individual are discovered; taking into cognizance the personal aspirations of an individual as well as the goals of the organization.
• • b.
Training Needs at Group Level: this involves a group of individuals within the organization who occupy similar position and perform similar functions.
There is need to examine what is needed in terms of knowledge, skills and Attitudes to carry out various duties and tasks that are related to a particular job.
• • c. Training Needs at Organization Level: this is the sum total of “Individual Needs” or “Group Needs”, which reflects the shortfall of the organization with 120 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION regards to its objectives and priorities n various units.
• • d. Present Training Needs: these are needs discovered as a result of deficiencies in the present situation.
• • e. Future Training Needs: these are needs required by an individual to perform future assignments or responsibilities.
• • f. Training Needs to be Met in-House: these set of needs can be met by organizing systematic training within the organization in the form of induction, orientation or training courses within the department.
• • g. Training Needs to be Met-Off-House: these are needs to be met by other training institutes like ITF (industrial training Fund); CMD (Centre for Management Development); etc.
• • Instrument for Identifying Training Need • • The various 121 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION instruments for identifying training needs for a future improved performance include the following • • i.
Job Analysis • ii.
Annual Performance Evaluation Report (APER) • iii.
Diary Method • iv.
Self- Reporting Questionnaire • v. Structured Interview Questions • vi.
Unstructured Interview Questions • vii.
Questionnaire Administration • viii.
Observation • ix.
Brainstorming • x.
Critical Incident.
• • A combination of some of these instruments would yield better results than single one.
• • SELF- ASSESSMENT 122 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION EXERCISE 3 • • 1.
What do you understand by training needs?
• 2.
Explain the kinds of training needs and identify five instruments used to identify training needs.
• • 3.4 Types of Training • • There are different types of training opportunities opened to an administrator.
Few of such are discussed in this unit as follows.
• • 1.
Induction Training • • Induction training relies on formal lectures and aims at acquainting the newly appointed administrators with their organization in terms of the available space, resources, arrangement and organizational pattern.
It equally identifies the expected role to play by the new staff.
It can last for about three weeks 123 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION and it is residential in most cases.
• • 2.
On-the-Job Training • • This is a training arrangement organized to make an administrator more efficient in the discharge of his/her duties without necessarily removing the trainee from his point of duty.
• • 3.
In-Service or Refresher- Training Programme • • The main aim of this type of training is to keep administrators up to-date on the latest development in their fields and to equip them with the necessary skills, knowledge and attitude relevant for their effectiveness.
• • 4.
Vestibule Training • • This kind of training is used primarily to train large number of people to meet up 124 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION with the challenges brought by rapid expansion of the organization.
Administrators are trained for specific jobs.
• 5.
Programmed Training • • This is one of the modern training systems that allows individual to learn and acquire new skills, knowledge, expertise and attitude at his own pace through a programmed teaching machines or prepared texts.
The strength of this kind of training is that it is economical and systematic.
However, it militates against good human relation and at times, some of the coded items might not be suitable to practical situation.
• • 3.5 Methods of Training • • There are many methods of delivery 125 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION depending upon whether the content of the topic is knowledge, skills or attitude or intensive.
The repertoire of programme delivery techniques is extensive but the most important factor to consider in the choice of delivery method is the trainees’ participation as well as available time.
• • (a) Group Methods of Training • • This refers to the method where participants discuss on various topics at various levels of meeting.
Among the recognized group methods are: symposiums, seminars, workshop, and conferences.
• • i. Symposiums: this is a series of related speeches by 2-5 persons focusing on a certain aspect of the general topic.
The presentation of each 126 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION resource person is coordinated by the moderator.
• • ii.
Seminars: this is a gathering of people under a leadership of learned person for the purpose of studying a subject.
Each present or discusses a problem and shares the findings with participants.
This makes seminars more of academic than any other group method.
• • iii.
Workshops: this also involves a group of individuals with common interest.
It comprises both theory and practice to enable participants to be more functional after the programme.
• • iv.
Conferences: this refers to the meeting of delegates for consultation, discussion or instruction usually at a specified period of time.
Proceed of workshop or conferences are usually codified and made available to every participants and the public in the form of books, journals, etc.
• • • 127 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION • (b) Individual Method of Training • • The methods of training presentation or programme implementation adoptable by individual presenter varies and can be used separately or combined to effect positive changes in the participants.
Some of these methods are: • • 1.
Lecture Method: this is knowledge oriented and consists of instructions from the trainer to the trainee.
It is often used to build up theoretical knowledge, which is a prerequisite for practical or participative training.
It is economical in the use of time and space but less participatory.
• • 2.
Talk: this allows for participation, while incorporating other methods.
It is suitable for small group and participation by group sustains the interests and learning of the training.
However, it is 128 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION time consuming.
• • 3.
Role Play: in this method, individual assumes the role they will play in their place of work.
It stimulates real-life situations and participants can practice and receive criticism in relatively protected situation.
• • 4.
Discussion Method: as the name implies, discussion allows free expression and exchange of opinions among participants on knowledge, ideas and attitudes on a particular subject.
It is suitable for attitude change but requires a good leader who gives appropriate direction to group.
• • 5.
Case Study: this refers to the history of some event or set of circumstances where relevant details are examined by the participants.
It provides a detached look at a problem (s) free from presume of the actual event.
• • 6.
Exercise: this is the process of giving some tasks for participants to undertake under a 129 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION certain rules and leading to a desired outcome.
Although it could be frustrating it not properly handled but it provides immediate feedback.
• • 7. Business Games: participants are informed about the organization’s financial position and are asked to assume different management role.
Decisions are made and actions taken and the probable outcome of the action are then evaluated.
• • • • SELF- ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 • • Examine the various methods of training institutional administrator.
• • 3.6 Training Process and Evaluation • • In the preceding sub-units, we have discussed some important aspects of training and development, now we will examine the process of training and 130 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION training evaluation, which are as significant in this context as other variables discussed hitherto.
• • Training Process: training is a systematic arrangement (process) through which an individual is equipped with the needed skills, knowledge and attitude for effective performance.
It is a function of inter- locking but dependent elements.
Its operation is more or less mechanical and continuous.
• • The process of training has the following elements • • a.
Training Needs.
• b.
Training Objective.
• c. Programme Design.
• d. Programme Development.
• e. Program Execution.
• f. Programme Evaluation.
131 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION • • Training Needs: as previously discussed under the analysis of training needs, the gap between the present level of performance, skills, knowledge and attitude of employee and the expected level of performance skill, knowledge and attitude for the training needs could be wide.
Identification of the training needs through the assessment of the current situation, using any of the equipment earlier discussed is the first stage in the process of training and a guide to formulating training objectives.
• • Training Objective: the training objective (T.O) is the specific focus for which training would be centred.
To identify the goals to be achieved through the training programme, a genuine consideration 132 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION would be given to the needs of the individual/group within the organization.
• • Programme Design: this is the theoretical frame- work upon which training could be carried out.
It encompasses a well-defined and clearly stated objectives of training incorporated into development and implementation of programmes.
It is an important element in the evaluation of training.
It includes the following elements among others: • •specifying, selecting, and appraising the target population; •drawing up the course/training content; •resources allocation; •inventory of approaches; and •sequencing or arranging topics and contents.
• •Programme Development: this is the building up of the programmes of events and activities for the 133 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION training.
It includes among other things, identifying the trainers/resource persons, organizing the venue and time, accepting contributions from individuals, consulting target population and making all material and non-material factors available for the programme.
• •Programme Execution/Implement ation: this is the actualization of the training exercise, bringing into close interactive arrangement the trainer, the trainee and material for training for the purpose of bringing about desirable changes in the performance of the trainee.
Our previous discussion has unveiled the possible methods of training that could be employed.
• •Training Evaluation: this is the assessment of the performance of the trained individuals in relation to the expected behaviour.
Evaluation is the comparison made between the initial 134 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION (pre-training) level of performance and the current (post-training) level of performance, usually in observable manner.
• •According to Hamblin (1974) and Fagbemi (1992), five levels of effects can be used to assess training output.
They are: • •i.
reaction effects; •ii.
learning effect; •iii.
job behaviour •iv.
organization effects; and •v.
ultimate value effect.
• •Some of the evaluation instruments are: • •pre-training evaluation – session profile form; •progressive evaluation (seasonal & Mid – course evaluation); •immediate post – Training Need course – end of course Reactionary T evaluation; and ra i Programme Evaluation n i •job – behaviour ng o effects evaluation b o je ct Programme Execution iv es Programme Design 135 Programme Development EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Fig.
2: The Training Cycle 4.0 CONCLUSION This unit focuses on training and development.
It is observed that training is a crucial aspect of human resource development, which every goal oriented organisation should embark upon.
It is meant for all categories of staff.
Training takes different dimensions and forms and the course of its implementation is diverse.
Being a process, training should be made continuous in every living organisation, its survival is based on follow-up and regular assessment.
5.0 SUMMARY Training has been 136 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION conceived to be a process of acquiring skills towards improved performance.
Increase in workers output and efficiency are among reasons advanced for training needs of the workers.
It should be noted that there are various training needs and various instrument for identifying training need of workers.
Training can be in form of induction, on-the-job training, in- service/refresher training.
6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss training in the context of its meaning, purpose, process and significance to institutional administrators.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS Adebayo O.
A. and Akinwumuju J.
A.
(1996).
Personnel Performance and Capacity Building, Ibadan.
The Department of Educational Management: University of Ibadan.
Aderinto A.
(1972).
“Staff Training: 137 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION An Employees Right or Privilege?” Perman Journal of the Institute on Personnel Management: Vol.
1 No 2.
Akintayo M. O.
(1996).
“Training of Employees and Development, whose Responsibilities?” A Paper Presented in an Industrial Relations Conferences Department of Adult Education, University of Ibadan.
Barker M. C. (1984).
Training and Development, Journal of European Industrial Training: Vol.
3 No 1.
Bass B.M.
and Vaughan J.
A.
(1971).
Training in Industry: the Management Learning, London: Tavistock Publication.
Beach D A.
(1980).
Personal Management of the People at Work, New York: Macmillan 138 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Publisher.
ASCON (1992).
New Trends in Personnel Management, A Book of Reading, Edited by Ali D. Yahaya and Caleb.
I. Akinyele, Nigeria.
Administrative Staff College of Nigeria (ASCON).
Egunyomi, D. (2000).
Introduction to Personnel Administration, Ibadan: Gab.
Educational Printers.
UNIT 2 CHALLE NGES OF INSTITU TIONAL ADMINIS TRATION 139 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Political Constraints 3.2 Economic Constraint 3.3 Inadequate Data 3.4 Social and Cultural Constraints 3.5 Administrative Constraint 3.6 Quota System 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Like many other private and public institutions in Nigeria, educational institutions exist in a complex, intricate and changing social environment.
In modern societies, educational institutions are regularly undergoing changes.
No institutional administrators can recommend one particular direction for all 140 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION institutions.
What works for one institution may not work for others.
They do not presume to know what is the best for all institutions to understand the culture, realities, goals or values of all institutions.
All educational institutions are headed by administrators while they are established for various purposes.
The National Policy on Education has a purpose for establishing various educational institutions.
The primary school is to provide basic literacy for pupils; the primary school is headed by the Headmaster, while the one at secondary school (Junior Secondary) is called Principal.
At the College of Education, it is called Provost, while it is called Rector at the Polytechnic.
It is called Vice-Chancellor at the University.
We have various types of institutions; political, educational, social etc.
but our major concern is educational institution.
There is no educational institution that can exist in isolation, they all relate with the society and the community.
It should be noted at this juncture that all other institutions also have their peculiar challenges.
However, in this unit we are going to 141 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION limit ourselves to challenges of educational institution’s administrators.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: •identify the challenges facing a school principal •identify the challenges facing Nigeria political institutions •suggests ways out of the age long problem facing institutional administrators.
• •3.0 MAIN CONTENT • •3.1 Political Constraints • •When we say Nigeria institutional administrators are confronted with political constraint, we refer to the effect of the power, influence and authority by the government of the day, especially in the allocation of resources.
Education is specially valued and highly demanded because of the role it plays.
Legislation has a direct influence on 142 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION the administration of the educational institution.
• •Government instability has been a very serious bottleneck to institutional plan and implementation in Nigeria where there is frequent change of government, characterized by non-continuity of policy/programme.
Planning of any kind in Nigeria is dated back to 1946.
Since then, there has not been a conducive political atmosphere needed for smooth implementation of institutional planning in the country.
The 1946 Ten-Year-Plan of Development and Welfare started by the colonial administration took place in the midst of nationalist agitation for a new constitution.
This led to a lot of controversy, and the result was a new and revised plan in 1961.
However, there was a new constitution in 1952, which also led to constitutional crises in 1953.
The 1953 crises led to decentralized constitution in 1954 and led to premature termination of the 1951 – 1956 plans.
In 1962, there was the first comprehensive plan called the First National Development Plan launched the same year.
143 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION However, in 1964 there was election crises and uproar all over the country, which led to military taking over the rulership of the country in 1966, and since then, there has been frequent intervention of military in governance.
• •Finally, the trend of politics in Nigeria has been that new governments come in with different policy for our educational institutions.
Plans made by previous governments are either disrupted or discontinued, it is even worse if it is from a military government to a civilian one.
• • • •3.2 Economic Constraint • •There is no economic reform that can be successful without adequate financial and human resources.
Most institutions in Nigeria are confronting economic constraints, and this constraint slows down the pace of achieving the institutions’ activities.
The expected funds from funding agencies i.e.
government, are delayed and in most cases some of 144 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION the fund are not released at all and this has negative influence on the effort of the institutional administrator in execution of institutions project(s).
Some institutions relied heavily on foreign support and financial assistance from Non-Governmental Organization (NGOs).
International institutions such as the World Bank, UNDP, support developing countries to finance some projects in their educational institutions.
But there is a laid down procedure for such assistance.
One of the procedures is that there must be feasibility studies of the institutions of the recipient countries and it is on the basis of the feasibility studies that financial support may be recommended.
Application for financial assistance may not necessarily be successful.
However, it has been observed that many institutional administrators in developing countries have at one time or the other base their planning wholly on such external assistance.
This makes institutions to suffer when such external assistance fails.
• •3.3 Inadequate Data • 145 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION •Many institutional administrators often fail because of underestimation of resource needs in terms of enrolment, personnel (academic and non- academic), physical facilities, equipments, and others.
Inadequate data may be linked to inadequate forecast as a result of wrong statistical data.
Information deficiency is one of the major constraints to administrators of many institutions, and once the administrators base their planning on wrong data, the organisation’s goals cannot be achieved.
• •3.4 Social and Cultural Constraints • •This has to do with the influence of pressure groups such as religious organizations, student’s organizations, Alumni, community organizations on the administration of institutions.
Educational institutions in most parts of the world are highly valued because of the role it plays.
Hence, societies demand for more education.
In Nigeria, the need for equal access to education is particularly urgent.
Individuals, communities and organizations are aware of their constitutional rights 146 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION to education; hence compete for a fair share of institutional resources at national, state and at the local government levels.
• •In the process of decision- making in an institution, various organizations within the institutions form pressure groups to bring to bear on the planning process, particularly on the legislature, their group’s institutional goals.
The inputs from the various organizations often significantly influence the outcome of institutional reform.
Many institutional administrators find it difficult to adapt to the socio-cultural life of the communities, where their institutions are located and this often lead to conflict between the institutions interest and the interest of the communities.
• •3.5 Administrative Constraint • •Administrative constraints is an inhibition to institutions’ plan implementation.
Bureaucracy is beset with many problems, which are likely to constitute impediments to institutional administrators.
These include, its’ own norms of 147 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION functioning, which is, commonly viewed as difficult and slow.
This is sometimes termed the “red tape’” system of functioning.
Another problem is the influence of inadequate communication within and between the system or the bad climate, which slows down activities within the bureaucratic system.
• •In addition, the administrators responsible for institutional plan implementation are themselves civil servants, who are expected to be loyal to the government of the day.
They are, at the same time parents of the students in the various educational institutions in the country, and they also belong to various organizations.
While these administrators are obliged to carry out political loyalties to various organizations, this may influence their attitude towards an educational project.
Administrators can use their special position to slow down the course of institutional plan implementation and in fact, disrupt institutional project plan considered to be contrary to public interests or in conflict with the interest of the 148 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION government of the day.
• •3.6 Quota System • •This is another challenge that institutional administrators have to cope with.
It is peculiar to federal institutions.
Appointment in the federal government institutions of learning is characterized by quota system.
Same with the admissions and employments (equal representation of states).
This system does not allow the best candidates to be chosen by various institutions and thereby making it difficult for institutional administrators to have the best hands to work with.
Appointments of personnel are based on quota system instead of emphasizing competence.
Institutional administrators have to set different criteria for different states or geo- political zones.
Some states/zones are regarded as educationally advantaged, while some are regarded as educationally disadvantaged.
The criteria for educationally advantaged states/zones are usually higher than those from educationally disadvantaged states.
This has been a very 149 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION serious challenge for institutional administrators because they have to work with people of different educational standard on the same job.
This could have negative influence on the achievement of institutional goals and also slows down the administration of the institutions.
• •SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE • •Apart from all the above listed challenges, think of other challenges facing institutional administrators in your locality.
• •Suggested Solutions to the Identified Challenges • •The following are suggested solution to the challenges being faced by Nigerian institutional administrators in the discharge of their duties effectively and efficiently.
• •i.
The government and the politicians should ensure that there is continuity of educational plans and experts should be employed to formulate and implement the plan action.
The plan so formulated should be in line with the global needs 150 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION and challenges of the educational institutions.
There should be careful consideration of all plans to separate them into short, medium, or long term.
• •ii.
Institutional administrators should base their plans/projects on reality i.e.
the available funds not the expected fund.
The funds available should be judiciously used.
Institutional administrators should guide against all forms of wastage.
There should be proper monitoring/control of the inflow and outflow of resources because the administrator will give account of how the available resources are utilized.
Institutional administrators should also seek support from well meaning individuals within the community instead of relying solely on foreign financial aids.
• •iii.
Institutional administrators should study and understand the cultural background of the community where the institution is situated as well as the type of education required by the community.
If a community that requires western type of education is given religious education, this may lead 151 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION to unresolved conflict and vice versa.
Institutional administrators must compromise what is statistically and economically rational for socio-economic ideas.
•iv.
The administrative bureaucracy must be reduced to the barest minimum if it can not be totally eliminated.
This will allow the administrator to take urgent decisions independently as at when necessary and remove all impediments on all plan implementation.
The administrators in the ministries should use their special position to accelerate the course of plan implementation.
• •v.
Appointments and employments in educational institutions should be based on merit rather than quota system.
It should be noted that educational institutions are places where knowledge is imparted into the up and coming generations for continuity and development, hence quality should be emphasized.
• •4.0 CONCLUSION • •In this unit, we have considered some of the challenges facing the institutional 152 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION administrators in Nigeria in the hope of contributing to our understanding of educational institutions.
We have suggested recipes for resolving some of the immediate challenges.
However, there is also the need to encourage reflection and self-knowledge to provide some new guides to the diagnosis of administrative problems of institutional administrators and to suggest that the posture of statesmanship may well be appropriate for many institutional administrators who may have a narrow view and more limited aspirations.
• •5.0 SUMMARY • •There is no institutional administrator that is problem free; the type of problems they face varies across institutions.
All praises and blame go to the administrator and vice versa.
The ability of the administrators to manage challenges effectively could make the difference as there is no better way of administering.
The situation will determine the best administrative method to employ.
• •6.0 TUTOR- 153 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION MARKED ASSIGNMENT • •What are the measures to be taken to cope with the challenges of institutional administration?
• • • • • • • •7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS • •Adesina, S (1982).
Planning and Educational Development in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Board Publication.
• •Ojelabi, A (1987).
A Guide to School Management, Ibadan: Valuta Educational Publisher.
• •Okebukola, P.A.O (1998).
“Trends in Tertiary Education in Nigeria” in The State of Education in Nigeria.
UNESCO.
Lagos.
• • • • • 154 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •UNIT 3 MOTIVATION AND INSTITUTIONAL RESPONSIBILITY • •CONTENTS • •1.0 Introduction •2.0 Objectives •3.0 Main Content • 3.1 The Concept of Motivation 155 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION • 3.2 Theory of Motivation • 3.3 Maslow’s Need Hierarchy Theory •4.0 Conclusion •5.0 Summary •6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment •7.0 References/Further Readings • •1.0 INTRODUCTION • •Motivation occupies a very strategic position in role taking and responsibility observation of any functional system.
Indeed, it is the core of effective performance of any social setting.
Employees look up to their employers for motivation, while the latter consider the organization’s provisions before effecting any measure of motivation.
• • What is certain here is that, no mater how institutional activities and administration practice is directed, motivation occupies the centre.
It is the institutional responsibility towards the staff with an intrinsic aim of achieving the aims and aspirations of the organization.
Motivation is a function of need.
Need varies from one individual to another so 156 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION also what motivates one person may not motivate another.
• •This chapter examines motivation as a provision of the institution for the staffers.
It discusses the origin or sources of motivation in any establishment.
• •2.0 OBJECTIVES • •The main objective of this chapter is to: • • clarify the significance of motivation in any institution • identify some strategies by which workers could be motivated in their places of work • the role of institution as well as that of administrator in motivating employees • you should be able to explain the concept of motivation • discuss its significance in the educational system • validate in practical terms how an administrator can facilitate job satisfaction among staff through motivation.
• 3.0 MAIN CONTENT • • 3.1 The 157 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Concept of Motivation • • A lot of definitions have been advanced by writers and researchers on the concept of motivation.
A brief look at some of these definitions would serve as guideline to arriving at a desirable conclusion of what motivation is.
• • Staw (1983) saw motivation as a “pre-potent state that energizes and guides behaviour.
It is rarely measured directly but is inferred from changes in behaviour or even attitudes.
• •Golembiewski (1973) referred to motivation as the degree of readiness of an organization to pursue some designated goal, and it implies the determination of the nature and locus of the forces inducing the degree of readiness.
• Jones (1955) stated that motivation is concerned with how behaviour gets started, is energized, is 158 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION sustained, is directed, is stopped and what kind of subjective reaction is present in the organization while all is going on.
• In the words of Zedeck and Blood (1974) motivation is a predisposition to act in a specific goal directed manner.
•To Kelly (1974) motivation has to do with the forces that maintain and alter the direction, quality and intensity of behaviour.
•Berelson and Steiner (1964) defined motivation as all those inner-striving conditions described as wishes, desires, drives, etc.
It is an inner state that activates or moves.
It involves effort, persistence and goals.
•Motivation is the process of influencing, or stimulating a person to take action that will accomplish desired goal (Mondy, Holmes, and Flippo; 1980).
•According to Mathis and Jackson (1982) Motivation is an emotion or desired operating on a person’s will and causing that person to act.
•Motivation according to Middlemist and Hitt (1981) is the “willful desire to direct one’s behaviour toward goal.
•Hoy and Miskel (1987) defined motivation as the 159 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION complex forces, drives, needs, tension states, or other mechanism that start and maintain voluntary activity directed towards the achievement of personal goals.
• •A vivid and critical consideration of the above ideas and conceptions of motivation would enable us to draw out the following conclusions as per the nature of motivation.
• •1.
Motivation involves purposive, designated or goal- directed behaviour.
•2.
It deals with what initiates, energizes, directs and sustains human behaviour.
•3.
It relates to both behaviour (attitude) and performance.
•4.
It requires certain forces acting on or within a person.
•5.
It can not be measured directly but inferred in behaviour.
•6.
Physiological, psychological and environmental differences of individual employees are important influencing factor.
•7.
Motivation is a response to need.
• •3.2 Theory of 160 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Motivation • •A lot of theories have been propounded on motivation with a view to identifying the concept, process and integrative nature of motivation.
Although this unit does not cover details of all these theories but attempt is made to draw out the basic propositions common to most of the theories using Maslow’s Need Hierarchy Theory for our illustrations.
• •3.3 Maslow’s Need Hierarchy Theory • •Maslow, a psychologist considered humans as having needs and wants as employees in any organization.
He pointed out that these needs are in order, even though they are complex in nature.
• • The assumptions of Maslow’s Theory include: • •i.
a number of complex needs affect the behaviour of an individual; •ii.
needs are arranged according to hierarchy of 161 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION importance from the basic physiological needs to the complex self actualization needs; • iii.
a higher need does not motivate unless the lower need is satisfied; •iv.
once a need is satisfied it no longer serves as a motivator; and •v.
there are many more ways to satisfy higher-level needs than lower level needs.
• •Classifications of Needs • •Maslow, whose theory served as path for other theorists identified five basic needs organized into successive levels of importance as follows.
• •i.
Physiological Needs: these needs are the lowest in the hierarchy.
They include basic biological needs of human being such as need for food, water, air, sexual gratification, shelter, clothing and so on.
He contends that once the physiological needs are satisfied, their strength of importance decreases; and the next higher level needs becomes the strongest motivator.
• •ii.
Safety Needs: these 162 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION needs begin to emerge and to dominate behaviour immediately the physiological needs are reasonably satisfied.
These needs include that for security, protection against danger and accidents, threat, deprivation and protection from physical or psychological harm, economic disaster, absence of pains and illness and security of job.
These needs can be met by such programmes as fringe benefits, retirement and pension scheme, insurance benefits, medical or health services, job securities and safe- working conditions; allowances, etc • •iii.
Social Needs: these include need to feel needed, the need for affection, love, belongingness, association, affection, friendship, interaction and acceptance in relationship with other people.
These needs can be satisfied through social interaction, group work, etc.
• •iv.
Ego or Esteem Needs: these growth level needs are two fold: needs to feel important and to receive recognition from others.
Mc.Gregor (1960) described these two kinds of egoistic needs as: 163 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION • •a.
Self-Esteem Needs: need for confidence, for independence, for achievement, for competence and for knowledge.
• •b.
Reputation Needs: needs for status, for recognition, for independence, for appreciation, for the deserved respect of one’s fellows.
Although, these needs are rarely completely satisfied but the considerable fulfillment of the esteem need leads to feeling of worth, adequacy, and self- confidence.
• iv.
Self Actualization Needs: this is the highest and topmost need level in the Maslow’s hierarchy of needs framework.
It describes the desire to become more and more what are idiosyncratically is; to become everything one is capable of becoming through maximizing the use of one’s skills, abilities and realizing one’s potentialities for continued self- development.
Although it is 164 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION difficult to define self-actualization precisely but Maslow identified indicators of these needs to include: honesty, self- assertiveness, self- expressiveness, openness, selflessly and vividly experiencing life, thinking of life as a process, etc.
v. s vi.
eed vii.
S N r E e d L Or F- gher A Hi C T U A L I Z A T I O N viii.
ix.
x. xi.
xii.
EGO & 165 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION ESTE EN NEED S xiii.
xiv.
xv.
s d ee SOCI N r AL e d NEED r O S er xvi.
w o xvii.
L SAFETY NEEDS xviii.
xix.
xx.
xxi.
xxii.
PHYSIOLOGI CAL NEEDS xxiii.
xxiv.
Maslow’s Need Hierarchy xxv.
xxvi.
Having discussed the needs of humans in any working situation, let us examine the practical ways of motivating employees by providing for these needs.
aa.
Strategies for motivating employees As hitherto discussed, the 166 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION key to the understanding of human behaviour is an understanding of the human needs.
In order to motivate people to direct their maximum efforts towards production, it is essential to satisfy these needs as far as practicable.
A few practical ways of motivating employees at work are discussed below.
(a) The Basic Needs i.
Salaries /Wages: one major reason why people work is to earn income in money term.
This is needed to meet some personal and domestic needs such as clothing, feeding payment of rent, school fees, etc.
Salaries have a large motivating tendency in it.
In most cases, it is not the increase in salaries/wages that only matters but also, prompt and regular payment of it.
Saul Gellerman (1968) summed the situation up in his statement: “to say that monetary omnipotence is a myth is not to say that money is impotent.” Money can motivate; that 167 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION is, it can influence action and encourage extra effort, extra creativity or any other kind of non-routine performance.
But it can do this only when the increment or net gain for the employee is large enough.
ii.
Job Security: it is not debatable that insecurity of job can dampen the efforts of employees more especially at the lower level.
Employees get motivated when there is job security which could encourage long term planning and skill development.
Job security allays the fear of uncertainty and injustice in workplace.
(b) Higher Needs The ultimate satisfaction derivable by employee in the place of work depends on the satisfaction of the last three of the five groups of needs.
Workers can be motivated for these through the following factors.
168 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION i.
Promotion: promotion implies a change for better in the place of work in terms of status, responsibilities, money and recognition of individuals’ performance.
As a response to this promotion gesture, the employee puts in more efforts in his work.
Promotion puts new life in the individual and activates his knowledge, skills, etc and consequently, strives harder to be effective in his new job.
Summarily, the motivating effect of promotion is high ii.
Job Enrichment: this involves creating an avenue for an individual employee to evaluate his effort by making him observe the end product of his effort.
It is different from job enlargement, which is unburdening worker with more tasks.
Rather than 169 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION creating boredom as in the case of job enlargement, job enrichment would enhance more efficiency in employee’s performances.
iii.
Objective Setting and Appraisal: this practice encourages employee as an individual to set specific targets within the framework of the departmental objectives.
This is done in conjunction with his head/boss and his attendant performance-effort is encouraged and geared towards this.
A well structured appraisal system makes for fairness and encourages mutual trust and confidence thus creating a congenial atmosphere where an individual could work without fear or intimidation.
iv.
Increased Responsibilities: this simply implies entrusting in the subordinate a 170 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION higher responsibility with a view to bringing about development through training and challenging tasks.
Delegation of responsibilities to subordinates by administrator is a way of building future leaders who could act on the super-ordinates’ absence.
This is fascinating and motivating enough, more especially when little or no supervision is done.
Although, some administrators consider such gesture as a threat to their jobs or that the subordinate may not be able to do the job satisfactorily, yet an in-dept thought would uphold the relief, time-saving and efficiency inherent in the principle.
v. Authority and Accountability: a major factor in motivating a job holder is to give him increased authority and hold him accountable for the results.
This 171 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION situation will pose a challenge to which the employee will respect.
To get this done, the employee should be involved in the earlier stage of planning and should have more authority over the choice of strategies for task implementation.
Also, he should be responsible and accountable to only one superior officer.
vi.
Understanding the Subordinate Goals: at times, some administrators erroneously assume that a post they had cherished should appeal to their subordinates or that some incentives they want should appeal to them.
It should be well understood that as diverse as individuals in an establishment so also is their interest, values, goals and aspiration.
Administrator should be dynamic to accommodate individual worker’s 172 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION goals.
In the words of Bensahel (1973) quoted in Ubeku (1975) “a reward can be valuable, but it will only work in getting a person to do things effectively if it is a reward he wants”.
Therefore, while majority of employees definitely look forward to advancement in their career, the direction of that advancement mapped out for them by their bosses may not be the one they want.
Also, people who are self-motivated feel there is interference if their bosses offer them incentives in an attempt to get more out of them.
In a nutshell, people are different and must be treated differently.
To treat people different, one must understand them as individuals, know their goals, and appreciate in what direction their abilities and interest can lead.
4.0 CONCLUSION We will conclude this unit by emphasizing few principles associated with motivation.
In the first instance, people work best when they realize that their work is important.
Two, people get satisfied with the job itself.
Also, 173 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION self-direction and self- development are essential for personal commitment that leads to enhanced results.
To sustain effective performance of workers therefore, an administrator should give recognition to and reward appropriately and adequately the jobs of workers.
Mention needs be made of the fact that motivation is a response to needs for the purpose of bringing about better positive behaviours and attitudes to work.
Failure to motivate workers leads to frustration and consequent negative attitudes to work.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, we have seen motivation in different perspectives as advanced by different authorities in the field as well as theories propounded on motivation.
The five basic needs of human beings categorized into different levels of importance by Abraham Maslow was also discussed and presented diagrammatically from the physiological needs which is the lowest in the hierarchy to self- actualization needs which is the highest in the hierarchy.
174 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
With particular reference to a named institution, discuss the relevance of motivation to the goal attainment of both individuals and the institution.
2.
Identify and discuss various ways by which the needs of employees can be met in any institution.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS ASCON (1992).
New Trends in Personnel Management, Edited by Ali D. Yahaya and Caleb I Akinyele.
Benshel, J.
A.
(1973).
Are you Dangling the Wrong Carrot?
International Management.
Egunyomi, D. (2000).
Introduction to Personnel Administration, Ibadan: Holad Publishers.
Flippo L. B.
(1975).
Personnel Management 6 Ed.
New York: th McGraw Hill Book Company.
175 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Peretomode, V. F. (2003).
Educational Administration; Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspective, Joja Educational Research and Publishing Ltd. Lagos Nigeria.
Ubeku, A.K (1975).
Personnel Management in Nigeria, Benin City: Ethiope Publishing Corporation.
UNIT 4 INFORM ATION AND COMMU NICATIO N TECHNO LOGY (ICT) AND INSTITU TIONAL ADMINIS TRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Information and Communication Technology 3.2 Characteristics of Computers 3.3 Application of 176 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION Computers to Institutional Administrati on in Nigeria 3.4 Relevance of ICTS to Administration of Institution 3.5 Challenges to ICTS in institutional administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The use and adaptation of ICTs in all spheres of life, particularly in human organizations in the contemporary world is enormous.
This is perhaps a function of dynamism, innovation or complex nature of tasks to be done in spite of limited resources allocated for such tasks.
In an appreciable manner, where decision-making needs to be quick and actions set to achieve goals within limited time; one would conclude that ICTs have substantial roles to play in Institutional Administration in Nigeria.
The ultimate use of 177 EDA 851 PRINCIPLES OF INSTITUTIONAL ADMINISTRATION 178
