 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDA 811: COURSE TITLE: CONCEPT AND THEORIES OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION AND PLANNING  INTRODUCTION EDA 811: Concepts and theories of Educational Administration and Planning is a first semester year one, two credit, and 700 level Core Course.
It will be available for all students offering M.ED Administration and Planning.
It will also be suitable as ‘One-of” course for anyone who does not intend to complete a National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) qualification, but wants to learn the Concepts and theories of Educational Administration and Planning course.
This course will expose you to an understanding of many of the Concepts and Theories in Educational Administration and Planning.
It will assist you to be able to apply these theories to the tasks and roles that you perform as School heads and Administrative Executives in the educational setting.
The course will consist of 19 units which includes Course Guide, definition of Administration, concept of importance of motivation and communication in and administration, meaning and classification of organizations, Theories and Administration, Decision making, School Organization, Administration, Exercise of Power, Authority, Responsibility and Delegation, Administration and Student Services, Discipline and Students Control, School Community relations, Educational Planning, its approaches methodologies and tools and the practice and applications of all these to the educational setting in Nigeria.
This Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using and how you can work your way through these materials.
It suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It also gives you some guidance on your tutor-marked assignments, which will be made available in the assignment file.
There are regular tutorial classes that are linked to the course.
You are advised to attend these sessions.
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN IN THIS COURSE The overall aim of EDA 811; Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning is to introduce specific definitions, and acquaint you with the important concepts in Educational Administration and Planning.
The context in which Administration is been practiced will also be explained.
The organization which forms the bedrock of any administrative practice will be examined, the types of organizations, principles of organization, techniques in organization and organizational conflict.
The historical trends in the development of Administration, highlighting the theories in the areas of personnel management, bureaucracy, scientific management and human relations.
These developments later found relevance in the area of education.
The understanding of these Concepts and Theories in Educational Administration; and planning is vital because it serves as a framework for the practice of Administration and the planning of educational programmes and other school activities.
From time to time the Educational Administrator needs to make decisions, which will interpret the policies and programmes of the educational system in the country.
During this course, you will learn about the school as an organization, school administration which will spell out the task and roles of the administrator, including the control of student services, and the type of relationships that the Administrator needs to cultivate with the students, parents and the community at large.
The course will also expose you to an understanding of the concept of planning in Education, the various approaches to educational planning such as social demand approach, manpower approach, and cost-benefit approach.
These are approaches that are applicable to educational planning worldwide.
Specific reference will be made to the relevance of these approaches for meaningful educational development.
You will also learn the methodologies of planning education.
The actual process of planning within the Nigerian context will be broadly spelt out.
This course will also refresh your knowledge on organizational structure of Education in Nigeria, the management and control of education.
Finally you will learn to examine the tasks and challenges that are ahead of future Educational Administrators.
COURSE AIMS The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: this course aims to give you an understanding of the meaning of the various concept of administration and planning.
The theories underlying the study of administration the practice of administration with the help of such instrument like decision making, discipline and control of students, staff meeting and the use of authority, power, responsibilities and delegation.
The structure in which all these administrative functions will find expression will also be explained.
This will be achieved by aiming to: Introduce you to the definition and meaning of the concept and theories of Educational Administration and Planning.
Describe the various classifications of organizations and the principles underlying its practice.
Outline the methods and tools employed, in decision making in an organization Explain the practice of School Administration as its concerns both the students, staff, parents and community as a whole.
Describe the concept of Educational Planning and its techniques and methodologies.
Outline the main constraint in Educational Planning.
Explain the organization, administration and control of education in Nigeria.
COURSE OBJECTIVE To achieve the aims set out, the course sets overall objectives.
Each unit also has specific objectives.
The unit objectives are always included at the beginning of a unit; you should read them before you start working through the unit.
You may want to refer to them during your study of the unit to check on your progress.
You should always look at the unit objectives after completing a unit.
In doing so you will be sure that you have followed the instructions in the unit.
Below are the wider objectives of the course as a whole.
By meeting these objectives you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course you should be able to: 1.
Define the concept of Administration.
2.
Describe who is an Administrator.
3.
Explain the meaning of Educational Administration.
4.
Explain the term organization.
5.
Differentiate between formal and informal organizations.
6.
Specify the principle of organization.
7.
Explain the scientific management theory.
8.
Describe the human relations theory.
9.
Discuss the Behaviouralist/Rationalist approach to administration.
10.
Explain the theories of bureaucracy.
11.
Describe the theory and process of decision making in administration.
12.
Explain the meaning of School Administration.
13.
Discuss the task and roles of the principal.
14.
Explain the application of Administrative instrument such as authority, power, responsibility and delegation.
15.
Discuss the administration of student services, control and discipline in schools.
16.
Define the concept of Education Planning.
17.
Describe the three major approaches to planning.
18.
Explain the constraints of Educational Planning.
19.
Discuss the models of planning.
20.
Specify the importance of each model of educational planning.
21.
Discuss the organization and administration of the educational system in Nigeria.
22.
Explain the organizational structure of the Ministries of Education in Nigeria.
23.
Specify the various levels of educational control in Nigeria.
24.
Identify the Federal and National Educational Agencies.
25.
Discuss the foreign and International bodies concerned with educational development in Nigeria.
26.
Discuss the task and challenges ahead of future Educational Administrators and Planners.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE  To complete this course you are required to read the study units, read set books and read other materials provided by the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Each unit contains self- assessment exercises, and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, is a final examination.
The course should take you about 17 weeks in total to complete.
Below you will find listed all the components of the course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.
COURSE MATERIALS Major components of the course are: Course Guide Study Units References Assignment file Presentation Schedule.
STUDY UNITS The study units in this course are as follows: Course Guide Unit 1: The nature and purpose of Administration.
Unit 2: Principles and Practice in Organizations.
Unit 3: Historical trends in the development of Administration.
Unit 4 : Classical Organizational thought and the Scientific Management Movement.
Unit 5 : The Human Relation Movement.
Unit 6 : The Behaviouralist/Rationalist perspective in Administration.
Unit 7 : Theories of Bureaucracy.
Unit 8: Concepts and theory of decision making in Administration.
Unit 9: The School as an organization.
Unit 10: Administration and control of student services.
Unit 11: School Community Relations in Administration.
Unit 12: Introduction to the Concept of Educational Planning.
Unit 13: Approaches to Educational Planning.
Unit 14: Education Planning process.
Unit 15: Management and Planning Models for Educational System in Nigeria.
Unit 16: The organizational Structure of the Education in Nigeria.
The first two units explain the important terms and concepts in administration, specifying the place of educational administration and the context in which administration is been practiced that is in an organizational setting.
The two types of organization were identified and the principles behind them explained.
The next five units gives a historical trend of the development of administration and highlights the four major developments of theories in the areas of Personnel Management Scientific Management, Human Relations Movement and Bureaucracy.
The next four units explains the actual practice of administration in the School system, using such concepts as decision making, control coordinating and managing of student services including the School community relations.
This was followed with four other units, which tend to describe the concept of planning, the approaches, the process and the models for Educational Planning.
The last three units explained the applicability of the various concepts and theories that have been studied with specific reference to what an offer in the educational system of Nigeria.
In addition the task and challenges ahead of future Educational Administration and Planning in Nigeria was discussed.
Each study unit consist of one to two weeks work, and includes introduction objectives, reading material, exercises, conclusion, summary, tutor-marked assignments(TMAs) and marking scheme, references, further reading and other resources.
The units direct your work on exercises related to the required readings.
In general, these exercise question you on the material ;you have just covered or required you to apply it in some way and, thereby, help you to gauge you progress and the reinforce your understanding of the material.
Together with tutor-marked assignments, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual units and of the course.
ASSIGMENT FILE There are eight assignments in this course.
The eight course assignments will cover – 1.
Definition of important concepts in Administration and classification of the types of organization (Course Guide Units 1 and 2) 2.
The development of Administration and the theoretical foundations of Scientific Movement and the Human Relation Movement (Units 3 - 5) 3.
The explanation of the Behaviouralist/Rationalist Movement (Course Guide Unit 6 ).
4.
A comparative analysis of the theories of bureaucracy (Course Guide Unit 7).
5.
The application of decision making metric to a given school problem (Course Guide Unit 8).
6.
An understanding of the concept of School Administration and the various administrative functions of the school head, for effective and efficient management of the school and the community (Course Guide Unit 9, 10 & 11).
7.
An explanation of the concept of Educational Planning and its processes (Course Guide Unit 12, 13, & 14).
8.
An application of the various planning approaches to educational planning in Nigeria (Course Guide Unit 14 & 15).
PRESENTATION SCHEDULE The presentation Schedule included in your course materials gives you the important dates for this year for the completion of tutor-marked assignments and attending tutorials.
Remember, you are required to submit all your assignments by the due date.
You should guard against falling behind in your work.
ASSESSMENT There are three aspects to the assessment of the course: first are self-exercises, second are the tutor-marked assignments; and third, there is a written examination.
In tackling the assignments, you are advised to be sincere in attempting the exercises; you are expected to apply information, knowledge and techniques gathered during the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the deadlines stated in the Presentation Schedule and the Assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 50% of your total course mark.
At the end of the course, you will need to sit for a final written examination of ‘three hours’ duration.
This examination will also count for 50% of your total course mark.
TUTOR-MARKED ASSISGNMENT (TMAs) There are eight tutor-marked assignments in this course.
You only need to submit five of the eight assignments.
You are encouraged, however, to submit all eight assignments in which case the highest five of the eight marks will be counted.
Each assignment counts 10% towards your total course mark.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignment from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
However, it is desirable in all degree level education to demonstrate that you have read and researched more widely than the required minimum.
Using other references will give you a broader viewpoint and may provide a deeper understanding of the subject.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a TMA (tutor-marked assignment) form, to your tutor.
Make sure that each assignment reaches your tutor on or before the deadline given in the Presentation Schedule and Assignment file.
If for any reason, you, cannot complete your work on time, contact your tutor before the assignment is due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless there are exceptional circumstances.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING The final examination for EDA811 will be of three hours’ duration and have a value of 50% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the types of self- testing, practice exercise and tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
Use the time between finishing the last unit and sitting for the examination to revise the entire course.
You might find it useful to review your self-tests, tutor-marked assignments and comments on them before the examination.
The final examination covers information from all parts of the Course.
COURSE MARKING SCHEME ASSESSMENT MARKS Assignment 1-8 Eight assignments, best five marks of the eight count @ 10% each = 50% of course marks.
Final Examination 50% of overall course marks.
Total 100% of course marks.
Total 1 Course Marking Scheme.
COURSE OVERVIEW This table brings together the units, the number of weeks you should take of complete them, and the assignment that follow them.
Weeks Assessment (end Unit Title of work activity of unit) Course Guide 1.
The nature and purpose of Administration 1 Assignment 1 2.
Principles and Practice in Organizations 1 3.
Historical trends in the development of 1 Administration 4.
Classical Organizational thought and the 1 Assignment 2 Scientific Management Movement 5.
The Human Relations Movement 1 Assignment 3 6.
The Behaviouralist/Rationalist perspective 1. in Administration 7.
Theories of Bureaucracy 1 Assignment 4 8.
Concept and theory of decision making 1 Assignment 5 in 9.
1 Administration The School as an organization 10.
Administration and Control of Student 1 15.
Management and Planning Services 3.
Models in 11.
School – Community Relations in EducationaEld Pulcaantnioinnga lP Prloacnensisn g Administration 1 12.
Introduction to the concept of Educational 4.
Planning Approaches to Educational Planning  1 Assignme nt 6 1 1 Assignme 1 nt 7 1 1 Assignme nt 8  16.
The organizational structure of the 1 Education in Nigeria 17.
The management and control Education 1 - in Nigeria.
- 18.
The future of Educational Administration in perspective Revision Total HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study units replace the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distant learning.
You can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suit you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some reading to do, the study unit will tell you when to read your other materials.
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise, your study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate points.
Each of the study units follows a common format.
The first item is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
The main body of the unit guides you through the required reading from other sources.
This will usually be either from a Reading Section of some other sources.
Self-test are interspersed throughout the end of units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination.
You should do each self-test as you come to it in the study unit.
There will also be numerous examples given in the study units, work through these when you come to them too.
The following is a practical strategy for working through the course.
If you run into any trouble, telephone your tutor.
Remember that your tutor’s job is to help you.
When you need help, don’t hesitate to call and ask your tutor to provide it.
1.
Read this Course guide thoroughly .
2.
Organize a study schedule.
Refer to the Course Overview for more details.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and how the assignments relate to the tutorials, and the date of the first day units.
Important of the Semester will be made available.
You need to gather all this information in one information e.g.
place, such as your diary or a wall calendar.
Whatever method you choose to use, you details of your should decide on and write in your own dates for working on each unit.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything you can to stick to it.
The major reason that students fail is that they get behind with their course work.
If you get into difficulties with your schedule, please let your tutor know before it is too late for help.
4.
Turn to Unit 1 and read the introduction and the objectives for the unit.
5.
Assemble the study materials.
Information about what you need for a unit is given in the “Overview” at the beginning of each unit you will always need both the study unit you are working on and one of your references, on your desk at the same time.
6.
Work through the unit.
The content of the unit itself has been arranged to provide a sequence for you to follow.
As you work through the units, you will be instructed to 7. read sections from your other sources.
Use the unit to guide your reading.
Well before the relevant due date check your Assignment File and make sure you attend to the next required assignment.
Keep in mind that you will learn a lot by doing the assignments carefully.
They have been designed to help you meet the 8. objectives and the course and, therefore, will help you to pass the exam.
Submit all assignments not later than the due date.
9. Review the objectives for each study unit confirms that you have achieved them.
If you feel unsure about any of the objectives, review the study material or consult your tutor.
10.
When you are confident that you have achieved a unit’s objectives, you can then start on the next unit.
Proceed unit by unit through the course and try to face your study so that you keep yourself on schedule.
When your have submitted an assignment to your tutor for marking do not wait for its 11. return before starting on the next unit.
Keep to your Schedule.
When the assignment is returned, pay particular attention to your tutor’s comments, both on the tutor-marked assignment form and also written on the assignment.
Consult your tutor as soon as possible if you have any questions or problems.
After completing the last unit, review the course and prepare yourself for the final examination.
Check that you have achieved the unit objectives (listed at the beginning of each unit) and the course objectives (listed in the Course Guide) TUTORS AND TUTORIALS There are 17 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials, together with the names and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must mail your tutu-marked assignments to your tutor well before the due date (at least two working days are required.).
They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Do no hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, e-mail, or discussion board if you  need help.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
You have difficulty with the self-test or exercise.
You have a question or problem with an assignment with your tutor’s comment on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask questions which are answered instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating in discussions actively.
SUMMARY EDA 811 intends to introduce the concepts and theories of Educational Administration and Planning to you.
Upon completing this course, you will be equipped with the basic knowledge of the important concepts and theories in Educational Administration and Planning.
You will be able to answer these kinds of questions: What is Administration?
Who is an Administrator?
What is Education Administration?
Why is motivation and communication relevant in Administration?
How would you define organizations?
How many types of organization exist?
What are the principles of organization?
How do we explain organizational conflict?
What does the scientific management theory stand for?
How can we apply human relations theories to Administrative practice?
How can we determine the difference between theory X and Y?
What impact does the theory of bureaucracy have on the practice of administration?
Why do we make decision in schools?
What are the functions of the school principal?
How can we differentiate between Authority, Power, Responsibility and Delegation?
How do we administer student services?
How do we control discipline in school?
What impact does guidance and counseling services have on school administration?
How do we explain the relationship between the school and the community?
What is the meaning of Educational planning?
What are the planning processes that you know?
What are the planning approaches that you can explain?
What are the major planning constraints?
How can we overcome these planning constraints?
Why do we apply models in planning education?
How do we describe the organizational structure of education in Nigeria?
Who do we have foreign and international bodies concerned with educational development?
What are the task and challenges ahead of Educational Adminsstrators and Planner in Nigeria?
Of course the list of questions that you can answer is not limited to the above list.
To gain the most from this course you should try to apply the principles and concepts to your every day life and practice of Administration in your organizations.
We hope you enjoy your acquaintances with the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
We wish you every success in the future.
None EDA 811: CONCEPTS AND THEORIES OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATON AND PLANING COURSE DEVELOPMENT Course Developer Dr. (Mrs.) Rosemond B. Ayanniyi Course Writers Dr. (Mrs.) Rosemond B. Ayanniyi Course Coordinator Ajadi Timothy 0 School of Education NOUN V/I Lagos Programme Leader Dr Salawu I.
0 School of Education NOUN V/I Lagos.
F71 ;7:;"` 40.1 So, — iai is NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA  .
EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Unit 1 The Nature And Purpose Of Administration Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The meaning of Administration 3.1 Who is an Administrator?
3.1.1 What is Educational Administration?
3.1.2 The relevance of Motivation and Communications in 4.0 Administration.
5.0 Conclusion.
6.0 Summary 7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment References 1.0 Introduction This unit is the foundation unit to this course and it would expose you to the meaning of the major concepts in Administration.
It will also assist you to understand the use and applications of these concepts in the educational setting.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • Define the concept of Administration?
• Describe who is an administrator?
+ Explain the concept of Educational Administration and Management?
NOUN 3  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 3.0 The Meaning of Administration Administration is a social process concerned with identifying, maintaining, motivating, controlling and unifying formally and informally organized human and material resources within an integrate system designed specifically to achieve predetermined objectives.
Administration has to do with getting things done with the accomplishment of defined objectives.
In prehistoric times it has been discussed that human beings come together for one activity or the other.
Such activities became useful and achieved some level of success due to spirit of group work.
For example the construction of the Egyptian pyramid indicates that there was recognition for planning, organizing, and controlling of group activities.
From this explanation, it should be clear to you that Administration is a social process which can also happen at the level of the family, where the parents and children as a group together makes things to happen.
At the village level, communal labour is often employed in other to get things done.
For instance, the building of Commmunity Schools is carried out by the members of the community with the assistance of government in some cases.
Whatever happens, the planning, organizing and controlling of the various aspect of the project will spell out what administration is.
That is the bringing together of people with a common purpose to achieve a specific recognized goals.
On a broader perspective Administration could be seen as an integral part of any organization.
It is crucial for maintaining and expanding the relevance, effectiveness and productivity of complex institutions.
Such as Government Department, Prisons, School Systems, Universities aFTrO.n," For example, the survival of all our organization, like the School and other institutions is dependent largely on the quality of administrative services available.
Administration therefore influences the results to be achieved, the direction to be pursued, and the priorities to be recognized within the organization.
Administration, according to Enaohwo and Eferakeya (1989) can be defined as the process by which goals are achieved through collective and cooperative human effort in a suitable environment.
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning This definition specifies four important points: • First, Administration is a process, which involves the manipulation of certain operations.
• Second, Administration is goal oriented.
• Thirdly, a collective and cooperative human effort is required in administration, and of a suitable environment, where participants can maximize performance.
i t c p t h p c i r t 1 " S (5 r ri Exercise 1.1 • From the various definitions of Administration mentioned four important points to consider?
• Administration may be defined as 9 • Administration is essentially about "getting things done" Yes/No?
3.1 Who is an Administrator?
In the last 45 minutes, you have been exposed to various definitions and meanings attached to Administration.
The next important concept that you will learn in this unit is who is an Administrator?
There can be no simple statement as to who an administrator is, because our idea of an administrator depends to some extent on our perception of him/her especially of the way he/she carries out the task or deals with problems facing him/her.
For example, the Administrator is regarded by some people as a Director, because the administrator gives orders and gets things done quickly without question In a school situation, the administrator may be regarded as disciplinarian, and a manager because of the way discipline is been handled and the affairs of the school being run.
The Administrator may also be described as the executive head of an organization because of the ways of making decisions and implementing policies and programmes.
In additioran administrator is a coordinator, who has to organize activities in such a way that things must work smoothly, quickly and efficiently.
Other word used to describe the administrator includes; NOUN 5  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 'Boss"Leader", 'Director', 'Adviser', 'Problem solver',' Manager' and so forth.
All these terms mean different things to different people because o f t he c om ple x act i vi tie s t ha t ha ve t o be ca rr ie d o ut i n di ffe re nt organizational settings.
However, in most of these settings, the administrator has to perform certain functions in coordinating the efforts of the people in the organization.
In achieving its primary goals) the administrator must demonstrate certain abilities in making decision< in initiating goals, in inspiring ()theft° act, in understanding and analyzing problems and finding solutions to them.
Indeed, anyone who carries out these and similar activities could rightly be regarded as an administrator.
The administrator uses a body of knowledge as a basis for deriving answers or approached to specific situations.
The Administrator also seeks principles capable of guiding the application of general ideas to specific situations.
Administrators are not charged in random behaviour, there is a definitive behavioural commitment to goal achievement.
Lastly, and administrator can be describ e, as an individual who directs the as affairs of an organization in such a way 'tto achieve its primary goals and objectives and who can get things done quickly and efficiently.
This will involve: • Planning: identify and decide on what to do and how to do it.
• Organizing: to arrange what is to be done in order • Supervising: oversee the activities by rendering expertise.
:•:.• Controlling: to see that things are done based on rules and regulations.
• Evaluating: an assessment of the activities in relation to goals and objectives.
Exercise 1.2 • Mention at least five words that can be used to describe an Administrator?
• List four things that an Administrator must be able to do?
• Itemize the five behavioural commitments of an Administrator 3.1.1 What is Educational Administration?
Now that you understand the meaning of Administration and can describe who is an Administrator, it is important to be able to relate Administration in the context of Education or School Organizations.
To be able to do that, we 6 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning would define Education Administration as a means of achieving the goals of Education through effective and efficient manipulation of available inputs.
Aderonmu & Ehametalor (1981) defined Educational Administration as "essentially a service, activity or tool, through which the fundamental objectives of the educational process may be more fully and efficiently realized".
Educational Administration is therefore concerned with the utilization of adequate resources and the harmonization of relationships and interactions in a suitable environment, in order to foster the attainment of the goals of teaching and learning.
In addition, Educational Administration involves prudent management of resources and high degree of accountability on the part of organizational members.
Finally, Educational Administration broadly means running of educational institutions, which involves guidance, leadership, and controlling of the efforts of individuals in the achievement of the goals of the institution (Ayanniyi 1999).
Educational Administration also involves management of resources; human, material, and evaluation or appraising the result of educational efforts.
In other to drive our discussions home, you will agree with me that administration in an educational organization otherwise known as Educational Administration is aimed at directing all activities towards the attainment of the goals of teaching and learning.
All the people working in an educational institution will have to contribute towards the accomplishment of these goals.
Teachers and other professional staff are involved, such as parents and lay members of the community.
Also involved are members of Schools Boards, Local Education Authorities, Inspectors, Ministries of Education and so forth.
Exercise 1.3 • Identify two major goals of Educational Administration?
• All the people working in an educational institution will contribute towards the accomplishment of these goals.
List at least four categories of such group of people?
NOUN  Concepts and T/,eories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 3.1.2.
The Relevance of Motivation and Communication in Administration It is in the nature and purpose of Administration for people, who have the duty to organize, plan or control a group of others in other to satisfy those people who look for them.
Such heads will want to be sure they are passing down instructions as expected, and that the subordinates are responding appropriately.
When this happens the administration is said to be motivating his workers as well as communicating with them.
These are two important issues for administrator: Motivation and Communication.
Motivation is a factor, which closely affects the performance of work and the overall efficiency of an organization.
Many distinguished scholars have written about motivation: Skinner, Maslow Chris Argyris, Herbzerg, Vroom, Campfield and Douglas Mcgregor.
Our purpose is not to go into all that they have done.
We are interested in how our administrators especially those in Schools can motivate their workers and students to achieve more.
The school will not be able to realize its goals fully until students!, teachers, and administrators themselves are sufficiently motivated.
Motivatron can thus be defined as the inner drive, which prompts people to act in a certain way.
Motivation is concerned more with intangible things such as leadership morale and so on.
From a management point of view, motivation is useful when it is applied to staff to discover what prompts people to behave in a certain way.
When it is applied to schools, it means why certain learners are highly motivated, others moderately and some less, even though the same incentives are available to all.
An outstanding feature of motivation is that if the staff are properly motivated, this can change an otherwise mediocre group into a highly productive team.
Judged purely from the performance of students, schools which have teams of motivated teachers tend to be better than those schools in which qualifications and experiences of staff may not be inferior, but the lack motivation.
Motivation is related to leadership, for good leadership sets an example provides guidance, encouragement, and instruction and can be one of the Greatest motivations of all.
Schools with effective Principals have motivated staff and students.
8 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning The famous Hawthorne experiments in America in the 19205 proved that when staff are consulted about changes, they invariably produce more and better work than previously.
In schools where staff meetings are democratic, and there is also student involvement in sdhool affairs, the teaching efficiency of staff and learning experiences of students tend to be better.
A study of motivation means a study of the causes of human behaviour, rather than its effects.
Many school disputes and problems could easily be avoided if there were better motivation of staff and students.
Knowledge of motivation can help every administrator to understand his subordinates and it can equally be of assistance to top management when framing policies.
Let me summarize the issue of motivation in Administration by saying that there are at least three major ways by which the School Administrator can prepare the proper atmosphere that will motivate his/her staff.
The first is by providing immediate attainable goals towards which the staff should work.
The second way of facilitating motivation among staff is to ensure that means are provided for attaining goals set for the staff Like, high quality teaching, backed up with provision of teaching — learning material and lastly, motivation is provided through feedback, which are immediate and specific.
The comments by an Administrator/ principal must be specific so that teachers have clear notions of what they did well and where they need improvement.
Besides, teachers can be helped to develop self-evaluation skills.
When teachers learn the qualities desired in a performance, and obtain experience in judging their qualities desired in a performance, and obtain experience in judging their own work in terms of these criteria, they are better able to provide their own feed-back.
Exercise 1.4 • In your own words describe motivation?
• List at least four things that a principal of a school can do to motivate his teaching staff?
• Mention two basic things that motivation can do?
My dear students, now that we are sure that motivation is relevant to Administration and Administrative practice, we shall discuss the last aspect of this unit, which has to do with communication.
NOUN 9  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Communication is intended for conveying information, instructions, advice, feelings, opinions, and facts correctly and accurately from one person to another person or group of people.
The above description of communication explains precisely what an administrator does to his workers and therefore justifies the need for good communication by an Administrator.
Good communications help to stimulate enthusiasm and raise the interest and motivation of those to whom they are directed such as staff, students, parents friends and so on.
Communication, is not an inborn thing, every administrator has to learn how to communicate.
For example, teachers are trained in various methods of transmitting skill and knowledge to students.
These methods include clear speaking, writing, etc.
C o m m u n i c a t i o n i s a c e n t r a l c o n c e p t i n t h e s t u d y o f e d u c a t i o n a l administration because it offers an additional concept for examining the school as a social organization.
The goals of the school become known and useful when they are communicated.
Thus, establishing communication is the first task of the administrator.
Like authority, communication involves two people — a sender and a receiver.
An administrator communicates not with himself alone, but with the public, students, teachers and other employees.
Secondly, there must be meaning.
Communication does not take place unless the receiver interprets exactly the information being transmitted.
The school administrator, for instance, wants such receivers as parents, teachers, and students to understand and accept the proposed ideas and the information being transmitted.
As administrators we are always looking for effective communication.
The basic requirements for good communications are as follow: • Have something to say, for example, as a school administrator, you might wish to interpret school policies and instructions, initiate new programmes, what is important in communication is knowing exactly what to say.
• Clarify all your ideas on the subject before seeking to communicate to others.
For instance, if you, as a principal, is going to talk about the school regulation as handed down to you from the ministry, you must know those regulations thoroughly and be aware of their implications for the development of ;your school.
+ Be prepared, prior preparations, requires full consideration of the purpose of communication, the audience, the scope of the subject, where, when and how best to present the will need to decide whether your message will be presented orally, in a face-to-face meeting, or printed in a memo, NOUN 10  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning letter or newspaper.
All these diversities of alternative means of communicating make planning essential.
+ Develop a natural style of delivering your communication.
• Use simple, straight forward language, whenever possible.
• Check and recheck whether your message talk/instruction has been properly understood.
•:* Seek to be understood all the time and also to understand.
Communication is a two-way process.
It is necessary to be a good listener too.
Thus, communication is purposive.
Its primary administrative functions are informing, instructing, or directing someone, evaluating someone or something, and influencing another's thought or behaviour.
(Musaazi 1982).
Exercise 1.5 • Mention two things that the school administrator expects to happen when he/she communicates?
• List at least four basic requirements for good communication?
• Is communication relevant to administration?
Yes/No 4.0 Conclusion In this unit, you have learned the nature and purpose of Administration.
This was done by acquainting you with the basic concept of Administration and t he pr in ci ple s u nde r lyi n g i t s p ra cti ce .
It h a s b ee n ex pl ai ne d that administration is purely and exhibition of rational behaviours, manifested in some behavioural activities such as Planning, Organizing, Supervising, Controlling and Evaluation.
The person who does all the above has been described as an administrator.
The unit also made it clear that Administrator takes place in the context of an organization of which the school belongs.
This reasoning explains the description of Educational Institutions and what is been carried out in terms of achievement of the goals and objectives of teaching and learning as Educational Administration.
The later part of the unit identified two vital issues that could enhance effective and efficient administration.
Such issues as motivation and communication were discussed, emphasizing their relevance and contribution to the process of Administration in Organizations.
NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 5 .
0 S u m ma r y What you have learnt in this unit has exposed you to the meaning of Administration, the concept of 'Administration', the understanding of what Educational Administration is, and a discussion of the relevance of Motivation rid Communication to the practice of Administration.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments • what do you understand by the concept Educational Administration • Imagine you are a principal of a Secondary School, what administrative guidelines would you consider in running the affairs of your school.
7.0 References • A d e ro n un mu , W. O .
& Eh iam eta lo r , E .T .
( 19 8 1 ) In tr o du cti o n to Administration of Schools in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Evans Brothers (Nigeria Publishers Ltd).
• A ya n n i yi R .
B .
( 1 9 9 9 ) " Le a d e r s h i p r o l e s o f t h e P r i m a r y S c h o o l Administrator" Ghana Journal of Education and Teaching.
Published by City Publishers Accra.
Vol.
1, No 1, Pp.
125— 129.
• Boyan, N.J. (1988) Handbook of research on Educational Administration.
New York: Longmans.
• Enaohwo, J.O.
& Eferakaya, 0.0.
(1989) Educational Administration.
Ibadan: Paperback Publishers Limited.
• Hanson, E.M. (1991) Educational Administration and Organizational behaviour Third Edition.
Boston: Ally and Bacon.
• Hoy, W.K.
& Miskel, C.G (1987) Educational Administration: Theory Research and practice Third Edition.
Boston: Ally and Bacon New York: Random House.
• Musaa zi, J .C.
S. (1982 ) The Theo r y an d Practice o f Educati onal Administration London and Basingstoke: the Macmillan Press Ltd • O z i g i , A .
O .
( 1 9 7 7 ) A h a n d b o o k o n S c h o o l A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d Management Lagos: Macmillan Nigeria Publishers Ltd. 12 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Manning Unit 2 Principles and Practices in Organisations Table of contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 What is Organization?
3.1.1 Types of Organization 3.1.2 Principles of Organizations 3.1.3 Organizational Conflict 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 Reference 1.0 Introduction In Unit 1,we studied the nature and purpose of Administration.
We learnt the meaning of Administration, and examined who an Administrator is, in an organizational setting, like the school.
Now, in Unit 2, we will discuss Principles and Practices in Organizations.
We will learn other additional content as specified in the Objectives below.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, you should be able to; C. Describe the concept of organizations C. Identity the two types of organizations NOUN 13 •  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 • Explain the principles of organization Describe organizational conflicts.
3.1 What are Organizations?
We are constantly surrounded by organization.
They employ us, sell to us, provide for us, protect us and give us along with others what we want, need, or are required to do.
An organization may be small (like the mechanic's workshop) or large (like the Federal Ministry of Education).
Large organizations are however, usually complex as they have multiple goals and more people working in them.
One characteristic that all organizations share is that they are composed of people.
These people have in common the fact that their activities are coordinated and that they, therefore cooperate with each other directly or indirectly in other to achieve a goal.
Cooperation in a venture that requires the efforts of a number of people means that actions must occur and jobs be done' in short, people must behave in certain ways so that the organization fulfils its purposes.
In Nigeria for instance, we have organizations like the Nigerian Union of Teachers, the Nigerian Science Teachers Association, the Nigerian University Students Association, the National Association of Educational Administrators and Planners (NAEAP), the Nigerian Chambers of Commerce, the Nigerian Bar Association, Taxi drivers Association, Schools, Colleges, Universities, Hospitals, and so on.
According to Misaazi (1982) organizations are needed to provide a structural framework for communication, command, and coordination of activities and people's efforts.
No enterprise, large or small, can operate successfully when duties are so vaguely defined that everybody can meddle in everything and nobody is responsible for anything.
Therefore, to operate successfully an enterprise, a school or a government unit must have an organizational structure which provides for the clear allocation of functions and responsibilities to the various sections and departments of the establishment: poor organizational structure is often a major cause of inefficiency and indecision.
But a good organization establishes clear lines of responsibility and communication and limit the span of authority and command, so that no one person takes responsibility for more than he can adequately supervise.
From the above explanations it is clear that to describe an organization , one requires the consideration of a number of properties it possesses.
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Eminent researcher has found it difficult to define organizations in general.
Subsequently Musaazi (1982) observed that organizations come into being because certain people have identified a common purpose, have been able to communicate with each other, and have shown willingness to contribute action.
An organization establishes conditions that will enhance the effectiveness of the organization in attaining its goals.
For example, in order to realize the educational goals of a school, we need suitable physical facilities, qualified trained and experienced teachers, motivated learners, who have high aspirations, effective leadership and healthy human relation within the school and with Ministry of Education, and the community at large.
Exercise 1.1 • What are or gani zatio ns?
• Mention some basic characteristics of organization?
• List at least three to four organizations, which you know in Nigeria?
Now, my dear students, let us continue this second unit with a step further by trying to identify the various types of organization that exit.
3.1.1 Types of Organizations C a n yo u r e m e m b e r t h a t o r ga n i za t i o n s a r e h u m a n c r e a t i o n s ?
, t h at organizations makes possible the benefits of modern living?
Are you convinced that organizations help us to order large-scale and complex social life?
Then, be prepared to learn about two different types of Organization that will answer the above questions and many more.
These organizations are often referred to as: • " Fo rmal" Or gani zatio ns • "Informal" Organizations A formal Organization is established basically for purposes of achieving certain goals.
For instance, a Church or a Mosque mainly looks after the spiritual life of its members.
An educational institution produces teachers, lawyers, engineers, economist, etc.
the life of a formal organization is longer than that of the actors in it, because the actors come and go but the organization remains.
Formal Organizations also have long-term objectives; they may be stated clearly or implied.
For example, Schools aim at the production of well- balanced personalities.
This may be stated in the national philosophy and the NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Eminent researcher has found it difficult to define organizations in general.
Subsequently Musaazi (1982) observed that organizations come into being because certain people have identified a common purpose, have been able to communicate with each other, and have shown willingness to contribute action.
An organization establishes conditions that will enhance the effectiveness of the organization in attaining its goals.
For example, in order to realize the educational goals of a school, we need suitable physical facilities, qualified trained and experienced teachers, motivated learners, who have high aspirations, effective leadership and healthy human relation within the school and with Ministry of Education, and the community at large.
Exercise 1.1 • What are organizations?
• Mention some basic characteristics of organization?
• List at least three to four organizations, which you know in Nigeria?
Now, my dear students, let us continue this second unit with a step further by trying to identify the various types of organization that exit.
3.1.1 Types of Organizations C a n yo u r e m e m b e r t h a t o r g a n i za t i o n s a r e h u m a n c r e a t i o n s ?
, t h a t organizations makes possible the benefits of modern living?
Are you convinced that organizations help us to order large-scale and complex social life?
Then, be prepared to learn about two different types of Organization that will answer the above questions and many more.
These organizations are often referred to as: • " Fo rmal" Or gani zatio ns • " Informal" Organizations A formal Organization is established basically for purposes of achieving certain goals.
For instance, a Church or a Mosque mainly looks after the spiritual life of its members.
An educational institution produces teachers, lawyers, engineers, economist, etc.
the life of a formal organization is longer than that of the actors in it, because the actors come and go but the organization remains.
Formal Organizations also have long-term objectives; they may be stated clearly or implied.
For example, Schools aim at the production of well- balanced personalities.
This may be stated in the national philosophy and the 15 NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Ad,ni,,istrajio,, and Planning EDA 811 school programmes butit may also not be mentioned.
However, through total experiences iria School, the aim of turning our balanced personalities may be realized.
In order to make the system work, formal organizations provide means of reporting performance and provide control devices to take care of normal human lapses.
In a school system, test and examinations measure performance and provide feedback to the learner.
Remedial work and extra classes may be organized to upgrade poor performance in order to attain the goals of the school.
Rewards and punishments, and guidance and counseling are commonly used in school situations.
Fo r m al o r gan i za ti on s h a ve wr itt en d oc ume nt s a s th ei r sta tu te s o r constitutions.
Universities have statutes, companies have charters, and political parties have manifestos.
These written documents facilitate the work at all levels of the organization, as duties and responsibilities are laid down.
Membership of formal organizations is gained consciously, at a specific time and usually openly.
It is often difficult to determine the boundaries of an organization, to know definitely where one organization ends and the next one begin, or simply, to discover who is a member of an organization and who is not.
An organization member is someone who participates in the operation of an organization and the selection of its objectives, or both.
With these criteria, we can identity employees as members of an organization.
"Informal" Organizations are contrary to formal organizations.
The informal ones are loosely organized, ill defined, and usually grow spontaneously.
Membership of informal organizations may be gained either consciously or unconsciously, and it is often difficult to determine the exact time when a person becomes a member.
In such organizations one's membership or invol vement ma y j us t gro w thr ou gh time.
The exact nature o f the relationships among the members and even the goals of the organization are unspecified.
Some examples of informal organization are friendship cliques, peer groups and pressure groups.
Informal organizations can be converted to formal ones when the relationship and activities are defined and structured.
For instance, in a school setting, one will find a group of teachers, closely associated, having one voice for or against a person, policy or programme and exerting sufficient influence in the school organization.
Such a group has no official recognition for its activities but the group makes its presence sr decisively felt.
If the group cooperates with the ool management, the organization will run smoothly; if it is in oppo .
on, the organization is bound to have problems in implementing its programme successfully.
There 6 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning are elements of informal organizations in formal organizations, and however much they may be disliked by management, they cannot be disbanded.
The informal organizations often exist by reason of informal channels of communication; that is to say there is more face-to-face communication than communication through document.
From this discussion it is important for management to recognize the existence and importance of the informal organizations.
If properly encouraged it can result in better teamwork, and can assist in achieving the better cooperation and motivation of workers, thus allowing the system to adapt and survive.
We shall continue our discussions on organizations by looking at the general characteristics.
3.1.2 Principles of Organizations You have been informed about the two major types of organization, and I think it is important that you know how to explain the principles or characterization that are common to organization.
In this regard, we shall continue our discussions by listing the important principle as follow: + There should be a clear line of authority form the top to the bottom of the organization, so that it is clear who is responsible to whom.
For example in the organizational chart of a school, we know that the teachers are responsible to the Head of Department (HOD).
While the Head of Department is responsible to the Principal, and the Principal to the Ministry of Education.
• Every worker should be immediately responsible to one senior only, not to several executives in the concern, otherwise confusion and conflicts may arise.
+ Authority must always be commensurate with responsibility.
If a person is given a lot of responsibilities and a little authority, he/she will not be effective in discharging his/her responsibilities.
+ Have one executive responsible for the flow of information (i.e.
communication of policies) from the managing body so that distortion in communication can be kept to a minimum.
+ Ensure that the span of control is appropriate; that is, do not assign to an administrator more persons than he can supervise.
+ Have the right degree of central control but with maximum decentralization.
NOUN 17  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning ELM P 811 Make the best use of specialists and the principle of specialization, because in complex, modern organizations, no single person can be all-knowing, however, highly placed he may be.
• Ensure that the responsibility and authority of each executive is defined to avoid isolation and interference.
<• Ensure that the organization includes built-in ways of co-ordinating the work of the organization, so that the executive does not have to resort to 'reminders' in normal times.
• Ensure that the organization provides good lines of communication both upwards and across levels of management.
• The number of levels of management should not be unnecessarily excessive, because it makes the whole organization clumsy and communication is likely to be distorted and slow down.
<• Ensure that responsibility is allocated for the whole of the work of the concern, otherwise something might not be done.
• Simply because it was nobody's jot to do it.
Exercise 1.2.
• is the school a formal or informal organization?
• Mention two formal organizations that you know?
• List at least three informal organizations?
• Outline five to six principles in organizations?
Well done for taking part in this discussion.
Now we shall move on to another interesting aspect of this unit.
3.1.3 Organizational Conflict Conflict is often regarded as the central problem of human society.
Presently, it has been revealed that conflict is inevitable in human interaction because of the nature of man, and it is regarded as having positive, and constructive functions in any organization and not just the disruptive aspects.
(Ayanniyi 1990).
In Schools conflict often occur but some school managers are not fully equipped with the management of conflict we mean efforts made by NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning administrators to establish conditions by which conflicts can lead to mutual exploration and new levels of consensus in problem solving.
Conflict is sometimes seen as a break down of the standard mechanism of decision-making or the process of operation of an organization so that the members experience difficulties in selecting an alternative action or performing their duties.
This is based on the premise that for an organization to function well there should be needs of the organization and those of its members.
And when there is a difference between them there is conflict.
Getzels & Guba (1957) in their homothetic ideographic model, observed that there are two components of behaviour in a social system; that which is conceived of as arising institutional goals and fulfilling goal expectation, and the other emanating from individual goals and fulfilling personality disposition.
Both may be congruent or incongruent.
When the individual performs his role according to the needs of organization, we get a congruent situation, but when the incumbent of a post does not behave according to the role expectation there is conflict, which is due to the gap between personality needs and organizational needs.
Basically, role conflict consist of three types: • In t r a - r o l e c o n fl i c t - o c c u r s w h e n t h e p o s i t i o n a n i nc u m b e nt h a s incompatible or competing role expectation by occupants of complementary position.
This means the behaviour of the office holder conflicts with expectations of people in complementary positions.
• Inter-role conflict - occurs when a person occupies more than one focal role and expectation of the various roles conflict.
• Role ambiguity — occur when there is wide variations among people about the expectations for an incumbent of a particular position.
Now my dear student, it will interest you to want to know some of the situations that could cause conflict in school It is essential to note that most school conflicts occur when some group feel that authority is been used to their disadvantage or is being misused; or some groups feel they are powerless, or that a decision by a body in authority reduces the power they currently held.
On cultural values and beliefs, different groups could have various divergent values and philosophy about the goals of education, what shall be taught, and how it should be taught as well as what the behaviour of students in the school should be.
NOUN 19  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 In addition, there could be existing antagonism between individuals, between ethnic groups or between other groups, which makes people to take side.
It must also be recognized that some school conflicts occur in response to policies or changes promulgated by school administration.
When an individual or a group is in support of the new or is dissatisfied with an issue.
The above conflict situation, when addressed, will give the following feedback, in the form of: 4.
Opportunity granted them to express their grievance.
• Promises to look into the issue within a short time.
4• A sign or indication that their expression of feelings has been given a deserving attention.
This suggest that in an organization, the administrator should be accessible, receptive, friendly, listen to the feelings of his subordinates and be trustworthy.
Whereas if the complainants receives a negative feedback, the conflict could be escalated.
And this could be as a result of the fact that the administrator is unfriendly, unreceptive, inaccessible and hostile to the group.
Such conflict could increase to affect the whole school.
We shall now round up our discussion of organizational conflicts by giving you how to manage conflicts.
1.
Understand that conflict is inventible in social interaction and conflicts can have positive functions.
2.
Remember that members of the school teachers, student will actively try to participate and influence the administration's decision making.
3.
Note that power, authority, and values and beliefs are areas that often cause conflicts in schools.
4.
Note that positive feedbacks to people with grievances could minimize occurrence of conflict or reduce its intensity.
5.
Remember that information and facts about conflicts need to be handled quickly and widely disseminated.
6.
Note that third parties intervention in helping to resolve school conflict is often helpful.
Exercise 1.3 • Mention the three types of role conflict that you have learnt?
• Identify three basic characteristics of issues that could cause conflicts in schools?
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning • Suggest at least three things that the manager needs to know in conflict situations?
Good Luck!
4.0 Conclusion The fact that human being make up a vital part of any organization is no secret.
No organization could possibly exist without some contribution of human beings to set and implement policies, and do the work of the enterprise.
Therefore organization has to live with and meet the problems together to achieve a common end.
This has been the crux of this unit discussion, with particular emphasis on the school as an organization.
5 .
0 S u m m a r y In this unit we have learnt the principles and practices in organization.
We tried to elaborate on this title by discussing what organizations are; the basic types of organiztions were identified.
The principles underlying the existence of organization were explained and the resultant conflict situations in organizations were decribed.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment (TMAs) Administrators are expected to integrate both "formal" and "informal" organizations in order to achieve both effectiveness and efficiency.
Discuss this view with particular reference to the school situation.
7.0 References Argyris, C. (1960) Understanding Organizational Behaviour Homewood, III: Dorsey Press.
Ayanniyi R.B.
(1990) An Analysis of conflict resolutions in the School System: Seminar paper faculty of Education A.B.U.
Zaria.
School review, XLV, pg.
423-14 Khan, R.L.
and Boulding E. (1964) Power and Conflict in Organization New York: Basic Books.
Musaazi J.C.S (1982) The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration London and Basingstoke Macmillan Press Ltd. NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Unit 3 Historical Trends in the Development of Educational Administration Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 1 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Contributions of Early Industrialist to the Development of Administration and Organization 3.1.1 Robert Owen (1771 — 1858) 3.1.2 Charles Babbage (1792 — 1871) 3.1.3 Henry L. Gantt (1861 — 1919) 3.1.4 Harrington Emerson (1853 — 1931) 4.0 Conclusions 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In Unit 2, we studied the principles and practices of organizations.
For us to properly understand this, we explained what organizations are, and identified the various types of organizations.
In addition we learnt the principles of organization and discussed organizational conflicts.
In Unit 3, we will trace the historical trend of the development of Educational Administration.
This will assist us to understand the emergence of subsequent administrative theories in educational administration.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, the learners should be able to: Explain the major developments in the history of Educational Administration.
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.1 Contributions of Early Industrialist to the Development of Administration and Organization The study of administration in general as a specific area of knowledge began in the early parts of the 1800s with the efforts of men such as Robert Owen, Charles Babbage and Henry L. Gantt and Harrington Emerson.
These people felt that if business and industrial enterprises were to be profitable, some ascertain methods of job performances have to be introduced into the organization.
We shall examine the contributions of each person to our understanding of administration and organization.
3.1.1 Robert Own 1771 — 1958) In the early 1800, Robert Owen a self-made businessman in the cotton- spinning industry was stressing the importance of the human aspect in production.
He was critical of manufacturers for their preoccupation with improving machines, specializing labour and cutting cost, yet neglecting to understand and invest in the human element.
Owen's idea is based on the following: a) That the labour force is a system composed of many parts; b) That it is the duty and interest of the Chief Executive to combine the efforts of these parts; c) That every human resource and material resource should be effectively coordinated to produce the greatest amount of gain to the proprietors; d) That experience has shown that there is a marked difference in the outputs between equipment and materials which are neat, clean, well- arranged, and always in a high state of repair, and those which are allowed to be dirty, in disorder, without the means of preventing unnecessary friction, much out of repair.
He emphasized that if the conditions of inanimate machines can produce such beneficial result, the more reason why it is necessary to devote equal attention to the essential machines (the human resources), which are far more wonderfully constructed.
Hello!
Students, I guess you are itching to express you total support to the ideas of Robert Owen.
Certainly that is noted.
But NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 let us continue, to trace the history and contribution of these early developers of administration.
3.1.9 Charles Babbage (1 792 — 1871) Another early pioneer in the development of management principles was Charles Babbage.
He was the forerunner of what is now commonly referred to as the scientific management theory, which will be discussed later, in the next unit.
Some of Babbage's contribution to knowledge includes the following: a) He was the first to demonstrate the first practical mechanical calculator, which had all the basic ingredients of a modern calculator.
b) He developed gaming programmes for his computer — these were a forerunner to modern business gaming techniques.
c) He invented his own engine, and its manufacturer got him interest in Management.
d) He analyzed the process of various job performances, the kinds of skills involved, and suggestions for improving the process of task performance.
He was a strong proponent of the idea of division of labour through specialization.
He advocated the mutuality of interests between workers and employers (this is similar to what Taylor did seventy five years later) g) He devised a profit sharing scheme.
Without doubt, Babbage was a man of great foresight in management.
He laid sound foundations upon which offers others built later on.
Exercise 1.1 • Mention at least three important things Charles Babbage introduced into management.
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.1.3 Henry L. Gantt (1861 —1919) Gantt was a protégé of Frederick Taylor like Taylor.
He promoted the ideas of: a Mutual cooperation between labour and management.
a Scientific selection of workers.
a Financial Incentives to stimulate productivity.
a Use of detailed work instructions Gantt devised a bonus system, which guaranteed the worker a given rate for meeting the day's standard and then paid a bonus for exceeding that standard.
This was a departure from Taylor's differential piecework plan.
Gantt is best known for his development of graphic aids to management planning, coordination and control of production.
The essential element of his thinking was scheduling around time instead of around quantities, which to the period of the World War I had been the practice.
Our modern production planning and control devices as well as the computerized programme.
Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) are founded on the principles of planning and controlling times and cost, which Gantt pioneered.
Students, I guess you are finding this history exciting; it is all about the development of Administration.
Let us now continue with the last in the series of early developers of Administration.
3.1.4 Harrington Emerson (1853 — 1931) Waste and inefficiency were the problems Emerson saw as plaguing the industrial system, and he attributed these to lack of organization.
He advocated a chief of staff, with four heads reporting to him Each head would plan and advise in a special area.
One for example, would be responsible for everything relating to the well-being of employees; a second for equipment; a third for mutual; and a forth, standard and accounting.
Their advice would be available to all levels in the organization.
Emerson advocated leaving supervision and authority with those directly responsible, but they would operate on the basis of the planning and advice by the specialists.
Emerson is best known for his twelve principles of efficiency.
These principles are summarized below: a) Clearly defined ideas — agreement among all involved as to the objectives of the organization; NOUN 5  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning LIMP 811 b) Common sense — managers taking a large view of problems and seeking knowledge and advice wherever it can be found; c) Competent Counsel — building a competent staff; d) Discipline — adherence to organizational rules; e) Fair deal — fairness in dealing with workers; 0 Reliable, immediate, accurate and permanent records — information and accounting systems; g) Dispatching — planning and routing work; h) Standards and Schedules — methods and times for task; i) Standardized conditions; Standardized operations k) Written standard practice, instructions; and 1) Efficiency reward — incentive plan Exercise 1.2 List at least five of Emerson's principle of efficiency.
Mention the four "heads" as advocated by Emerson Now we have come to the end of this discussion.
If you have been able to follow and also attempt these exercises, then well done!
4.0 Conclusion D e v e l o p m e n t h a s a l w a ys b e e n i n a d i d a c t i c a l t r e n d , a n d t h a t o f Administration is no exception.
Our discussion in this unit was meant to enlighten us on the trend of development, which ushered in the practice of Administration.
These ideas were developed, in order to disproof old ones and sometimes discard them.
One thing that was prominent for all these administrative development was the need to improve on the functions of administrations in any organization.
These developments later found relevance in the area of education.
61 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 5 .0 Summary In this unit, we have examined the historical trend in the development of Educational Administration, by outlining the various contributions of early industrialist like, Robert Owen, Charles Babbage, Henry Gantt and Harrington Emerson, to organizational growth.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment • Summarize the major contributions of Robert Owen to Personnel Management.
.0 Discuss the extent to which the principle of Owen's theory of Personnel 9 Management of School Organizations.
el 7.0 References George, Jr. C. S. (1972).
The History of Management Thought.
New Jersey: Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall Inc. Halpin, A. W. (1958).
Administrative Theory in Education.
London: Macmillan Company.
Hoy, W. K. and Miskel, C. G. (1978).
Educational Administration: Theory, Research and Practice.
New York: Random House.
NOUN 7  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 5 .
0 S u m ma r y In this unit, we have examined the historical trend in the development of Educational Administration, by outlining the various contributions of early industrialist like, Robert Owen, Charles Babbage, Henry Gantt and Harrington Emerson, to organizational growth.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment - Summarize the major contributions of Robert Owen to Personnel Management.
Discuss the extent to which the principle of Owen's theory of Personnel S Management of School Organizations.
(7 0 e 7.0 References George, Jr. C. S. (1972).
The History of Management Thought.
New Jersey: Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall Inc. Halpin, A. W. (1958).
Administrative Theory in Education.
London: Macmillan Company.
Hoy, W. K. and Miskel, C. G. (1978).
Educational Administration: Theory, Research and Practice.
New York: Random House.
NOUN 7  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 5 .
0 S ummar y In this unit, we have examined the historical trend in the development of Educational Administration, by outlining the various contributions of early industrialist like, Robert Owen, Charles Babbage, Henry Gantt and Harrington Emerson, to organizational growth.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment s Summarize the major contributions of Robert Owen to Personnel Management.
- Discuss the extent to which the principle of Owen's theory of Personnel Management of School Organizations.
C f 7.0 References George, Jr. C. S. (1972).
The History of Management Thought.
New Jersey: Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall Inc. Halpin, A. W. (1958).
Administrative Theory in Education.
London: Macmillan Company.
Hoy, W. K. and Miskel, C. G. (1978).
Educational Administration: Theory, Research and Practice.
New York: Random House.
NOUN 7  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 unt The Scientific Management Movement Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Frederick W. Taylor (1856 — 1915) 3.1.1 Implications of these ideas to Educational System 3.1.2 Henri Fayol (1841 — 1925) 3.1.3 Urwick and Gulick (1937) 3.1.4 Implications of POSDCORD" to educational system 4.0 Conclusions 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1 0 Introduction Our last discussion in Unit 3 was on the historical trend of the development of educational administration.
In unit 4, we shall be studying the Classical Organizational thought / Scientific Management Movement, its emergence and contribution to the practice of Administration in organizations.
We will learn other additional content as will be specified in the objectives below: 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit you should be able to: Explain Frederick Taylor's Scientific Management Movement.
List Taylor's essential points in the Principles of Management Discuss Henri Fayol ideas, as it affects production in organizations.
Describe the administrative duties of an executive using the acronym "POSDCORB" 1 8 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.1 Scientific Management Movement Frederick W. Taylor (1856— 1915) Frederick Winslow Taylor has been credited as the originator and principal contributor to the Scientific Management Movement, and often referred to as the father of the Scientific Management Movement.
Taylor worked in the Midvale Street Company is Pennsylvania, U.S.A in the following capacities, a labourer, clear, machinist, foreman, chief draftsman and a chief engineer.
His various experiences at different levels of the organization enabled him to note that there was a substantial amount of inefficiency prevalent in the performance of all task at the operational level.
This inefficiency is partly a result of the fact that worked were in charge of both planning and performing their jobs.
This situation he felt, led to much waste.
Taylor saw that there was a gap existing between actual production and costs, and potential production and cost, and was concerned with this gap if his scientific principles were applied.
The crux of his ideas was the need for proper work methods and standards derived from scientific study of each job and its requirements.
Taylor therefore, believed that the remedy for curing this inefficiency lay in scientifically designed jobs.
Much of Taylor's research work was focused on the following ideas: Improvement of working tools Analysis and innovation of work method Enforced standardization of work method Enforced cooperation These principles have been summarized by authors and in some cases; excerpts, which reveal the characteristics of the element of management, have been presented.
Villers (1960, p. 29) has summarized Taylor's principle of scientific management in six steps as follows: 1) Time-study Principle: All productive effort should be measured by accurate time study and a standard time established for all work done on the shop.
2) Piece-rate Principle: Wages should be proportional to output and their rates ba sed o n the sta ndard s determined b y time stud y.
As a NOUN 29 S.  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.1 Scientific Management Movement Frederick W. Taylor (1856— 1915) Frederick Winslow Taylor has been credited as the originator and principal contributor to the Scientific Management Movement, and often referred to as the father of the Scientific Management Movement.
Taylor worked in the Midvale Street Company is Pennsylvania, U.S.A in the following capacities, a labourer, clear, machinist, foreman, chief draftsman and a chief engineer.
His various experiences at different levels of the organization enabled him to note that there was a substantial amount of inefficiency prevalent in the performance of all task at the operational level.
This inefficiency is partly a result of the fact that worked were in charge of both planning and performing their jobs.
This situation he felt, led to much waste.
Taylor saw that there was a gap existing between actual production and costs, and potential production and cost, and was concerned with this gap if his scientific principles were applied.
The crux of his ideas was the need for proper work methods and standards derived from scientific study of each job and its requirements.
Taylor therefore, believed that the remedy for curing this inefficiency lay in scientifically designed jobs.
Much of Taylor's research work was focused on the following ideas: Improvement of working tools Analysis and innovation of work method Enforced standardization of work method Enforced cooperation These principles have been summarized by authors and in some cases; excerpts, which reveal the characteristics of the element of management, have been presented.
Villers (1960, p. 29) has summarized Taylor's principle of scientific management in six steps as follows: 1) Time-study Principle: All productive effort should be measured by accurate time study and a standard time established for all work done on the shop.
2) Piece-rate Principle: Wages should be proportional to output and their rates ba sed o n the sta ndard s determined b y time stud y.
As a NOUN 29 I.
________________________________________________________________________________  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 corollary, worker should be given the highest grade of work, which he is capable.
3) Separation-of-planning-from-performance principle: Management should take over from the workers the responsibility for planning the work, and making the performance physically possible.
Planning should be based on time studies and other data related to production, which are scientifically determined and systematically classified; it should be facilitated by standardization of tools, implements, and method.
4) Scientific-methods-of-work-principle: Management should take-over from the workers, the responsibility for their methods and train workers accordingly.
5) Managerial-control principle: Managers should be trained and taught to apply scientific principles of management and control (such a management by exception and comparison will valid standards).
6) Functional-Management Principle: The strict application of military principles should be considered and the industrial organization should be so designed that it best serves the purpose of improving the coordination of activities among the various specialist.
Taylor also advocated the following: Law is the chief basis for efficient management; whatever we do must be explained scientifically.
For example: why do people come to work?
Why do they produce?
Human behaviour needs to be explained and this should aim at efficient management.
Management is therefore a scientific way of making human beings produce more.
Good life of the worker must be brought about by monetary rewards.
Administration should be inter-related with the personal aspirations of the people in the industry i.e.
Workers.
Hello students!
If you have been following these discussions, what are your comments on Taylor's ideas of management?
Hold it and let me just mention a few, while you add the others.
30 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.1.1 Implications of Scientific Management Ideas to the Educational System The implications of Taylor's ideas of management for educators are worth considering.
In trying to emphasize productivity, Taylor and his associate tend to reduce human beings into rational machine.
In a way this action could be a barrier to innovation and the development of one's skills.
The implication of this mechanistic approach to work in schools is that the work of the teacher will have to be reutilized.
Thus the teacher cannot deviate from his prepared lesson notes to teach or demonstrate other important issues that would have been useful to the students.
Definitely this makes the work of the teacher boring and unexciting.
Even in our ministries of education various approaches or methods are applied in solving different issues or problems, which would also make Taylor's mechanistic and standardized approach to management difficult to operate.
Moreover, productivity emphasized by Taylor cannot suffice as the sole end of education.
For example, the number of passes in examinations, and the volume of lecture ,notes received by students are not the only measures of educational productivity.
It should be noted that education involves the human mind, and as such some of the benefits of education cannot be easily quantified and precisely mechanized.
On this basis, therefore, to say that remuneration should be commensurate with the volume of work done could be difficult to apply in the school setting.
The actual amount of work done by the teacher is difficult to measure.
According to Musaazi (1982) we could agree with Taylor that economic considerations is one of the factors that motivates people to work, its importance should not be over emphasized at the expense of the workers psychological needs.
Workers also need kind, sympathetic, honest, impartial, considerate and accommodating administrators.
All these can sometimes be more important than just monetary rewards.
Because teaching is a task that is focused on the learners, who are human beings with their individual differences.
Both the teachers and pupils learn from one another.
They also need rest and cannot be treated like machines.
In addition the role of the teacher in the overall development of the child cannot be overlooked.
Thus the teacher cannot pretend to be so impersonal and simply task-oriented.
To suggest that work should be standardized for teachers is also unrealistic.
Teachers are, unlike machines, individuals with their own differences.
These differences influence greatly the way they handle their teaching assignments.
Therefore, teachers cannot use one method of teaching.
Similarly, the NOUN 31  Concepts and 'Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Ministries of Education are rather too complex to permit standardization of work activities in their operations.
In spite of all these limitations of Taylor's ideas of management, nevertheless, some of his ideas could be helpful when applied to the school system.
For example, his view, those members of the organization should know the aims and objectives of their duties are very important.
Both school administrators and teachers must know the objectives of their schools.
If the task of the teacher or the worker in the Ministry is well defined, he stands a better chance of performing it well.
This will also facilitate accountability.
However, Taylor's idea of rigid control could hinder initiative and lead to much bureaucracy or group thinking especially in the headquarters of the Ministries of Education.
Taylor's view on staff selection and training is very useful if properly applied in our educational institutions.
In this way, qualified teachers and ministry personnel will be assigned to the right types of jobs while training could be used to improve the efficiency of the workers (teachers, ministry officials).
His own idea of the provision of appropriate tools and materials to the workers is also very relevant to schools.
Teachers, students and even workers in the Ministries of education need to be provided with necessary and up-to-date equipment in order to promote their work.
For example, students need textbooks, visual aids, science equipment, laboratories and so on.
We also need to have well trained teachers and school administrators in our schools, if our educational objectives are to be achieved.
Exercise 1.1 Mention at least two things that were the focus of Taylor's ideas of management.
List two of the views that Taylor advocated.
3.1.2 Henri Fayol (1841 — 1925) Another important component of classical theory of administration is that presented by Henri Fayol (1841 — 1925).
Henri Fayol adopting the scientific process of inquiry like Taylor developed some principles of management, which invariably complemented the work of Frederick W. Taylor.
32 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning He was born in 1841, a French Engineer who advocated the efficiency cult aimed at increasing productivity of workers.
Unlike Taylor, Fayol concentrated on the top management (Managing Director) and worked downwards to the lowest organizational member.
He separated the process of administration from the operations in the organization, such as production.
He was of the view that production is different from administration, and that the production subsistence of the organization is brought about by the administration.
He defined administrative behaviour that is the functional element of administrative task as follows: To plan — means to study the future and arrange the plan of operations.
To command — To ensure that the staff do their work.
To coordinate — means to unite and correlate all activities.
To control — means to see that everything is done in accordance to the rules , and instructions laid down (Gullick and Urwick, 1937, p.119).
Fayol's fourteen Principles of Management.
Fa yol 's principle s o f management prescribed certain strategies for structuring behaviours in organizational life in order to achieve efficiency and effectiveness.
Fayol formulated fourteen principles of management as follows: Division of Work: Division of work or specialization increases productivity.
The more skilled the labour and management the higher productivity, because one can work at activities in which he is most capable.
Both technical and managerial skills are required for efficient performance of organizational duties and this can be achieved through specialization.
Authority and Responsibility: Authority connotes the right to give orders.
Authority is therefore required to control the behaviours of organizational participants.
Appropriate sanctions are required to encourage good and d i sc o ur a ge po o r pe r fo r ma nce .
A n o r ga n i za ti on al mem be r ha s responsibility to accomplish the organizational objectives of position.
Discipline: There must be respect for and obedience to the rules and objectives of the organization.
According to Hicks and Gullet (1976) this NOUN means and requires "(1) Good superiors at all levels; (2) Agreements as clear and fair as possible; (3) Sanctions (penalties) judiciously applied".
e-0  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning ED/ti' 811 Unity of Command: To m i n i m i ze c o n fu s i o n a n d c o n fl i c t s e a c h subordinate should receive orders and be responsible to one super- ordinate.
Unity of Direction: This implies unity of purpose.
An organization is more effective when everyone work towards the same objectives.
Subordination of Individual Interest: The interest of one employee or group should not prevail over the interest of the organization.
Corollary, the interest of the whole supersedes the interest of the parts.
Remuneration: Pay according to performance.
Pay should be fair and not exploitative.
Different modes of payment and incentives should be used.
Centralization: There should be a balance between concentration and distribution of authority in the organization.
Implicit in this principle is delegation of authority.
Scalar Chain: There is a scalar chain or hierarchy linking various levels and all members according to the unity of command.
Considering the difficulty of communicating directly in large organizations based on the unity of command, Fayol suggested the "Gang plank", as a way out.
In this respect members occupying the same level in the organizational hierarchy can contact directly without necessarily going through their super-ordinates.
Order: Fayol suggested that there should be systematic arrangement of functions for everyone in the organization.
Equity: Fairness, cordiality, kindness, and justice, based on predetermined norms.
Stability of Tenure of Personnel: Time is required for an employee to get used to new work and succeed in doing it well.
Job security should be used to reward good performance.
Esprit de Corps: "Unity is Strength".
Superior performances come from a feeling of oneness, belongingness, pride and loyalty.
(Enaohwo, J.
0. and Eferakeya, 0.
A.
(1989)) Students, it is now time for us to examine the views of others who sought to refine Fayol's ideas.
34 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.1.3 Urwick and Gulick (1937) In 1937, Urwick and Gulick became more sophisticated in their analysis and approach.
They worked more on Fayol's element of administration and provided more articulate and up-to-date principle of management.
According to Hoy and Miskel (1978:5) Gulick in answer to the question, "What is the work of the Chief Executive?"
responded "POSDCORB'.
The acronym depicted seven administrative procedures: planning, organizing, staffing, directing coordinating, reporting and budgeting.
These functions overlap, and the performance of one cannot be neatly separated from the other.
In this sense, management can be viewed as a composite process.
In the views of Enaohwo & Eferakeya (1989), a more complete function of a manager, however should include, "evaluation".
From this perspective the acronym "POSDCORB" should become "POSDCORBE" where the letter "E" represents evaluation.
This is because the reporting function of the administrator does not embrace the function of evaluation; consequently, reporting should be viewed as an aspect of evaluation.
This is why the Gulickian acronym has been extended to "POSDCORBE".
This addition it is hoped will enable us to describe fully the scope of administrative duties.
Now students, don't you think these ideas could be applicable to our schools today?
Let us give a few illustrations with examples.
3.1.5 Implications of "POSDCORB" to the Educational System Planning involves a definition of goals and objectives.
It is a process as well as a means of orienting the institution towards goals.
So, in schools we set out in advance a pattern of activities and actions that are suppose to bring about the attainment intended school goals.
In determine what is to be done, we cover a number of decisions related to the clarification of schools objectives, establishing school policies that will help to realize the goals.
We finally set out programmes and specific methods and procedures of implantation.
In most Nigerian schools the Vice Principal or the Senior Master often plans the school timetable.
We know that organizing is the process of determining the activities to be performed in order to achieve the objectives of an institution.
It is through organizing that the task of an institution are subdivided and then related and arranged to create an operating unity.
Organizing entails the grouping of NOUN 5  Concept: and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 activities inter-related manner, assigning these responsibilities and assembling the resources.
E.g.
the games master of a school could be charged with the responsibility of organizing an Inter-house Athletics Competition.
When it comes to directing we refer to motivating, influencing, guiding or stimulating the actions of people towards the attainment of the desired organizational objectives.
In this sense, direction is a part of supervision.
The act of coordination is also important in our school systems.
Coordination refers to the process of bringing related activities together.
The larger the school, the greater is the need for coordination; Coordination is therefore necessary in all areas of the school if the head teacher is to provide effective leadership.
Reporting, that is when we keep the executive informed as to what is going on.
Budgeting: This relates to all that goes with budgeting in the form of fiscal planning, accounting and control.
Evaluation: The role of the school administrator also involves evaluating staff and students.
He reports on the performance of teachers, support staff and students.
To do this effectively, he needs to monitor the activities of his subordinates and clients.
Supervision is also inclusive in the duty of the principal in evaluation.
4.0 Conclusion The development of management thought has been and will continue to be evolutionary in nature.
The scientific management era was the forerunner of the human relation era and both of them together provided the foundation for the classical era.
It should be noted that the fact that the new concepts were developed did not mean that preceding ones were unsound.
As conditions change, approaches to management must necessarily change.
The scientific management movements placed new emphasis on achieving increased output and efficiency.
The mood of the scientific management system is rational, logical, impersonal, austere, orderly, mechanical, conforming, highly controlled and task-oriented.
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 5 .
0 S u m m a r y In this unit we discussed the scientific management movement, highlighting the contributions of Fredrick Taylor, Henri Fayol, Urwick and Gulick.
We observed that Taylor worked from the individual workers upward with emphasis on workers and the resources for work.
While Henri Fayol was concerned with the top management (Managing Director) down to the workers.
Urwick and Gulick were seen as the refinementalist who amplified and articulated the functions of the manager as "POSDCORB" the acronym meaning: Planning, Organizing, Staffing, Directing, Coordinating, Reporting and Budgeting.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMAs) Discuss the contributions of the Scientific Management Movement Ideas to the Development of Education in Nigeria.
7.0 References Enaohwo, J. O. and Eferakeya, O.
A.
91989).
Educational Administration.
Ibadan: Paper Book Publishers Ltd. Fayol, H. (1944).
General and Industrial Management.
Ran Constance Storrs, London, Sir Isaac pitman and Sons Pp 5-6.
Getzels, J. W. Lipham, J. M. and Campbell, R. F. (1978).
Educational Administration as a Social Process: Theory, Research, Practice.
New York, Harper and Row Publishers.
Pp 41 — 44.
Gulick, L. and Urwick L. (1937) ed.
Papers on the Science of Administration.
New York, Institute of Public Administration, Columbia University Pp 13 - 15 Hicks, H. G. and Gullet, C. R. (1976).
Organizations: Theory and Behaviour.
McGraw-Hill Kogakusha Limited.
Pp 163 — 176.
Hoy, Wik and Miskel, C. G. (1978).
Educational Administration: Theory, Research and Practice.
New York, Random House, Inc. Pp 4 —5 Musaazi, J. C. S. (1982).
The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
Nigeria: Macmillan Press.
NOUN 37  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 The Human Relations Perspective Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Mary Parker Follet (1868— 1933) 3.1.1 The Forms of Conflict - Solution 3.1.2 Elton Mayo (Social Skills) 3.1.2 Some Major Contributions of Human Relationist to Administration 3.1.4 Criticism of the Human Relationist Idea 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction In Unit 4, we studied the Scientific Management Movement, with a focus on Frederick Taylor and Henri Fayol's ideas on increased productivity, workers efficiency and managers administrative duties.
Our study of Unit 5 is titled "The Human Relations Perspective".
This will concentrate on some additional views of how to manage organizations with emphasis on the human aspect of administration.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: Describe Mary Parker Follett's ideas Identify the three forms of conflict and solution Explain the contribution of Elton Mayo's ideas.
Examine the major contributions of Human Relations to Administration.
38 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.0 Marry Parker Feller (1868 — 1933) Marry Parker Follett was among the first people to recognize the importance of human factors in administration.
She wrote several brilliant papers dealing with the human side of administration.
Marry Follett believed that the fundamental problem in all organizations was in developing and maintaining dynamic and harmonious relationships.
Follet's papers set the stage for research efforts of Elton Mayo, F. J. Roethlisbergs and William J. Dickson.
They conducted the famous Hawthorne experiment, between 1924- 1932.
Under the sponsorship of the National Research Council, the experiments were conducted in the Hawthorne Works of the Western Electric Company in Circero, Illinois, near Chicago.
The first purpose of the experiment was to determine the effect of physical factors on productivity.
The result of which indicated that there was no relationship between illuminations and productivity.
The second series of experiments in April 1927 were conducted to determine factors responsible for achieving increased productivity in industrial systems.
Utilizing a small sample size of six females who were telephone relay assemblers, the experimentalists observed them under controlled environment.
Changes were made frequently in the working periods and working hours.
Formal and close supervision strategies were eliminated.
The researchers observed that the productivity of the subjects increased.
E ventuall y, it wa s concluded t hat the s ocial o r hu man relationships among the operators, researchers, and supervisors were more important in determining productivity, than changes in the working conditions.
The researchers also concluded that the study group achieved high moral because of the special attention that was given to them.
Thus the contributions of human relationist to our understanding of organizational behaviour.
Fundamental to this, is the knowledge that organizations have social and emotional aspects in addition to service or economic goals.
Marry Parker Follett argued that the individual should be given enough opportunity to develop through better human relationships.
She contended that the process of production is important to the welfare of the Society, as the products of production.
That such welfare is not only monetary but also how workers relate to one another.
Students, it is now time for us to listen attentively to one of the special areas of administration, which Mary Follett introduced.
Mary Parker Follett introduced the concept of conflict in administration; she believes that administrative process was always with conflict solution of which there were three forms.
She argues that conflict is a healthy situation, NOUN 39  Coneepis and Theories of Educational Administraiion and Planning EDA 811 and any group should be able to manage its conflict.
The ability to manage such conflict shows some extent of maturity.
Conflict she said should not be a confrontation.
3.1.1 Three Forms of Conflict — Solution Domination: This is a situation in which victory is unilateral, that is to say that as administrators, we should be able to come out with a unilateral solution, to a particular problem.
Compromise: This is the situation in which.each side agrees to make concessions and arrive at certain solutions to narrow down areas of disagreement.
According to Mary Follett, this situation is a human relation component.
People cannot come to compromise if the human relation is not smooth.
Integration: In which neither side claims victory.
In this aspect the administrator comes out with a new idea and this comes out to be useful to both sides i.e.
the victory given to the administrator.
The administrator stands to benefit from the new idea.
The human aspect comes in because the administrator should be able to convince himself and the two bodies involved.
Exercise 1.1 Identify two main conclusions that could be drawn from the Hawthorne experiment.
3.1.2 Elton Mayo (Social Skills) Mayo's views could be summed up in a statement that "much can be gained by carrying greater personal consideration to the low level employment" (Enaohwo and Eferakeya, 1989).
He stressed the needs of the individual in the organization.
He emphasizes the importance of acquiring social skills that will enable us to get along with one another.
For example, a good sense of humour could be seen as a social skill, a good command of the language of communication in the organization and so on.
Lastly, he urged that administrators should be tactful, they should know the psychology of the workers, they should be humane, and at the same time quite firm, when decisions are to be taken.
He stressed the ability to be able to handle human beings socially.
40 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.1.3 Some Major Contributions of Human Relations to Administration Administrators' work with and through people in order to accomplish the purposes of the organization, and therefore sensitivity to the human factor is an important first step in their work.
This step is required so as to motivate teachers and others in the school system.
Administration is a shared responsibility and therefore the organizational structure should allow a free interplay of ideas in order to minimize the rigidity by hierarchical structures.
The economic incentive (salaries) is not the only significant motivator.
Non- economic social sanctions limit the effectiveness of economic incentives.
For example, the teacher who is appointed head of a department will be willing to devote his time and energy to the development of the department even when such a post may not be accompanied by financial rewards.
The feeling that the principal was confident that he could manage that department may be sufficient incentive for the appointed teacher to do the job.
All human beings want social recognition and esteem; the attainment of the goals of the school may be difficult; if not possible, if the principal of a school habitually ignores the opinion and feeling so the teachers, as well as those of the students, on matters which affect them.
3.1.4 Criticism of the Human Relationist Ideas Critics of the human relations theory raise a lot of dissatisfaction: They argued that the human relationist paid no attention to the external environment affecting the life of an organization.
That they treated the organization as a family That the humanist seems to have considered management as been soft and made an assumption that the happiest organization was the most productive.
They argued that management is very tough and something more than just making the people happy is necessary.
They accuse the humanist that their approach is exploitative in the sense that they make the worker very happy but do not allow them to participate in decision-making.
Through the manipulation of being happy the NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 workers forget to realize their role in the decision-making, which is also in the decision making which is also affecting them.
They argue that because of the soft attitude to administration, workers become happy, and become easy to manipulate by the administrators.
Exercise 1.2 Mention at least three contributions of the human relation movement.
Outline three basic criticisms of the human relation movement.
4.0 Conclusion In the late 1930s there was a strong reaction against the Scientific Management Movement.
These reactions wanted change, which meant further improvement in the task of administration.
The human relationist provided us that change with an understanding that high moral was an important factor along with economic considerations in achieving product efficiency and effectiveness.
The human factor in administration gained new prominence.
The existence and importance of informal group interactions within the formal organizational structure gained recognition.
The informal organizations grow out of people's social needs.
The human relations movement therefore looked at the organization as a system of individual interacting, forming informal inter-group relations, as well as formal relations defined by the organization.
It is worth noting that the human relations movement less emphasis on the rigid interpretation of efficiency as suggested by Frederick Taylor; but putting more attention on obtaining the cooperation of employees and helping them to identify more closely with the organization and its goals.
All these contributions found expression in the view of the Mary Parker Follet and Elton Mayo, otherwise referred to as the Humanist.
5 .
0 S u m m a r y Our study of unit 5 centred on the contributions of the human relationlist to the practice of Administration.
We were able to describe the ideas of Mary Parker Follett as it relates to the human side of administration, and her ideas about conflict-solution in the organization.
Elton Mayo's ideas and emphasis on the social skills of individuals was also discussed.
We highlighted the major contributions of the humanists, rounded up on our discussion with the criticisms as expressed by critics and other theorist.
NOUN 2  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMAs) How does the Human Relations Movement differ from the Scientific Management Movement in organizational developments?
7.0 References Bass, B. M. (1965) .
Organizational Psychology.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Enaohwo, J. O. and Eferakeya, O.
A.
(1989).
Educational Administration.
lbadan: Paperback Publishers Limited.
Follett, M. P. (1940).
Dynamic Administration: The collected papers of Mary Parker Follett, Henry C. Metcalf and Luther Urwick (ed).
New York: Harperad Fow Hall, R. H. (1977).
Organizations: Structure and Process (2'd ed) New Jersy: Englewood Cliffs, Prentice-Hall, Inc. Kaln, R. L. and Boulding, E. (1964).
Power and Conflicts in Organizations.
New York: Basic Books.
McGregor, D. (1960).
The Human Side of Enterprise.
McGraw-Hill, Kogakusha, Ltd. Musaazi, J. C. S. (1982).
The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
London: Macmillan Press Limited.
NOUN 3  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 The Behaviouralist / Rationalist Perspective of Administratio n Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 Behavioural / Rationalist Perspectives 3.1.1 Chester Barnard 3.1.2 Herbert Simon 3.1.3 Max Weber 3.1.4 Advantages of Bureaucracy 3.1.5 Disadvantages of Bureaucracy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References and Further Reading 1.0 Introduction In Unit 5, we studied the contributions of the Human Relation Movement to Administration.
In this Unit 6, we will learn about the Behaviouralist, who are often referred to as the Rationalist.
The main ideas of these groups of people are that administration should involve a high level of intellectualism and rationality in thinking.
We will learn other additional content as will be specified in the objectives below: 2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit students should be able to: Identify who the rationalists are Explain the views of Herbert Simon, Chester Barnard and Max Weber 4 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of bureaucracy 3.1 Behavioural!
Rationalist Perspectives From our previous studies, we have seen that the scientific management and human relations ideas of administration, ignored the impact of social relations and of formal structure respectively.
It is the behavioural perspective, which put together the earlier ideas and added propositions and ideas drawn from Sociology, Psychology, Anthropology, Political Science and Economics.
This approach differs from other behavioural sciences only in its subject matter, and that is the work behaviour in formal organizations.
This certainly is an interdisciplinary approach to administration.
The most notable among these rationalist were Herbert Simon, Chester Barnard and Max Weber.
They argued that an administrator must not take things by instinct.
But some intelligence has to be put in administration.
Now students, let us examine the contributions of each of this rationalist to administration.
3.1.1 Chester Barnard It was Chester Barnard who originated much of the behavioural approach when he examined carefully the organizational life in his functions of the Executive (1938).
He emphasized the importance of both formal and informal organizations and clearly demonstrated the inevitable interaction between them.
His structural and dynamic concepts will be of importance to us as administrators.
The structural concepts are the individuals (i.e.
teacher; student; clerk, etc.)
the cooperative system (i.e.
the working relationships in the form of a team), the information organization (i.e.
peer groups, friendship cliques, etc).
The main dynamic concepts are free will, cooperation, communication, authority, the decision process and a forceful working state of balance.
Chester Barnard contends that efficiency and effectiveness can be achieved if the formal and informal aspects of the organization are integrated.
He distinguishes between the concepts of effectiveness and efficiency.
The former refers to "the accomplishment of the cooperative purposes, which is essentially, non-personal in character.
The latter refers to "the satisfaction of individual motives, which is personal in character".
NOUN 5  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning FDA!"
811 Although Barnard dealt mainly with the structure of formal organizations, he recognizes the importance of the informal aspect of organizations as contributor effectiveness and efficiency.
He asserts that "whatever their origin, the informal contacts, interactions and groups change not only the experience, knowledge, attitudes and emotions are affected but also their functioning in the formal organization".
(Getzels, et at 1978).
Barnard (1938) suggests that "learning organizational ropes in inost organizations is chiefly learning who's who, what's what, and why's Why,of its informal society".
The informal organization provides the broadest view for studying and understanding administrative behaviour.
3y Herbert Simon Another of the most notable behaviouralist is Herbert Simon.
Simon in his treatise, Administrative Behaviour (1947) expanded on Barnard's work and used the concept of organizational balance as a central point for a formal theory of work motivation.
What this means is that Simon viewed the organization as an exchange system in which rewards (inducements) are exchanged for work - just as in a school, the teachers get salaries in exchange for their work.
Thus, an employee or teacher remains in the organization as long as he thinks the inducements are larger than his contributions.
Therefore, by integrating economics, psychology and sociology, the inducement — contribution scheme illustrates the interdisciplinary nature of administration.
For example, a teacher may be induced to remain as the Vice Principal of a School, as a result of other fringe benefits attached to the post, such as free accommodation and free medical services, and of course the social recognition, which goes with the post.
Thus from what we have said so far, we can see that effective administration is a process of highly rational or intelligent decision-making that influences the behaviour of employees of the organization.
Dear students let us ask ourselves: What is a rational or an intelligent decision?
Let us say it is one, which leads to the selection of the best solution for the accomplishment of anticipated goals or objectives of the organization.
Therefore, organizational rationality involves "input activities", and in the 46 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning case of a school, you need input from students, teachers, the Ministry of education, etc.
Herbert Simon disagrees with the idea that if you are able to manipulate things you would be successful.
Instead he believes that an administrator should study and understand the political, social and psychological conditions under which he administers.
Hebert Simon identifies two important elements in the organization, which hinders successful rationality and decision-making.
They are: o Complexity of administrative decisions o Human inability to see through the future In order to compensate for all these limitations, the administrator does the following?
3.1.3 Max Weber Max Weber is famous with his theory of bureaucracy.
He conceives bureaucracy as the most efficient forms of organizational design for achieving perfect rationality and efficiency.
He described the elements of his ideal administrative framework as follows: 1.
Impersonal and social distance among officials through dependence on rules and regulations.
Therefore, practices such as nepotism and favourtism associated with job performance should be eliminated.
2.
Hierarchy of authority: The arrangement of offices should follow the principles of hierarchy such that every position or office is under the control and supervision of a superior one.
Assignment of positions should be based on individual qualification.
3.
Members owe obedience to the organization's rules and regulations.
According to Scott and Mitchell (1976) rules and regulations serve the following functions in bureaucracy.
4 They standardize operations and decisions NOUN 47  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning FDA% 811 4 They serve as receptacles of past learning 4 They protect the incumbent and ensure equality of treatment.
4 Professional or Career Orientation: Employment in a bureaucratic organization should be based on merit or technical competence that will create career paths for organization participants.
There should be reward system to acknowledge superior performance.
Promotion should be based on achievement and seniority.
Tenure should be given to those with special skills and who are productive.
Max thought that a well-planned bureaucracy would be fairer, impartial, and predictable.
In general, more rational behaviour is expected in such bureaucracy.
Max believed that there is formal recording of actions in a bureaucracy; files are made available where members sign and record their performance.
Max argued that in a bureaucracy you do not own an office, so you can be transferred, dismissed or temporary removed to other places.
He believes that a bureaucracy is characterized by relationships bet power, authority and persuasions.
3.1.4 Advantages of Bureaucracy I.
The bureaucracy is efficient when it is well planned and organized.
2.
A bureaucracy is predictable, rules are written down, and the roles of incumbent are clearly defined.
3.
The bureaucracy is impersonal, that means it not bias.
4.
B u r e a u c r a c y gu a r a n t e e s a l i fe - c a r e e r .
5.
It gives a tenure appointment; members are employed as permanent and pensionable officers.
3.1.5 Disadvantages of Bureaucracy 1.
It encourages over conformity, which leads to group thinking.
48 NOUN  E,DAP, 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 2.
It turns employees into ritualistic bureaucrats who emphasis impersonal rules to the extent of driving their client into despair.
For example, sometimes bureaucracy makes ministry officials to read rules and regulations to their members, without necessarily solving their problems.
3.
Career orientation of bureaucrats make them more interested in protecting their career than in dealing with their clients.
4.
Innovative ideas in bureaucracy are difficult to come by.
5.
Bureaucracy does not take into account the presence of the numerous informal organizations including the primary roles into which the role incumbent belongs.
6.
Bureaucracy encourages the monopoly of information by a superior officer.
4.0 Conclusion From what we have learnt in this unit, it is clear that behaviouralist otherwise called rationalist view administration as the integration of the formal and informal aspects of organization, and the analysis of the decision making apparatus as a means for increasing and achieving organizational effectiveness and efficiency, in a rational way.
They argued that this rationality could only be achieved if the administrator has a knowledge of the economic and social backgrounds that informs the behaviour of employees in their organizations.
Lastly, they warned that such knowledge should not abuse the mind of the administrator in carrying out his duties, and hence the advocacy of bureaucracy in organizations.
5.0 Summary In this unit, we have studied the views and contributions of notable Behaviouralist and Rationalist.
The main ideas of Chester Barnard and Herbert Simon were examined.
And lastly we discussed Max Weber's bureaucratic elements, by outlining the advantages and disadvantages of bureaucracy.
NO UN 9  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 4 What is Bureaucracy?
4 Discuss at least four advantages and disadvantages of bureaucracy.
7.0 References Barnard, C. (1964).
The functions of the Executives.
Cambridge, Mass, Harvard University Press (Originally published in 1938).
Enaohwo, J.
0. and Eferakoya, 0.
A.
(1989).
Educational Administration.
Ibadan: Paperback Publishers Limited.
Getzels, J. W., Lopham, J. m. AND Campell, R. F. (1978).
Educational Administration as a Social Process: Theory, Research and Practice.
New York: Harper and Row Publishers.
Musaazi, J. C. C. (1982).
The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
London and Basingstoke: The Macmillan Press Limited.
Robert G. 0.
(1970).
Organizational Behaviour in School.
New Jersey: Englewood Cliffs Prentice Hall Inc. Scott, W. G. and Mitchell, R. R. (1976).
Organization Theory: A Structural Behavioural Analysis (31d Edition) Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin Inc. Simon, H. A.
(1945).
Administrative Behaviour.
New York: Macmillan.
0 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Unit 7 Theories Of Bureaucracy Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction Objectives 2.0 Definition of Theory 3.1 Characteristics of the Theories of Bureaucracy 3.1.1 The Merton Model 3.1.2 3.1.3 The Selznick Model 3.1.4 Gouldner's Model 4.0 Conclusion 5•o Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction In the last unit, we discussed the behavioural perspective of organizations, as advocated by notable behaviouralist like Chester Barnard, Herbert Simon and Max Weber.
These behaviouralist emphasis the need for rational decisions and proper understanding of the socio-economic environments which affect the behaviour of employees.
In this unit (7) we shall be studying the various theories of bureaucracy.
These theories x-ray the application of behavioural ideas in organization.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this study the student should be able to: Identify the three major theories of bureaucracy.
Discuss the application of each of these theories in organization.
NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 3.1 Definition of Theory Feigt, I-I (1951) defined theory as "a set of assumptions from which a larger set of empirical laws can be derived by purely logical-mathematical procedure".
While Hoy and Miskel (1978) defined theory as "a set of interrelated concepts, assumptions and generalizations that systemically describes and explain behaviours in educational organizations".
Theory therefore seeks to establish relationships between variables by describing, explaining and predicting the attributes of the phenomenon.
In other words theory in educational administration is directed towards describing and explaining observed behaviours and events through a systematic view.
It is in this perspective that the theories of bureaucracy could be examined and related to the school system.
3.1.1 Characteristics of the Theories of Bureaucracy The general structure of the theoretical systems of all the three is remarkably similar.
The three theories use the best independent variable, as some form of organizational procedure, designed to control the activities of the members of the organization.
The dependent variable is that which is controlled while the independent is that which cannot be controlled.
These procedures are based on the "machine" model of organizational behaviours, a concept emanating from the scientific view of men in an industrial set up by the first management theorist Frederick Taylor.
The procedures have their consequences as anticipated by the organization so also the unanticipated consequences.
These consequences reinforce, the tendency to use and unanticipated consequences the leader of the organization is able to use their control devices opportunity.
3.1.2 The Merton Model The Merton model is concerned with dysfunctional organizations.
These organizations result in consequences unanticipated and undesired due to the values of the members.
2 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Merton asserts that changes in the organization and in the personality of i n d i vi d u a l m e m b e r s o f t h e o r ga n i za t i o n s t e m fr o m fa c t o r s i n t h e organizational structure.
By personality Merton means that nay fair reliable connection between certain stimuli and characteristic responses to all the factors operating in the organization Merton suggest that positive and negative personalities might be developed in an organization.
Hence the demand for control.
The demand for control has the top hierarchy and undergoes eight various stages such as emphasis on reliability pattern of behaviour.
The above discussion is further explained in Figure one below: The Merton Model Demand for Control Intended result i.e.
the top Hierarchy • Unintended result Emphasis on reliability pattern of behaviour Defensibility Rigidity of behaviour Felt need for • of individual organizational defense defensib.lity of actions of status individual actions Amount of difficulty with clients Fig I The organization is seen to be rigid and so defend the behaviour status of its members, in a form of group action.
This is followed by the individual action been defended by the individual and it is always in conformity with the rules and emphasis on reliability patter of behaviour.
3.1.3 The Selznick Model This model emphasis delegation of authority, in the sense that it is a little bit different from Merton's model.
Merton stresses rules as a response for NO 3 UN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 human control.
Zelznick also shows how a control device or theory brings about unanticipated consequences.
The model starts with the demand for control, which starts at the top hierarchy.
As a result of an increase delegation of authority, several immediate consequences are recorded.
Consequences of delegation: 1.
It increases the amount of training in specialized competence.
2.
It increases experience within specialize tasked area and improves the employee's ability to deal with problems in such task area.
3.
Delegation results in departmentalization and brings about an increase in the interest among the sub-units in the organization.
4.
Delegation encourages training and training results in increase competence and therefore increase cost in further differentiation of sub-unit goals.
This division of interest within the organization also leads to increase conflict among organizations and the sub-units.
Selznick's model stressed that decisions made within the organization normally depends on consideration of internal strategies, which leads to internalization of sub-goals by participants.
The internationalization of sub-goals is usually reinforced by the feedback from the daily decisions it influences.
The necessity for making daily decisions creates a system of precedents.
Therefore decisions have to depend primarily on the operation criteria of the department by the organization, and among these criteria sub-unit goals are of considerable importance.
By operationality of goals, we mean the extent to which it is possible to observe and test how well goals are been achieved.
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Selznick's Model • Delegation of authority Amount of training In specialize competences Bifurcation of Interest Interim ization of sub-goals Content of Decision Internationalization or Operationality Organizational Goals by of Organizational Participation Goals.
Intended Results Unintended Results Fig II NOUN 11=5.5=1  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Selznick's Model Delegation • of authority Amount of training 1 bifurcation In specialize competences of Interest 'Jr Internalization of sub-goals Conten of Decision Internationalization or Operationality Organizational Goals by of Organizational Participation Goals.
Intended Results Unintended ' ' * Results Fig II NOUN 11=5=5:=I  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Selznick's Model Delegation • of authority Amount of training In specialize competences Bifurcation of Interest Interim ization of sub-goals Conten of Decision Internationalization or Operation ality Organizational Goals by of Organizational Participation Goals.
Intended Results Unintended Results Fig II NOUN f t I  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Selznick's Model • Delegation of authority Amount of training In specialize competences Bifurcation of Interest *1 Interna ization of sub-goals *1 Content of Decision Internationalization or Operationality Organizational Goals by of Organizational Participation Goals.
Intended Results Unintended * Results Fig II NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Achninisircnion and Planning EDA 811 3.1.4 Goulner's Model In terms of number of variables and relations, Gouldner's Model is the simplest.
Like Merton, Gouldner is concerned with the consequences of the bureaucratic rules for the maintenance of organization structure.
Like both Merton and Selznick, Gouldner attempt to show how a control technique designs to maintain the equilibrium of a larger system with a subsequent feedback on the sub-system.
In Gouldner's model, the use of general and impersonal goals regulating work procedure is part of the response to the demand for control from the top hierarchy.
Consequencts: To decrease the visibility of power relations within the group.
The visibility of authority differences within the work group interacts with the extent to which the qualities of norms are held to affect the legitimacy of the supervisory role.
This in turn affects the level of interpersonal tension in the work group.
56 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Figure III below explain further the discussion of Gouldner's model.
Gouldner's Model Demand For Ministry of Education Control Principal or Knowledge about Use of generalized Minimum Impersonal rules Acceptable behaviour Rules and Regulations in Schools • Each teacher Visibility of Power Level of knows what is relations Interpersonal tension expected of him • Principal, V.P.
and staff Outcome of behaviour good or • Closeness of Difference supervision Without changing Between authority relation organizational goals and What the school want to achieve and what is really achievable Fig III NOU 7 N  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 4.0 Conclusion The three models that have been discussed were advocated by Merton, Selznick and Gouldner.
Each of the models had something specific to emphasis about the application of bureaucratic rules in organizations.
Such emphasis was x- rayed as the identification of organizational structure, which necessitates the need to use control within the reliable pattern of behaviour, such was the views of Merton.
Selznicrs model emphasis the importance of delegation in bureaucratic organizations.
This was examined with all the consequences attributed to it.
Lastly, the I (1 ner' s model examined the visibility of authority and the place G011 of organizational structures for effective control.
These views certainly explain the applicability of bureaucracy in organizations of which the educational institutions is inclusive.
5 .
0 S u m m a r y In this unit we studied three important models of bureaucracy as advocated by Merton, Selznick and Gouldner.
The applicability and subsequent consequences of the ideas expressed in each of the models were also examined.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment (TMAs) Discuss the Gouldner's model and how it applies to the school system.
7.0 References Feigl, H. (1951).
"Principles and Problems of Theory Construction in Psychology" in Current Trends in Psychological Theory.
Pihsburgh, Pa: University of Pihsburgh.
Hoy, W. K. and Miskel, C. G. (1978).
Educational Administration Theory, Research and Practice.
New York: Random House Inc. Musaazi, J .
C. S. (1982).
The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
London Basingstoke: Macmillan Press.
• ___ c NOUN 58 ___ I  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Adniinistration and Planning Robert, G. 0.
(1970).
Organizational Behaviour in Schools.
New Jersey: Englwood Cliffs Prentice Hall Inc. Simon, H. A.
(1945).
Administrative Behaviour.
New York: Macmillan Williard, R. L. and Ronald, G. C. (1967).
Educational Administration: A Behavioural Analysis.
New York: Macmillan NOU 59 N  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Decision Making in Administration Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The Concept of Decision-making in Administration 3.1.1 3.1.1 Four basic strategies of decision making 3.1.2 3.1.2 The process of decision making 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 !!
Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1 Introduction In unit 8, we will study an important task of the administrator, which is Decision making.
We will explain the meaning of Decision-making, the strategies of decision-making, and the processes involved in decision- making.
The practice of decision-making in educational administration will also be examined.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit discussions, student should be able to: 1 .
D e fi n e t h e c o n c e p t o f d e c i s i o n - m a k i n g 2 .
Explain the four basic strategies of decision-making 3 .
D i s c u s s t h e p r o c e s s o f d e c i s i o n - m a k i n g 4 .
Explain, how decisions making is carried out in schools 3.1 The concept of Decision Making in Administration There are different ways of looking at decision-making.
According to Newman and Sumber (1961) 'decision-making' is synonyms of planning.
While Dorsey (1957) views the decision-making process as an extension of a 0 NOUN  EDA811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning series of interrelated communication events.
Similarly Simon (1960) conceives of decision making "as though it were synonymous with managing".
Decision-making is a sequential process that culminates in a single decision or a series of choices that stimulate moves or actions.
The result of our decision process is policies, rules or regulations that guide the subsequent behaviour of members of the organization.
Decision-making is a major responsibility of all administrators.
It is a process by which decisions are made and implemented.
An understanding of the decision making process is important for all administrators because the school like all formal organization is basically a decision making structure.
Decision-making is therefore seen as problem solving, or a sort of mental rehearsal.
Lastly Decision-making is an attempt to solve organizational problems.
The leader need to possess a.good knowledge of the problem solving techniques in order to make sound and effective decisions where decisions are made by one person, then the organization is malfunctioning.
If this happens, wise decisions would not be made all the time, because human beings have their limitations.
Decision-making is considered to have a number of important attributes: In has a tendency to perpetuate itself; it attempts to protect itself from disruption and destruction from within, and hence it is concerned with the morale and satisfaction of its employees; It seeks to survive, and it is therefore competitive with other behaviour patterns and finally it seeks to progress and grow.
Effective administration requires intelligent decision-making.
Decisions are intelligent when they are appropriate for accomplishing specific goals.
Administrative decisions, however, are often extremely complex, and as such rationality is limited for a number of reasons.
Student!
It is now time for us to look at the basic forms of decision- making.
NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 3.1.1 Four basic strategies of Decisions Making In the last decade, decision-making became important in Administration, and various studies have shown that.
Below are the basic strategies that can influence and enhance decision-making in organizations.
(1) The Classical Model: This is an optimizing strategy.
It assures that decisions should be completely rational; it employs an optimizing strategy by seeking the best possible alternative to maximize the achievement of goals and objectives.
According to the classical model, the decision-making process is a series of sequential steps.
(2) The Administrative Model: It is a satisfying strategy.
The complexity of most organizational problems and the limited capacity of the human mind make it virtually impossible to use an optimizing strategy on any but the simplest problems.
Herbert Simon (1974) was first to introduce the strategy of satisfying (searching for satisfactory; alternatives rather than optimal ones).
This is a situation whereby there is a reliance on both theory and experience in decision making.
(3) The increamental Model: A strategy of successive limited comparisons.
Occasionally some situations require an incremental strategy.
If the set of relevant alternative is indefinable and the consequences of each alternative unpredictable.
For example to what new activities, should a school administrator allocate more resources?
Charles Lindblom (1980), Bray brook and Lindblom (1963), Lindblom and Cohen (1979) first introduced and formalized the incremental strategy.
They characterize their decision-making method as "the science of muddling through" and argues that it may be the only feasible approach to systematic decision making when the issues are complex and the uncertainty and conflict are high.
The process is best described as a method of successive limited comparisons.
It does not require objective, exhaustive analysis of alternatives and consequences, or a prior determination of either optimum or satisfactory outcomes.
The strategy considers only alternatives that are very similar to the existing outcomes and ignores all outcomes that are outside the decision-makers narrow range of interest.
(4) Mixed Scanning or adaptive decision-making: The mixed scanning model of decision-making is proposed for complex decisions.
Mixed Scanning unites the best of both the administrative and incremental modes.
Amitai EtLiori (1967) (1986), (1989) has reintroduced a model 2 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning of decision-making to cope with the increasing complexities and uncertainties faced by contemporary administrators.
He calls his model "humble decision-making" but a more descriptive title is mixed scanning or adaptive decision-making.
Mixed Scanning involves two sets of judgment first is choices about the organization's mission and basic policy, and then incremental decisions that moves the organization in the direction prescribed by the policy.
Mixed Scanning unites the rationalism and comprehensiveness of the administrative model with the flexibilities and utility involved.
The rules for mixed scanning are straightforward.
They include: Focused trial and error, tentativeness, procrastination, decision staggering, fractionalizing, between hedging and reversible decisions.
All of these adaptive techniques can be skillfully employed by educational administrators and they all illustrate flexibility, caution, and a capacity to proceed with partial knowledge.
Exercise 1.1 (I) Explain the concept of decision-making (2) Mention at least two strategies employed in decision-making 3.1.2 The Process of Decision-Making Decision-making processes involve a series of complex interactions of events.
These interactions will be discussed in detail below in the following stage: Stage 1: Study carefully the existing situation.
An intelligent administrator is always studying his environment to see what is going wrong and what is being done right.
He has to study his staff.
The school head needs to be constantly aware of what is happening in the school.
This requires him to know quite a lot about student's affairs teachers activities and welfare, parents' opinions about the school and so on.
Specifically, he needs to know such things as students' performance in their studies, teachers performance in their teaching assignment, availability of teaching aids, catering services in the school, school discipline and school community relations.
It is only when the administrator is acquainted with the NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 situation himself that he can be in a position to detect problems or difficulties, which require decisions to be made.
Stage 2: Recognise and define the problem.
All decision-making begins with the identification of the problem in the organization.
Once a difficulty or an undesirable situation in the system has been identified, we can start to think about rectifying the situation or solving the problem.
Thus an effective administrator is always sensitive to organizational actions or behaviours that do not measure up to the prescribed standards.
This means that the administrator must constantly be alert to issues or situation that might become problems in order to adopt a course of action that will prevent the problems from developing.
The recognition and understanding of the problem are therefore crucial to the process of decision-making.
The way a problem is understood has immense importance in subsequent analysis and solution.
For staff or society as a whole.
Therefore the school administrator has to approach indiscipline with a clear understanding of the problem.
Stage 3: examine the detailed make-up of the problem in the existing situation.
Here however the administrator has to classify the problem.
This means that he has to decide whether the problem is really unusual or whether it is a new development of a typical difficulty for which an action pattern has already been developed.
More often than not the organization normally establishes mechanism and procedure for dealing with many problems which can easily be found in the use of existing school regulations.
Precisely the administrator needs to know the jurisdiction of the problem, that is to say, is the problem within his ability or has it been left to the board of governors to solve?
For instance, if a school administrator expels a student from the school, will he be willing to accept the responsibility for the decision?
If a decision is not within the jurisdiction or capacity of the administrator to take it will be better not to take it at all.
Stage 4: decide on the criteria for resolving the problem: when we have finished describing, analysing and specifying the problem, then as decision makers, we must decide on what constitutes an acceptable resolution.
What are the criteria for the acceptability of a decision?
In other words, on that variables, or factors will you base your decisions?
Are these variables acceptable to your staff members?
What are the minimum objectives to be achieved?
What is good enough?
It is advisable for the decision-makers to rank the criteria with their possible outcome along a continuum from minimally satisfying to maximally 4 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning satisfying.
As a general rule, the criteria we use to judge the decision must be consistent with our organizational goals (i.e.
school rules and regulations).
Stage 5: develop a plan of action.
This stage is to identify the alternative methods available for tackling the problem, evaluating the cost and consequences of each alternative and selecting the one offering the most advantageous combination of cost and consequences.
What are the different things that I can do?
How much will each cost?
What are likely to be the result?
Which should I choose as the best?
The administrator develops his plan of action basing it on a simplified picture of reality.
That is., he chooses the factors that he regards as most relevant and crucial, he is able to come to general conclusions and then take action.
Stage 6: initiate the plan of action.
Stage 6 is complementation: that is establishing an organization to carry out the policy, programme or decision chosen.
Allocating resources to it, and motivating people to carry it out.
The other thing we do in the implementation stage is to establish controls to monitor the performance of the plan, evaluate its degree of achievement and determine the reasons for any deviation from expected consequences.
Reasons for the success or failure hay' e to be identified.
If the decision has been a failure, then corrective action must be taken.
4.0 Conclusion Decision-making has become such a crucial test of administrative effectiveness that the success of administrators is judged by the soundness and appropriateness of their decisions.
In educational administration, leaders who cannot take decisions but leave situations which demand urgent action to deteriorate to the extent of crisis are incompetent administrators, because they lack the most essential complement for successful performance in their office.
Decision making is a day to day activity in any organization and in the school decisions are centered in one or several of these: personnel, finance equipment and the length of time it will take to get things done.
5.0 Summar y In this unit we have discussed the concept of decision-making, we examined the basic strategies associated with decision making and lastly we explained the various stages that are involved in the decision making process in any organization.
Emphasis was made on the applicability of decision-making in educational administration.
NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment (TMAs) Describe with examples from school situations the stages of the decision making process in organizations.
7.0 References Dorsey, J.T.
Jr. (1957) 'A communication model of administration', Administration Science Etzioni, A (1964) Modern Organizations Englewood Cliffs New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Musaazi,J.C.S (1982) The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration London and Basingstoke: Macmillan Newman, W.H.
and Sumber C.E.
Jr. (1961) The progress of Management Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice Hall Simon, H.A (19609) The new Science of Management Decision New York: Harper and Row 6 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning UNIT 9 The Practice of School Administration Table of Contents .
1.0 bIntroduction 2.0 11 Objectives b3.1 The concept of School Administration 3.1.1 1!
Principalship: Tasks and Roles 3.1.2 Qualities desired of a School Administrator 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction In Unit 9, we will be studying the practice of School Administration.
We are going to emphasis the School system in order to be able to discuss the various administrative tasks, which confront the school administrator.
We will learn other content as specified in the objectives below: 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, students should be able to: (1) Explain the concept of School Administration (2) Describ e th e t ask o f the prin cip al (3) Identify the qualities desired of a School Administrator NOU 7 N  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 3.1 The Concept of School Administration School Administration is a social process, concerned with identifying, maintaining, stimulating, controlling and unifying, formally and informally organized human and material energies within an interpreted system.
A School administrator fulfil such demands by developing specific plans and executing policies within a unified system related to the administrative task.
It is through administration that the energies of people are brought together.
School administration is specifically concerned with students, teachers, and rules, regulations and policies that govern the school system.
In school administration both the school head and staff must of necessity see themselves as a team working for the growth and development of the child.
Thus school administration should be guided by certain basic ideas, some of which are described below.
First School Administration must strive to create a community of learners who are physically and mentally healthy, efficient, and responsible and whose behaviour is acceptable to society.
Secondly, the school must be administered in such a way that all members of both teaching and non teaching staff function as a team.
Each individual in the school assisted to develop his or her own talents and to contribute maximally to the progress of the school.
Thirdly good school administration demands that both staff and pupils have a large part to play in decisions that determine the school rules, regulations and programmes.
Administration through staff meetings, students' representatives clubs committees and organization should involve everybody in the running of the school.
Thus proper delegation of authority and responsibility must prevail in school administration.
Fourthly, school administration should encourage and provide for the professional growth of teachers through planned educational seminars, conferences and in-service education.
In addition all the administration decisions and procedures in the school must be consistent with the underlying philosophy of the school.
These decisions should all the time aim at achieving the set objectives and goals of the school.
Finally, the school head and his staff must always keep the Ministry of Education, school boards, the general public fully informed of the policies, programmes, failures, and successes of the school.
My dear students, I believe it is now clear to you what school administration is.
Let us continue by looking at the specific duties of the principal.
68 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.1.1 Pincipalship: tasks and roles The school head performs a wide variety of functions.
The main task of the school head are interpreting policy, executing curriculum programme, seeing to students welfare, equipment, physical facilities and finances, inducting and retraining staff, and finally maintaining effective school community relations (musaazi 1982).
He has to keep the trust bestowed on him by his employers, as a teacher the school head must be exemplary, he must be efficient and resourceful.
The school head (principal) has the responsibility of promoting effective teaching in the school.
It is his duty to ensure that his employer appoints qualified and competent teachers to his school.
The principal must be highly competent and skilled in such things as modern techniques of instruction, human relations, and delegation of responsibilities, and communication.
The principal is responsible for assigning task and duties to his staff.
He/She has to ensure through supervision that each person is performing his or her duties satisfactorily.
For instance, the principal might decide to inspect teachers' lesson plans to see whether teachers do actually prepare lessons before going to teach.
Sometimes the principals could sit in on some of the lessons to evaluate their teaching.
To achieve the goals of improving the curriculum programmes the principal must have an understanding of the teacher, and teachers role, and be prepared to work effectively with the teacher.
Principals must maintain discipline among the teaching staff; but this has to be done with fact, fairness, and firmness.
A high degree of discipline may lead to good morale among the staff.
The principal should know that the morale of teachers is affected by both material and human factors.
The material factor include such things as salary, sick leave, medical care, equipment, supplies and facilities.
In the area of human relations, the principal is in a key position to influence the human factor of morale.
He/Shel can, for instance select individual teachers for certain roles, change the attitudes of staff members, change the nature of their relationships with him/her and with other staff members.
The principal can generate interpersonal interest confidence and trust.
Most often teachers approach the principal for a number of personal reasons.
For instance, a teacher may request leave of absence for few days to go and attend the wedding of his/her son a ceremony highly valued by his culture.
The principal has to respond to such a request with understanding.
NOU 9 N  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 It is also part of the principal's duty to orient new staff members to school life as a whole.
He/She has to provide them with information concerning the school , so that t he y get to kno w ho w t he sch ool is or ga ni zed and administered.
Such information helps them to adjust to their new place of work.
The principal should also seek ways to retaining teachers once employed.
He/She as the head of administration in the school must continuously seek the welfare of staff members.
He/She must promote them or recommend them for promotion, as this is a positive way of rewarding them for their services.
The head must show genuinely that he has concern for teachers and that he respect their views, consequently he/she must involve them in the making of decisions that affect the school.
Even when good planning comes from the principal alone, he/she must, as a good leader share it with others and let them feel like important contributors to what is going on in the school.
The principal, as the head could initiate change in the school.
Such changes should be brought about smoothly and with minimum opposition or resistance.
The principal most importantly should be able to rally support for his/her programmes plans and goals.
The principal has the responsibility of seeing to it that the establishment procedures and structures help the school to achieve its objectives.
He/She continually monitors the way things are done, coordinate and regulate the tasks of the entire school system.
As the school principal, he/she is responsible for the school funds, although there will always be assistance from the school bursar or a financial clerk.
Grounds and buildings are the responsibilities of the principal.
He/She makes sure that all school property is maintained and properly repaired and utilized.
As the Chief Public Relations Officer of the school, the principal maintains good public relations with the parents and the community as a whole.
He/She maintains a close liaison with other educational institutions 'like the Teacher Training Colleges, Universities and employment agencies.
Finally the principal can be described as somebody responsible for planning, organizing, coordinating, motivating the staff and student and managing school buildings and facilities.
70 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning For him/her to be able to carry out these tasks, there must be well-developed routines policies and procedures, which are actually the best techniques for efficient management.
3.12 Qualities desired of a School Administrator We all have an image of what the modern school head or principal should be.
This image is characterized by certain important leadership qualities.
The following personal qualities are generally considered as desirable qualifications of an effective School Administrator.
(a) Intelligence: This involves intelligence, mature and sound judgement, broad-mindedness and the ability to foresee and examine problems or tasks and be able to provide appropriate solutions.
The school head should at least be higher in intelligence than his/her teachers.
(b) Self-Confidence: The school principal deals with staff, students, school board members, parents and the general public.
It is therefore essential that he have confidence in himself or herself, and in his/her ideas as he interacts with these people.
Making mistakes should not make him/her lo se c on fidence; in stead he /she shoul d ha ve determination and the will to succeed in his work.
(c) Sociability: The school head must interact with many individuals and groups of people.
He/She must have the ability to deal with human beings, he must have human relations skills.
Principal must be friendly, cheerful and sociable.
The principal needs to be interested in the welfare and problems of his staff and students.
Certainly the school head must have a listening ear.
(d) Consideration for other: People desire respect and consideration from their fellow human being.
Respect for human dignity requires consideration on the part on the school head.
The principal must create a sense of respect and trust in every member of staff.
Most important he/she must be an example of courtesy, politeness and trust towards the people with whom he works.
A considerate school head will show sympathy and concern for teachers and students.
(e) Professionally minded: The principal must recognize the good of the profession.
As a professional person the principal should always be prepared to safeguard his profession form those who might degrade public education.
The school principal must also accept the responsibility throughout his/her career to master and to contribute to the growing body of specialized knowledge concepts, and skills which, characterize the profession.
Thus he/she has the professional NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 obligation to attend conferences, seminars, workshops and other learning activities, which can help in contributing to his/her professional growth and development.
The principal must possess teaching skills, he/she should be a master teacher.
Lastly he/she should be a 'scholar' in his own right.
(0 Moral integrity: The school principal must always uphold high ethical and moral standards.
He/She should always stick to the truth.
He/She must be honest in dealing with staff, students and the public.
He/She must practice what he/she say by showing good example.
(g) Humility and modesty: The school head should avoid belittling his/her staff and declaring himself as the most intelligent, knowledgeable and capable person in the school.
(h) Sound Health: Good physical and mental healths are essential requisites for maximum effectiveness.
We probably might not exhaust the qualities of a school head, but certainly he best is expected of any school principal.
Exercise 1.1 Mention at least four qualities of a principal 4.0 Conclusion In order to understand school administration we require to know the performance of the different functions of school head (principal).
5 .
0 S u m m a r y In this unit, we have clearly discussed the concept of school administration.
We specifically examined the tasks and roles of the principal in the school system and finally we identified the desirable qualities and qualifications of a school head or principal or school administrator.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment (TMAs) (la) Define School Administration (lb) Outline at least five basic task of the School Head.
NOUN 2  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 7.0 References Adesina, S (1980) Some aspects of school management Lagos: Educational Industries Ltd. Ayanniyi R.B (1999) 'Leadership roles of "le Primary School Administrator' Ghanna Journal of Education and Teaching.
Accra: City Publishers Vol.
1, No 1 Pp 125 — 129 Mbiti, D (1978) Foundations of School Administration Nairobi: Oxford University Press Musaazi J.C.S (1982) The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration London: Macmillan Press Ozigi, A.0 (1977) A handbook on School Administration and Management.
London: Macmillan NOUN 3  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 UNIT 10 Administration and Control of Student Services Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The concept of Student Services 3.1.1 Discipline and control of students 3.1.2 Student Wealth Services 3.1.3 Guidance and Counselling Services 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction In this unit we will be discussing Administration of student services, as a continuation of the duties and tasks of the School Administration.
Specifically we will study, the discipline and control of students and the provision of Guidance services to students.
Other contents will be examined as it relates to student services.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this Unit 10, the students should be able to: ( 1 ) D e s c r i b e , s t u d e n t s e r v i c e s ( 2 ) Explain the concept and control of discipline ( 3 ) Discuss, the administration of Guidance services 3.1 The Concept of Student Services Students are the focal point of school administration.
Therefore' wliciever the school head does must take into account the students, their welfare, and other activities that affect their lives and stay in school.
School are set up not for teachers, not for parents, not for educational administrators but for students.
The various decisions taken by school administrators therefore depend upon knowing the general and specific needs of the student population.
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.1.1 Discipline and Control of Students The concept of discipline cannot be given a universally accepted definition with special reference to the school system, however we often refer to discipline when students are taught to respect the school authorities, to observe the school laws and regulations and to maintain an established s t an da r d o f b eh a vio ur .
C on s eq ue nt l y l ac k o f d i sc ip li ne rel ate s t o misbehaviour in any of these areas.
Students' discipline means that students are provided with an opportunity to exercise self-control to solve school problems to learn and to promote the welfare of the school.
Discipline could also connote orderliness.
A disciplined person is orderly, responsible, diligent, sympathetic, cooperative, honest, considerate and always tries to do what is right and good.
Very often when students go out for debates concert and games, the principal charge them to maintain discipline or be of good behaviour.
Discipline therefore can be defined as readiness or ability to respect authority and observe established laws of the school.
Giving the above explanations it is relevant to say that there is need for control of students in terms of their disciplinary levels and this is where the administrator comes in.
,In administering discipline, the school head and the teachers should set examples of self-control and internal discipline in their classes and throughout the school.
School rules and regulations have to be made to guide student's conduct.
Rules however should not be looked upon as negative controls.
Rules can provide a framework of responsibility.
Whenever rules are set up to govern the behaviour of students' rewards and penalties are necessary to support the rules.
When students behave responsibly and want to promote their own self- discipline, it is the duty of the school head and his staff to support and encourage this kind of attitude through social recognition and approval.
Compliments on good behaviour, neat dormitory good academic performance and so on are typical ways of expressing approval.
Individuals who are responsible and refuse to conform to the school's expectation must be subject penalties.
Lastly, staff and students should cooperate in establishing, maintaining and revising the school rules.
Students are more likely to conform to rules that they have participated in formulating.
NOUN 111  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Exercise 1.1 List the various attributes that can contribute to a disciplined student.
3.1.2 Students Health Services The physical, mental and emotional health of the students is important, for sound health is the basis of life.
The students have to be physically strong and healthy and every effort should be made to promote their mental and emotional well being.
The administration could deal with the health problems of his/her students by having a medical officer or a qualified dispenser who normally attends to all minor cases of sickness, but most cases of sickness should be referred to the health centre or hospital.
To promote student good health certain things as follows could be done by the administrator.
Student should be educated on the importance of sound health and encouraged to form good health habits.
Societies like the Red Cross could be organized in the school to encourage students' membership and participation.
Good food is essential for the maintenance of health.
If the institution provides meals for the students, the administrative head should ensure that the food contractor fulfils his contact- and supplies of all items he is contracted for.
The administrator should encourage the stuaefits to participate regularly in physical and recreational activities.
AdequAte' provision should be made in the budget for the.Schase of sports and recreational equipment.
3.1.3 Guidance and Coun*lling Services Another important student service is the availability of opportunities to seek advice and consult — that is of guidance.
Guidance is that education function which has a direct synthesizing influence on the life of the student.
Basically, its purpose involves assisting the individual to develop his potential and aid him in becoming more and more self-directive.
Guidance programmes are educational services that exist for the student in the school and involve the participation of the entire school staff, with of course, proper leadership being provided by the school counselors or guidance teacher.
The school head is the central figure in developing or improving guidance services in the school.
He must create an atmosphere of caring for the students.
He/She should provide general support and administrative leadership to the guidance service.
If he/she is lucky to have on his staff a professionally trained career teacher, he/she should give all the necessary assistance needed in carrying out his work.
37 6 1 N O U N  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning The administrator should allocate a lighter teaching load to the careers teacher so that more time will be devoted to counseling the students.
It is also advisable to assign an office for the job.
For guidance programmes to succeed schools must keep accurate records on all students.
These records give the careers teacher and other teachers a better understanding of each individual student strength and weaknesses.
These records can serve as a guide when new teachers take over a class or when students start showing unusual and worrying behaviours; The career teacher needs a record of each student's home back ground, his medical history, his educational history as well as his personal development, all these would be provided by the school administrator.
Summarily the School Administrator needs to play the role expected of him/her in these areas: Procurement of Facilities and supplies; Selection of Counsellors Development of a favourable attitude towards guidance among teachers, parents, student and the community; Definition of functions of self, teacher, and counselor; Distribution of guidance duties among various counselors; and distribution of college and vocational information (Hulton, 1970) 4.0 Conclusion: Administering student services is an aspect of school administration.
The school head is the key person in the administration of a school.
He has specific task to perform.
He is a leader and an administrator and as such he must possess certain qualities and attributes that are essential for his success in the job.
All these activities are geared towards the education of the learners, the students.
For good learning to take palace in the School, there must be good discipline.
Both staff and students must maintain a high level of discipline.
Students in school usually have problems of adjustment.
They are physical, mental and emotional problem and they need to be solved, hence the need for guidance and counseling.
All the above are services rendered to students in any school system of which a school head must administer.
5.0 Summary In this unit we have studied the administration of students services by the school head.
We emphasize that such services come inform of control or discipline, the provision of health facilities, and guidance services.
Concepts and :theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment (TMAs) Describe the various roles that an administrator would play in rendering guidance services to his students.
7.0 References: Mesina Segun (1981) Some aspects of School Management lbadan: Educational Industries Nigeria Limited Enaohwo, J.O.
and Eferakeya 0.A (1989) Educational Administration Ibadan: Paperback Publishers Limited Hutton, P.W (1970) "Education of the Guidance Team" Counsellor Education and Supervision, Summer P.234 Musaazi J.C.S (1982) The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration London: Macmillan Ozigi A.O.
(1977) A handbook on School Administration and Management lbadan: Macmillan Publishers Limited.
78 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning UNIT 11 School-Community Relation in Administration Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.1 The concept of School and the Community 3.1.1 Relationships between the School and the Community 3.1.2 I Ways of promoting school community relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction In Unit 11, we will be studying the school-community relations.
The relationship between the school and the community will be examined, and the ways the school administrator can promote good school-community relations will be discussed.
2.0 Objectives: At the end of this unit, students should be able to: (1) Describe the relationship between the school and community (2) Identify the ways through which the administrator can promote school-community relations.
3.1 The Concept of School and the Community The school is a planned social institution, which acts as an instrument of society for teaching the young.
In this institution, the interest of both the adults and children within the school converge with those of parents and citizens outside it.
Thus a School system must have public relations.
Since education is an activity, which involves the cooperation of teachers, parents, children and the community as a whole, parents in particular are naturally NOUN 79 _ [  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 interested in the education of their children.
They sometime want to know who is doing the teaching, what is being taught, and how well it is being taught.
The society has varying degrees of expectation of the role the school should play in its life.
The parents and the general public expect the students to develop certain attitudes and mental attributes necessary for the improvement of the quality of their lives and that of the society.
It is therefore most important that the administrator should establish, develop, and maintain satisfactory relations with the community in which the institution is situated.
The character of the community varies from one area to another.
For example, an institution may be in a small and relatively underdeveloped village.
On the other hand, it might be a large, densely populated and highly developed urban area.
In either case the administrator will be dealing with members of the public in many matters which affect the institution hence the need to establish a good basis for happy school-community relations.
Musaazi (1982) assert that the school can be viewed from two angles: it is a model of the community, and it is also the community school'.
From both angles, the school has broader functions that bring it into close relations with the surrounding community.
The school definitely needs to be in close relationship with the community because of the moral, financial and material support, which the community gives to the school.
Thus the community's participation in school affairs makes the line between schools and community more meaningful therefore the school and community regard each other as partners.
Students, am sure you are interested in participating in this discussion, let us carry on.
3.1.1 Relationship between the school and the community Social interaction is not always a one-way process.
It is not a question of how the school can serve the community or how the community can control the school.
The interrelationship between the school and the community, involves a careful understanding of the influence of one upon the other.
Hence, the most basic characteristic of the school and the community must be flexibility.
The school should be willing to take on and abandon functions and services in the light of changing needs and development within the corar..unity should resist becoming a static institution.
Let us examine, ' the school-community as the curriculum.
Without departing from its curriculum, the school can relate some of subjects to community problems and draw upon the community for possible teaching and demonstration materials.
Agricultural curses for example can use local plants seeds, and tools, and draw upon the fanning experiences of the community.
TO make r o NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning this kind of approach to leaning even more appropriate, students can run school farms where they learn by doing schools in urban centres might put more emphasis on other productive activities with their communities.. For example visits could be arranged to factories, commercial firms, and government institutions to observe and be taught the operations by the experts on the job.
Such experts can also be invited to the school to address the students and staff.
Summarily, the school can also contribute to the life of the community by human experiences for all age groups and at all levels.
The school head and his staff and students can relate the school to the community, by organizing school concerts, sports competitions, exhibitions and so on, to which people in the community should be invited.
Students and staff can also help in community development programmes such as teaching adults how to read and write, educating the community on the importance of good sanitation, and participating in a number of community self-help projects.
School should offer their premises for adult education programmes and other cultural festivals, such as weddings and naming ceremonies.
When school facilities such as libraries, halls, and sports fields are made available to the community, this could help improve school community relations.
The school administrator facilitates satisfactory school community relations only when he is tactful, patience and has an understanding attitude to the community.
Exercise 1.1 Mention at least three things that the school and the community can benefit from each other.
3.1.2 Ways of Promoting School Community Relations As the head of the institution the administrator should be accessible to parents and members of the public.
The head's position is one of a public relations officer; As a public relation officer, the head should try to be courteous to people, treating them with tact, consideration and sympathetic understanding.
When the administrator is approached for help on any matter he/she should try to do his best to cooperate, but be frank and straightforward in his dealings.
NOU 1 N  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 While it is good to cooperate, the administrator should be fair to himself and not try to do the impossible.
Secondly, the school administrator can promote school community relations by making some school facilities and resources available to the community for educational and social purpose.
For example, the Parents Teachers Association (P.T.A) might like to hold their regular meetings in the school, the local education officers, may like to arrange evening classes in your institution.
During the vacation period members of the Teachers Association might wish to use the school for in- service courses.
The students association might wish to hold dances or meetings in one of the Halls.
In all cases the administrator should try not to be unnecessarily difficult.
Where the head is afraid of damages or loss or misuse of school properties, he/she can make the people liable for any damage caused.
One way of achieving this is to commit the people who want to borrow or use and school facilities in writing.
The administrator should be guided by any official policy, which may have been established by authority.
Thirdly, educational visits could be arranged for students to places of interest in the community.
By doing so the administrator will be able to demonstrate in practical terms the school's interest in promoting and sharing the cultural life of the community., For example, a visit to the palace.
In addition, Nigerian art and craft is not only of great artistic value, but also can be a practical use.
Weaving, carving, painting, sculpting, leather working, pottery making, mat making and glass making are practiced in different parts of this country.
It is desirable for administrators to make use of local experts by inviting them to give lessons in schools.
In many cases, these experts can enrich the leaving experiences of children far more successfully than a teacher who is a general practitioner.
Courses in other areas such as animal husbandry, science, geography, history, literature, hygiene and music can be made more meaningful by the use of local materials and also using local experts where they are available.
Fourthly, members of the community could be invited to visit the school or to attend or participate in some of its activities, such as speech and open days, sporting activities, school social programmes staff parties and so on.
All the above-mentioned strategies and ways of promoting school community relations will provide an opportunity for communication, between the school and the members of the community: Such strategies can also be used to interest the public in some particular aspects of the school life and to make appeals for public aids in cash or kind, for various projects in the school.
When these school community relation activities are carried out the administrator helps to publicise the institution, project its public relations NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning image and also help in fulfilling an important objective of education.
Now we know that school relates to the community in numerous ways and the community does the same in response.
4.0 Conclusion: The Nigerian school plays a leading role in most of the communities, and as such becomes the focal point of interaction in the communities.
Schools are intended to promote social change in the locality around them.
These schools service adults as well as children and therefore make efforts to include adult oriented programmes related to literacy, faming and other vocational skills.
The conduct of all these activities lies in the hands of the school administrator.
There is no doubt that the administrator appreciates that the school cannot function in isolation, hence the need to promote good, and healthy school-community relations.
5.0 Su mmary: In unit 11 we have been able to discuss school community relations.
We tried to describe the meaning of school, and the community.
We also discussed the relationship between the school and the community, and finally we identified and examined the various ways in which the school community relations could be promoted.
6.0 Tutor-marked Assignments (1) Discuss with relevant examples what schools can do to become effective agents of community relations.
7.0 Reference: Balogun, D.A.
Okon, S.E.
Musaazi J.C.S and Thokur, A.S. (1981) Principles and Practice of Education Lagos: Macmillam Lewis, L.J.
(1965) Society, Schools and Progress in Nigeria Oxford: Pergamon Musaazi, J.C.S.
(1982) The Theory and practice of Educational Administration London: Macmillan Ozigi A.O.
(1977) A handbook on school Administration Lagos: Macmillan NOUN Lvi  Concepts and Theories of Educational Adininisiration and Planning EDA 811 1111111111=111111111 Introduction to the Concept of Educational Planning Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Concept of Planning 3.0.1 The Meaning of Educational Planning 3.0.2 Types of Planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 References 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction In Unit 12, we will be studying the concept of Educational Planning.
This will be an introductory unit to an understanding of what planning is on a general note, and the meaning of educational planning in specific terms.
We will also study other contents as will be specified in the objectives below: 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: I.
Explain the concept of planning 2.
Identify and discuss various types of planning 3.
Discu s s the meanin g o f Edueational Planni n g 3.0 The Concept of Planning Planning is the process of setting out in advance, a pattern of action to bring about a given overall policy by the shortest possible articulation of means.
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning This implies that planning is the process of identifying the means and the ends.
Planning helps us to understand the targets and enables us to map out strategies of attaining such targets.
According to Musaazi (1982) Planning is a rational process of preparing a set of decisions for future actions directed at achieving goals and objectives by optional means.
By this definition, planning is future-and goal oriented-Planning does not exist in a vacuum, goals and objectives must be set.
Planning is also designed to achieve development and as such planning becomes a continuous process.
Planning is not only concerned with objectives but with how to achieve them.
Therefore it is concerned with implementation of those objectives.
Similarly, Orwigho (1991) contends that 'planning is a process that involves the selection of facts and assumptions that are related to the future with the aim of visualizing and formulating the desired outcomes to be attained.
Planning is always concerned with the progress made, with unforeseen obstacles that might arise, and with how to overcome these obstacles, and this can only be achieved through constant evaluation.
Fayol (1949) considers planning as an act of foretelling and preparing for the future.
Luther Gulick and Urwick, (1939) viewed planning as working out in liroad outline things that need to be done and methods for accomplishing the goals of an organization.
Now students with this knowledge of general planning, let us be more specific by discussing the meaning of Educational Planning.
3.0.1 The Meaning of Educational Planning On the basis of our general definition of planning, i.e as a process of identifying our goals and objectives and working out aims and means of achieving them; we can explain that educational planning involves the process of identifying educational needs, the direction which education should take and how to implement the decisions taken.
Educational planning is the application of a rational and systematic analysis to the process of educational development with the aim of making education more effective and efficient in responding to the need and the goals of the students and the society.
Li NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 In effect, educational planning deals with the future of our educational system in relation to the past and present trends.
As a result, it provides the basis for future decisions and actions on issue related to education.
Educational planning is a continuous process.
Therefore, it does not end when the plan is completed on paper and approved by the relevant authorities such as the State Executive Council or even the Ministry of Education.
It is also concerned with the implementation of the plan, the progress made, and problems encountered in the process.
Educational planning involves a consideration of unforeseen obstacles and making provision for possible ways of overcoming them.
This implies that educational planning calls for a constant evaluation and modification.
If necessary of the related programmes until the anticipated goals are achieved.
For example, if you plan to operate a Nursery and Primary School, it is your duty to get it started, and until pupils start graduating from the school, and the school continue to sustain itself and achieve its goals, the process of planning, implementing and evaluation will continue.
Basically, the task of the educational planner is to see to it that the economic use of the country's educational resources are intelligently planned.
Just like any planning, educational planning is future-oriented, drawing enlightenment from the past.
To be meaningful, educational planning must take into account the integration of formal and non-formal education and the training facilities in the country.
Generally, educational planning focuses on the needs, aspirations and prospects of the students and the society.
Specifically educational planning focuses the mind of educational planner or Administrator on major issues such as those related to the type of Schools required in the society, the level of education that needs to be given priority, courses to be offered, student enrolment and other issues on human, material and financial resources of the educational system.
For example the present focus of the Federal Government on Universal Basic Education (U.B.E) and Open University is an indication of the work of educational planners, who must probably will have made this suggestions based on the needs of the country to educate a large percentage of children, and also to make university education to be at the reach of all those who need it respectively.
Although these issues are important, they are not by themselves enough.
The complete education plan must take into account another group of issues, which are the facts of life for an administrator, i.e the pattern of pressure 112, NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning groups, the organizational structure of education, the salary structure, teacher union rules, or any combination of a host of other complicated features which could force reluctant rejection of a plan.
Dear Students, thank you for taking so much interest to understand what educational planning is.
Now let us identify the different types of planning.
Exercise 1.1 Define the concept of educational planning.
3.0.2 Types of Planning Planning can be categorized into three major types.
The Reactive Planning, the Negotiated and he Systematic Planning, efforts will be made to discuss these types of planning and specifically spell out what each types stands for.
1 .
R e a c t i v e P l a n n i n g Reactive Planning occurs when the planner or the administrator wants events to occur before preparations are made to tackle them.
Crises are therefore resolved as they occur in the institution.
The planner who adopts this type of planning relies heavily on information and activities that deviate from the norm.
Therefore, under the reactive planning, abnormal events tend to form the basis for scheduling the programmes of the institution.
As a result of this, the administrator tends to be confused since the trend of events is unpredictable.
The logical outcome of this type of planning is frustration among the members of the institution, coupled with a loss of confidence on their leader, leading to ineffectiveness and lack of a sense of direction.
2 .
Negotiated Planning Negotiated type of planning is based on bargains to arrive at a common position.
With this type of planning, less emphasis is placed on a rational examination of the issues to be resolved or the programme to be implemented.
Instead, final decision is heavily influenced by the bargaining position of the various parties involve in the planning process.
Sometimes, the relative authorities of the parties as well as the associated possibility of controlling the available resources also influence the final plans that emerge.
The result of this type of planning is that educational programmes are introduced without adequate consideration given to their desirability.
This often NOUN 11:.=1  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 leads to hapzard or even non-implementation of some of the related programme, with the associated waste of valuable resources.
3.
The Systematic Planning Systematic Planning involves a process by which the planner identifies the need of the institution.
The problems affecting the institution are therefore clearly stated and the alternative requirement for problem solution identified.
On this basis, the solution that could enhance the resolution of the problem are chosen, from the alternative measures already identified.
Systematic approach to educational planning therefore requires a carefully determined method and means of resolving educational issues and a proper evaluation of the result of the implemented plans.
As a result the systematic method of planning, represent a logical problem — solving process for the identification and resolution of important educational problems.
The Negotiated and the Systematic types of planning could be considered as complementary to each other.
This is particularly true with reference to the educational system where negotiation appears to be inevitable as a result of t he li mit ed re s o u rce s a t t he d i sp o sa l o f ed u cat io na l pla n ne r s a nd administrators.
This is also partly as a result of the special relationship between education and politics in developing countries like Nigeria, with the resultant need for group decisions on educational issues.
It is possible for educational planners to apply the negotiated and the systematic types of planning at the same time.
However, the following are some of the main features that tend to distinguish the systematic planning from the negotiated type of planning: 1.
Goals are often not stated in written form with the negotiated planning.
Each of the parties involved in this type of planning would prefer to leave the ultimate goals as a mystery, since it would make it possible for him to manoeuvre and bargain favaourably in the process.
Whereas in the systematic type, the goals to be attained and the measures of evaluating the progress recorded are pre-determine, made explicit and public.
In fact the goals are agreed upon before planning takes place.
2.
In the negotiated type of planning, each negotiator releases only information or data that support this views, the details are not often produced.
As for the systematic planning there is usually a common NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning analysis group that is responsible for the collection, organization and presentation of the data that are used by all the planners.
Such data is therefore made public and this minimizes arguments about the information so collected.
3.
In Negotiated Planning, comparison between alternative measures are often made during oral arguments.
While with the systematic type comparison between alternatives are made, prediction of consequences of each alternative is carefully done and every analysis is presented in written and made available for study.
Where possible, systematic planning used hard date and computation in forecasting.
Below are the advantages of systematic planning approach: ( a ) O r d e r l i n e s s ( b ) I d e n t i f i c a t i o n o f g o a l s ( c ) W a s t e i s b e i n g m i n i m s e d ( d ) I t i s t i m e s a v i n g ( e ) Focus on goals are quite obvious It enhances implementation ( g) It p ro v i d es b as i s fo r ev al u at i o n (h ) Stability and continuity can be enhanced Exercise 1.2 1.
List the three types of planning that you know 2 .
W h a t i s R e a c t i v e P l a n n i n g ?
4.0 Conclusion There is no doubt that educational planning occupies a prominent position in the development of educational systems of a country.
Generally planning compels educational administrators to visualize the overall programmes of their institutions.
It enables members to have a better understanding of their tasks or responsibilities and be better prepared for future events.
Through planning, the educational system is in a better position to respond positively to the needs and aspirations of both the students, the society, and the nation at large, for growth and development.
N OUN II 89  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 5 .
0 S u m m a r y In this unit we have studied the concept of planning on a general note.
We also examined specifically the meaning of planning, and lastly we identified the various types of planning, their features and advantages.
6.0 References Ayanniyi R.B (1992) "Educational Planning Process in Nigeria since 1960".
Unpublished Ph.D theses, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria.
Banfied, Edward G (1952) "Ends and means in planning" International Social Science Journal, Vol II, No.2 Fayol H. (1949) "Administrattive industrielle et generale", in constance stazzrs (ed) General and Industrial Management, London: Sir Issac Pitman and Sons Gulick L, and Urwick L (1939) Papers on Science of Administration, New York: Institute of Public Administration.
M u s a a z i J .
C .
S ( 1 9 8 2 ) T h e T h e o r y a n d P r a c t i c e o f E d u c a t i o n a l Administration, London: Macmillan Ovwigho M.Y (1991) The Theory and Practice of Educational Planning in Nigeria, Kaduna: Think Publishing Co. Ltd. London: Macmillan 7.0 Tutor Marked Assignment Fully discuss the meaning of Educational Planning.
11:00 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning U n i t 1 3 Approaches to Educational Planning Table of Contents Introduction Objectives b The need for the Planning Approaches 0 1 Social Demand Approach 0 0 Manpower-requirement Approach 4 0 Cost Benefit Approach 4 -4cr.LA( occc0 ; CSRTuoeumfnteocmrrleu anMsrciyaoe rsn k e d Assignment 1.0 Introduction In Unit 12, we studied the concept of planning in general, and examined the meaning of educational planning on a specific note.
In addition we identified the various types of planning.
In this unit we will continue our discussion by explaining the various approaches to educational planning and the advantages and disadvantages of each of the approaches.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, students should be able to: 1.
Discuss the three approaches to educational planning 2.
List and explain their advantages and disadvantages.
3.0 The Need for Planning Approaches Education has become an important business in Nigeria; with the result that lot of resources is devoted to it, by both the private individuals and government.
The implication is that there is an urgent need for effective planning of the educational system.
As educational planners we are charged NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 with the responsibility of developing an educational plan to be recommended to the policy makers for implementation.
The question that readily comes to mind then is; how should we go about drawing up such a plan?
What approaches should we follow and why?
Our discussion of the three different approaches, namely, social demand approach, the manpower approach and the cost-benefit approach will further justify the need for the application of these approaches for effective planning.
3.0.1 Social Demand Approach This is the method used in predicting social demand for education by parents and children.
The emphasis is on consumption of education.
With this method education is seen as a public service and as a right of everyone and so it should be provided.
Traditionally the simplest version of this approach has always been an attempt to forecast demographic trends in order to estimate the school population.
The social demand approach can therefore be regarded as a traditional approach to educational planning.
In applying this method, planners consider strategies that will enable them make adequate provision for everyone who is qualified and willing to receive education irrespective of the manpower requirement.
It is on this basis that the social demand approach is referred to as the aggregate demand for education.
It is the sum total for the demand of education by all individuals at a given place and time under prevailing cultural, political and economic situations.
In other to be able to forecast the number of schools to be built, facilities required and teachers to be trained so as to meet the projected demand for education.
The planner considers demographic trends in the society.
The social demand approach became popular among African leaders when they started to realize the need to meet the demand for education by the citizens, and the need to use education as means of mobilization.
The importance was also highlighted when the United Nations declared education as a "Fundamental Right" of everyone, and request nations to provide free education at primary levels.
Steps in applying the Social Demand Approach 1.
We should examine the size of the age group relevant to the level of education i.e Primary and Secondary.
2 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 2.
Extend the levels of the age groups that are likely to attain the levels needed for entry.
3.
Consider how many of those qualified that should be assumed to enter school.
4.
Decide on the basis of assumption the future length of study.
Advantages of Social Demand Approach It offers everyone the chance to receive education and acquire the related benefit.
It promotes literacy in the country It tends to enhance political participation of citizens and can lead to national unity It provides forum for inculcating national ideas.
It can be politically rewarding to a country on international basis because some international organizations attach importance to high literacy rates among member countries.
Disadvantages of Social Demand Approach Data problem of obtaining demographic The crucial issue of resource allocation in the country is ignored, because resources are allocated to education to the detriment of other sectors.
There is the problem of ignoring the pattern and type of manpower required for development programmes.
The current graduate unemployment is a result of learning on this approach of over producing with considering manpower needs.
This approach can water down the standard of education because it is likely that the limited resources will be spread over the large population of students.
NOUN 3  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Exercise 1.1 Mention at least two advantages and disadvantages of Social Demand Approach.
We shall continue our discussion now.
3.0.2 Manpower Requirement Approach The Manpower requirement approach educational planning is based on the view that any nation with plans or aspirations for economic development has to consider the preparation of its human agents of development.
The rationale here is that it is the trained manpower of a country that must guide both its educational and developmental decisions as a whole.
This implies that for any country to develop economically, socially and politically, it must have the manpower to its objectives.
In Nigeria and indeed in many other African countries, the traditional high and middle level manpower survey techniques is commonly used.
Normally inventory by occupational classification of middle and high level cared in medium and large sized enterprises are taken.
These assumptions are made about desirable or appropriate educational qualifications for various occupational categories.
Assumptions are also made of annual requirements to take care of wastage such as deaths, retirement, replacement of expatriates and dismissals.
The manpower approach is a method that is associated with the development of human resources; therefore it calls for conscious projection of the relevant educational facilities that can make the training of such personnel realistic.
Therefore, human resources could be regarded as the energies, skills and knowledge of the people which when developed can be used for production of goods and services.
Hence the human resources or the manpower requirement approach to the development of any society is people oriented with emphasis on the developments of thoughts, motives, beliefs, feeling, aspirations and the culture of the people.
Specifically, the following steps could be followed while adopting the manpower requirement approach.
I. Categorise the economy into sectors, such as Agricultural, Industry, Commerce and Health.
2.
Prepare an inventory of manpower for the current year in the various sectors in relation to educational requirements for each of the NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning occupation in the sectors.
This provides a basis for the estimation of future requirement and supply o f manpower by educational qualification.
3.
Determine the size of the labour force for the forecast year base on projected.
requirement by the various sectors, addition of these estimates amount to the total labour force projection for the country.
The total estimate of employment for the forecast year will be made.
4.
Allocate the total employment for the forecast year among the different categories of occupational classification.
The aggregate constitutes the stock of manpower that will be required in the economy for the forecast year by occupational categories.
5.
Convert data on occupational categories into requirements according to various levels and types of education within the system of education.
Through this it is possible to relate occupation to educational supply of personnel with each main type of qualification for the forecast year, on the basis of present stock, expected outflows or graduates from the school system.
6.
Estimate the anticipated supply of personnel with each main type of qualification for the forecast year, on the basis of present stock, expected outflows or graduates from the school system.
7.
Calculate the changes in the annual outflow from the different levels or types of education that could create balance in the forecast year between what is required and what could be supplied, using the current educational output as basis.
8.
Estimate the enrolment in each level or type of education that are needed to achieve the required annual outflow.
Advantages of the Manpower Approach It allows realistic evaluation of the relationship between education and the manpower needed by the country.
This is important because in a developing country every effort needs to be directed towards providing manpower that can enhance adva ncement.
The pl anner' s attention is focused on the ke y educational areas that can contribute to the progress of the society.
NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 With the manpower method rational application of available resources could be made to limit wastage.
It could also help to curtail the problem of unemployment and minimize related crimes.
Disdvantages of the Manpower Approach Most of the variables needed to be considered are often difficult to quantify.
It is difficult to estimate in the country, the G.D.P.
because some people are involved in more than one occupation.
Lack of clear-cut relationship between education and occupation, the result is that we have engineers teaching, and teachers in manual jobs.
Hence it is difficult for planners to project the manpower required on the basis of education for the purpose of recommending what our institutions should provide, or produce.
The needs and values of the people tend to be ignored by this approach, due to the emphasis on national development.
Data is difficult to get so projection on long-term basis is not easy.
It has a tendency to underestimate or over estimate the required manpower when planning using this approach.
3.0.3 Cost Benefit Approach Education is now generally recognised as a form of investment in human beings.
It yields both economic and non-economic benefits.
As a result it contribute to the wealth of any nation by increasing the productive capacity of the people.
The cost benefit analysis is the approach to planning that suggests a careful evaluation of the various alternatives to a problem in terms of the cost and benefits before making a decision on what steps to take.
Specifically, the planner estimate the cost of acquiring some additional levels or types of education and the extra benefits that are likely to accrue to the individual or the society.
The cost benefitS analysis therefore requires a systematic comparison of the magnitude of the cost and benefits of the investment on education in order to determine its profitability.
It offers the planner an opportunity to examine the future benefits of his educational programme on the basis of cost and a guide to rational allocation of resources.
This I NOUN 6  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning approach is what any rational individual would want to apply when deciding how best to spend his money.
This approach is thus a management technique that is used to determine alternative plans or programmes that yield the required number of benefits for the least cost or the measure that produces the greatest benefit for any given cost.
This approach is also referred to as the rates-of return Advantages of the Cost Benefit Analysis or Rates of Return Approach It provides the planner information on the relationship between education and the labour market.
It portrays the picture of the economic consequences of alternative educational policies.
It can be used to get information about the different cost of different education and information on the balance between supply and demand of the various categories of educated manpower.
It provides useful information for making rational decisions.
It focuses our attention on the need for a constant evaluation of our educational programmes with special emphasis on the cost of the programmes.
Disdvantages of the Cost Benefit Analysis or Rates of Return Approach Failure to deal with non-monetary return.
Difficulty of establishing a comparative value of similar monetary sums for different people.
 Failure of the anal ysis to always identify the best possible programme.
Lack of attention to the problem of student's unemployment.
 The intangible nature of many cost and benefit make it difficult to apply this approach.
The age earning profile that forms the basis of our calculation is deficient.
Over emphasis on economic benefit over other emphasis.
NOUN 7  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 4.0 Conclusion There is a widespread agreement that no particular approach to educational planning is the best for all.
In education the three major approaches as discussed above are Social Demand Approach, Manapower Requirement Approach, and the Cost Benefit Approach.
The first one is the least complicated approach to educational planning.
It simply charges the education system with providing schools and facilities for all children who demand admission and who are qualified to enter.
These certainly have its advantages and disadvantages on the development of any nation.
The manpower requirement approach is the most preferred methodology.
In simple terms this approach emphasis three major specifications; specification of the composition of manpower needs at some future date, specification of manpower availability and a specification which reconciles the former with the latter.
The emphasis in manpower approach is forecasting, and hence the dangers that lies ahead in predicting the future.
The cost benefit analysis is the least employed of the three approaches to educational planning.
Most decision makers are reluctant to go as far as calculating a rate of return for planning purposes.
But it should be noted that the developing countries with limited financial resources cannot afford wastage, particularly in educational expenditure, hence they need more of this approach.
Finally, it could be said categorically that no one single approach is applicable, any good educational planning should integrate the three approaches i.e.
provide education for those who need it, make sure such education is relevant to the manpower needs of the country, and be sure of the cost implication of such programmes, so that implementation would not be affected.
5 .
0 S u m m a r y In this unit our concern was to study the three main approaches to educational planning.
We have been able to discuss these approaches and we also listed and explained the attendant advantages and disadvantages that each of the approaches offer.
6.0 References Adesina, Segun (1997) Planning and Educational Development in Nigeria, Lagos: Educational Industries Limited Akangbou, S.D (1985) The Economics of Educational Planning in Nigeria, New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House, Pvt Limited 8 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Ad,ninistration and Planning Blaug, M (1965) "The rate of return on investment in education in Great Britain" in Balug, M (ed) Economics of Education Hammondsworth: Penguin Books Limited, Harbison Fredrick (1960) "high level manpower for Nigeria's future in investment in Education, Lagos Federal Ministry of Education.
M u s a a zi J .
C .
S ( 1 9 8 2 ) T h e T h e o r y a n d P r a c t i c e o f E d u c a t i o n a l Administration, London: Macmillan Publishing Company.
Ovwigho M.Y.
J.C.S (1991) The Theory and Practice of Educational Planning in Nigeria Kaduna: Think Publishing Co. Limited.
7.0 Tutor —Marked Assignment The high rate of graduate unemployment is a thing of concern to government.
As an educational planner, what steps will you take in using the manpower requirement approach.
NOUN 99  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Unit 14 Educational Planning Process Table of Contents !
Introduction 0 .
; Objectives 0 0 i Definition and Meaning of the Planning .
0 r Process a .
Categories of Planning - 0 ( .
Educational Planning Process in Nigeria a3 ti Conclusion C7's STuumtomr Marayr k ed Assignment References 1.0 Introduction In unit 13, we studied the three major approaches to educational planning.
These were social demand approach, manpower requirement approach, and the cost benefit approach.
We also listed and explained the various advantages and disadvantages of each of the approaches to educational development.
In this unit, we will be examining the Educational Planning Process in its general form, and also specifically explain the planning process in Nigeria.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, students should be able to: 1 .
E x p l a i n t h e P l a n n i n g P r o c e s s 2 .
Identify and discuss the various categories of Planning 3 .
Examine the process of educational planning in Nigeria NOUN 100  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 3.0 Definitions and Meaning of the Planning Process There has been a lot of agreement on the major steps that are to be followed in the process of planning as propounded by various scholars.
A few of such proposal will be considered.
Robinson (1972) presented a proposal on planning that clarifies the agreement regarding the steps of the planning process.
Robinson, maintained that 'the well established paradigm of the planning process requires the establishment of purpose, the formation of alternatives, the prediction of outcomes, the evaluation and selection of alternatives and implementation.
Partly in line with Robinson's proposal, Churchman (1968), observes that the essential ingredient of a plan include the following: a goal is set, a group of alternatives is considered, in relation to how it will or will not effectively lead to the goal, one of the alternatives is selected, the plan is implemented, and the decision maker checks to see :tow well the plan works.
It is important to note that the process of education is normally done with certain values in mind.
These values are related to what the partners of education, viz students, parents, the Ministry of Education or Government and other private agencies, require and expect to achieve through education.
Therefore the operators of the process are often expected account for how the resources RI allocated to the system have been utilized using the output of the system as a yardstick.
Kaufman (1968) and Corrigan (1969), for instance, have presented an overall educational management process model that stresses the need for a revision on the basis of evaluation.
Their management process model is composed of the following elements: 1.
Identify problems (based upon documented needs) 2.
Determine solution requirements and solution alternatives 3.
Select solution strategies (from among alternatives) 4.
I m p l e m e n t s e l e c t e d s t r a t e g i e s 5.
Det ermin e perfo rm an ce effecti v en ess 6.
Revise as required at any step in the process It is important to note that whenever educational changes are to be introduced the processes presented above could be applied and when the requirement or NOUN 101  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning ELMP 811 expectations are not met any time during the planning process, the appropriate revision should be made.
To enhance the link between knowledge and action, the planning process must be built directly into the management system.
In the process of planning it is important for the following questions to be raised: Where are we?
Where do we want to go?
What resources do we need to connect in order to get there?
How do we intend to get there?
When will it be done?
Who will be responsible for what aspect of the plan?
What will be the likely impact of our plan on human and other resources'?
What will be needed to measure progress?
Answers to these questions may take the form of description of needs, the challenges that may be encountered and opportunities that exist within and outside the system.
My dear students I know you have been following this discussion.
If so let us practice this exercise.
Exercise 1.1 Mention a least five questions that you will ask when you are in the process of planning?
Well done!
Let us continue our discussions.
3.0.1 Categories of Planning There are three categories of Planning usually referred to as Long-Range Planning, Medium-Range Planning and Short-Range Planning.
Each of these categories will be discussed.
102 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 1 .
L o n g - R a n g e P l a n n i n g In terms of time span, Long-Range Planning has been considered by varions authors to represent periods in excess of ten to twenty years.
However, Candoli (1978) has observed that the main problem associated with long-range planning is the tendency to consider the related plans as rigid parameters beyond which the affairs of an organization cannot be operated.
This implies tht to base the activities of Education on such long-term plans may not produce the desired results, since our society is dynamic and the educational programmes are expected to reflect societal changes.
For this Candoli (1978), considers long-range planning as the application ofnew alternatives and approaches to the affairs of education within a period of three to five years.
It is important to observe that long range plans are not entirely rigid.
Provisions are often made for flexibility so that essential changes within an organization can be accommodated from time to time.
For this reasons long-term plans are further broken into medium-range plans and short-range plans.
Therefore long-range planning could be considered as the process of systematically projecting the activities of the organization for at least ten years in order to achieve intended goals.
Ovwigho (1991) With long-range planning, the management of an institution tries to decide on what is to be done, when it should be done, how it is to be done, and who should be responsible for the execution of the various aspects of the plan.
However, long-range planning is sometimes considered to cater for the structure plans.
2 .
Medium-Range Planning This is the process through which specific functional plans related to a given number of years are made.
Through this process, details of how strategies are to be carried out to attain long-range objectives are provided.
The institution therefore prepares manuals of procedures that should guide the various units or departments in preparing their medium-range programmes and plans.
Medium-range planning is usually for five years.
In most institutions, the functional plans are translated into financial terms in the form of profit and loss statements.
NOU 103 .
N  'Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 3.
Short-Range Planning This is done on the basis of the medium-range plans.
As a result, the first year of the medium-range plan is used for the short-range yearly operational planning.
Short-range planning is intended to make the long-range plans more realistic or operational.
Short-range plans such as annual budgets are more detailed than medium-range plans.
Exercise 1.2 1.
Identi fy at lea st t wo c ategorie s o f plan nin g 2.
T h e A n n u a l B u d g e t a n n o u n c e d b y y o u r s t a t e g o v e r n o r i s a .................................................................
If you have been able to answer these exercises, then let us continue and well done.
3.0 2 Educational Planning Process in Nigeria Educational Planning in Nigeria is undertaken as a part of the overall national planning.
This implies that the planning units in the Ministries of Education are expected to work closely with the Ministry of National Planning that is charged with the responsibility of producing overall economic development plans for the country.
Therefore educational planning in Nigeria is done within the framework of the national goals.
As a result, the process of educational planning in the country starts with the formulation of national policies and goals.
Such policies that are related to education are initiated by the policy makers or the ruling political body, often in line with the ideology of the government in power.
For instance the President, or a State House of Assembly might decide, as a matter of policy, that agricultural education should be given priority in the country or a given state respectively.
Directives related to such policies are handed down to the Federal (or State) Ministry of Education for necessary action.
The officials in the Ministry of Education then examine such policies and restructure them so that they can constitute operational objectives within the context of education.
Plans are programmes that could help to attain these policies are then worked out essentially in the planning units of the Ministries of Education.
The implications of such plans in terms of the required resources for their implementation are also stated.
The proposals drawn up in the Ministry of Education are then sent back to the appropriate body such as the National or the State's Executive Council for their consideration and approval.
This 104 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning means that the plans are finally approved by the government and an appropriate legislation is passed on them in terms of edicts or decrees.
Once the educational plan is approved by government, the Ministry of Education is confronted with the task of implementation.
With long-term plans for instance, the ten-year development plan progress reports are often given periodically.
Such reports are expected to reflect the extent to which the targets of the plan have been attained.
The Ministries of Education in the States develop their educational plans as is done in the Federal Ministry of Education.
It is then expected that educational planning in the States will reflect the overall national goals and objectives of education.
It is for this reason that the Federal Ministry of Education sometime coordinates the educational plans of the States to arrive at the National Educational Plans.
In summary the planning process in Nigeria involves the following: 1.
Issuing of directives 2.
Preparation o f plan s b y Se nior Ci vil Ser va nts 3.
A p p r o v a l 4.
I m p l e m e n t a t i o n 5. Review of progress made Exercise 1.3 1.
Why do the Federal Ministry of Education need to coordinate.
2.
Wh y d o w e n e e d t o w r i t e r e p o r t s o n p l a n s ?
4.0 Conclusion Educational Planning is an important component of educational development.
We plan our educational systems in order to achieve the aims and objectives of education for the citizenry.
In the same vein, the process of this educational plans is equally important, because such processes spells out in specific terms the variables to be considered and the steps or stages to embark upon in accomplishing such objectives.
Hence the need for a study of the educational planning process, which is another practical effort of the educational plans.
NOM) 105  Concepts and Theories of Educational Adminivration and Planning EDA 811 5 .
0 S u m m a r y In this unit we have been able to study the educational planning process in general, the categories of plans in terms of the long-range, medium-range and short-range, and lastly we examined the planning process in Nigeria.
6.0 References Adesina, Segun (1981) Introduction to Educational Planning: A book of Selected Reading Ile Ife: University of Ile Press Limited Ayanniyi R.B.
(1992, "Educational Planning Process in Nigeria since 1960" Unpublished Ph.D Theses, Department of Education, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria.
Candoli IC, Hack W.G., Ray J and Stoller D.H (1978), School of Business Administration, Boston: allyn and Bacon, Inc. Chesswas J.D.
(1969), Methodologies of Educational Planning for developing countries, Text I and !!
UNESCO, IIEP Churchman, W.C. (1968), The systems Approach, New York: Penguin Books Kaufman, R.A. (1972), Educational System Planning, Englewood_Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Itall, Inc. Musaazi J.C.S, (1982), T h e T h e o r y a n d P r a c t i c e o f E d u c a t i o n a l Administration, London: Macmillan Ovwhigo M.Y., (1991), The Theory and Practice of Educational Planning in Nigeria, Kaduna: Think Publishing Co. Limited Robinson I.M.
(ed) (1972), Decision making in Urban Planning, Beverly Hills, California: Sage Publications 7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment (TMAs) Carefully examine the process of Educational Planning in Nigeria.
106 NOUN  FDA?
811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Unit 15 Constraints of Educational Planning in Nigeria Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Political Constraints of Educational Planning 3.0.1 Economic Constraints 3.0.2 Constraints of Skilled Personnel 3.0.3 Constraints of Inadequate Statistics and Demographic Data 3.0.4 Constraints of Inadequate Planning Tools 3.0.5 Constraints of Implementation 3.0.6 Suggestions on Ways of Remedying the Constraints of Educational Planning 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 1 References 7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment 1.0 Introduction In unit 14 we studied the Educational Planning process by explaining the different proposal that were made on the process of planning, based on that we also identified the three categories of planning such as long-range planning, medium-range, and short-range planning.
Lastly we examined the planning process as practiced in Nigeria.
Now we will continue our discussions in this unit by identifying and discussing the various constraints affecting Educational Planning in Nigeria and suggest ways of remedying such constraints.
NOU 107 N  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, students should be able to: 1.
Identify the constraints affecting educational planning 2.
Discuss the various constraints of educational planning 3.
Illustrate with relevant examples each of the constraints 4.
Explains wa ys o f rem ed yi n g the con straint s. 3.0 Political Constraints of Educational Planning The process of educational planning in Nigeria is faced with a lot of constraints.
One of such is the political constraints.
Educational Planning is based on the ideology and the policies of the government.
Sometimes, such policies are made without giving adequate consideration to their implications.
As a result, the planner is often requested to plan on the basis of policies, which might be difficult or too expensive to implement under the prevailing circumstances and available resources.
To this effect planners often prepare unrealistic plans or face a situation whereby his plans are rejected, by the approving body.
In addition, political rivalry among different groups in the country sometimes influences the amount of money allocated to education.
Furthermore there has been the tendency for some leaders tin the country to consider education as weapon that could be used to wield political influence.
For example, during the Second Republic between 1979 and 1983 the government introduce a policy whose provision included qualitative and quantitative education.
Educational planners who operated under such a setting normally found it difficult to develop realistic or operational plans.
Political instability in the country also disrupts the process of planning and the implementation of educational programmes.
For instance, the constitutional crisis of 1953, the military coup d'etat of 1966, 1976, 1983 and 1985, coupled with the protracted Civil War of 1967-70, have all disrupted the process of planning and the continuity of educational plans in Nigeria.
As a result of such political crisis, some plans that have reached advance stages were abandoned while others were hurriedly introduced.
The impact of these unsettle political conditions was felt in three major ways.
First a chaotic political situation is a disincentive to foreign donor countries.
This can have disastrous results for a country like Nigeria, which count on funding its educational development programmes by foreign aid of 50% of the cost.
S e co n d, s uc h p ol iti cal i n s ta bil it y c a n e ven l ea d to t er mi nat i on or 108H NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning postponement of existing external assistant contracts until conditions return to normal.
For example the discontinuation of USAI sponsored Teacher Education Project in Northern Nigeria, the closure of the UNESCO sponsored Advance Teacher Training Colleges, all explained the above reasons.
Thirdly, as political conditions become increasingly strained they cause significant distortions in the original allocations of Development plans, which generally affects such services as education (Segun Adesina 1981) Exercise 1.1 Mention at least two ways in which politics affect education in Nigeria.
3.0.1 Economic Constraints Another related problem that is encountered in the process of educational planning in Nigeria is that of economic constraints.
Adequate allocation of resources is necessary for a successful implementation of educational programmes.
However, due to political consideration and the high rate of inflation educational programmes in the country have tended to be unrealistic in relation to available resources.
The planner tends to underestimate the cost of such programme and continues to overestimate the anticipated revenue with which to execute the plans.
This situation had been worsened by the worldwide economic recession.
There is also an over reliance on foreign aids and in Nigeria, like many African countries, usually anticipated help from foreign donors to finance some of her development projects including those in education.
The problem arises when the anticipated money does not come which automatically means that the programmes planned cannot be carried out.
For example a School Administrator, who has planned very beautiful programmes for his/her school, might not be able to make it materialize if the problem of finance comes in.
Some activities like the speech and prize- giving day, or inter-house competition could be affected by such constraints.
In higher institutions the introduction of new programmes in a university could also be delayed or sometimes might not take off at all for reasons of economic constraints.
3.0.2 Constraints of skilled Personnel Lack of sufficiently well trained personnel in the planning units of the Ministries of Education is another problem.
This units require people with the ability to carry out project development in the educational service.
So as to realize the goals set by the planners.
The units in the Ministries therefore NOUN 109  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 lack specialist such as educational planners, statisticians, programmers, and analyst, who could effectively develop and ensure successful execution of plans.
This is partly as a result of the rigidity of the educational system which is not responding adequately to the need to place people who are trained in the area of educational planning in the appropriate position.
The wrong notion that anyone who has served in the Ministry of Education for a long period could automatically occupy such planning units in the Ministries having their directors of planning as people who just rose through the ranks without any cognate experience in the skill of planning.
In addition, the few available specialists who are employed in the planning divisions of education sometimes opt for the private sector as a result of the poor conditions of service offered in the Ministry.
3.0.3 Constraints of Inadequate Statistical and Demographic Data The process of educational planning in Nigeria is also hampered by the critical problem of inadequate statistical and demographic data.
For any meaningful planning to be carried out, statistics is very crucial.
However so reliable census has been conducted in country.
The census conducted during the pre-independence era, for instance in 1931 and 1952 were confronted with the problem of insufficient funds and lack of trained personnel for any meaningful exercise.
There was also the fear of the government using such census for the purpose of taxation with the result that majority of the people did not cooperate with the officials for any reliable population figure to be attained.
Thus the pre-independence census resulted in under counting of the population.
However, since the post independence period, families and communities have the tendency of inflating their size as a result of the fear of ethnic or political domination.
This was the situation during the 1963 census and especially that of 1973 when the population was highly inflated to about 80 million.
In recognition of the unrealistic nature of that exercise, the 1973 census was not accepted for purposes of planning.
Death and Birth rates were not properly kept hence it was difficult for planners to have the basic statistical materials for planning.
For example, the number of children in a state in Nigeria.
How many of them are of school going age.
How many of the school going age are likely to be in school in a particular year.
The number and kind of job available in a particular year, in each state and in the country as a whole.
The actual growth rate of industry, commerce and government employment.
How many will be made available each year of the planning period, all these are not easy to attain and it tend to implicate the process of educational planning in Nigeria since they were based on mere estimates.
NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Exercise 1.2 1.
Identify at least two reasons why the educational plan needs the population figures.
2.
As a School Administrator, is it relevant for you to have an accurate figure of population of your students?
3.0.4 Constraints of Inadequate Planning Tools Another important constraints of educational planning in Nigeria has to do with inadequate planning tools.
Such as calculating machines, computers and other materials and facilities that are essential for effective planning.
It is equally important to note that educational planners in the country are not adequately consulted before policies that are related to education are formulated.
Consequently, there is the tendency for them to develop programmes on policies that are not clear to them or that may be difficult for them to justify.
3.0.5 Constraints of Implementation In addition most of the planners, are not given enough freedom to implement their plans.
In most cases, the process of plan implementation is carried out by people who did not participate in planning the programmes.
Consequently it becomes extremely difficult for the planner to successfully evaluate the progress made in the implementation of the plans in order to determine areas that require modification.
This is one of the crucial reasons why some educational programmes in the country are not successfully or fully implemented.
Apart from the problems discussed, educational planning in the country is also obstructed by lack of goodwill of the people and inadequate support given by the government to educational plans.
Generally, the citizens of the c o u n t r y c o n s i d e r e d u c a t i o n a l p r o gr a m m e s a s m a i n l y go ve r n m e n t responsibilities.
As a result they show little interest or no attention later even after a lot of resources have been spent on them.
A typical example if the Universal Primary Education (UPE) programme that was launched in 1976.
Now students I believe you enjoyed this discussions, we now have information on the problems (constraints) affecting educational planning in Nigeria.
NOUN 111  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Exercise 1.3 Why do the citizenry have a lukewarm attitude to educational programmes?
Well done let us continue 3.0.6 Suggestions on Ways of Remedying the Constraints of Educational Planning To minimize the problem that are associated with the process of educational planning in Nigeria, the following measures must be taken: A careful consideration should be given to the political setting under which educational plans are made, and political stability should be encouraged in Nigeria, for instance through adequate enlightenment programmes.
Efforts should be made by all and sundry to allow democracy to survive in Nigeria.
2.
Educational Planners should establish a close relationship and hold regular consultation with the policy makers.
As much as possible the educational planners in the Ministry of Education should be involved in the formulation and implementation of policies that are related to education.
3.
The formation of educational policies and the related plans should as much as possible reflect the available resources.
In addition, adequate funds should be made available for the implementation of educational programmes.
4.
Educational Planning should be left in the hands of trained and skilled personnel.
Moreover, more educational planners, statisticians, demographers, and analyst should be trained and better conditions of service offered them to attract them to remain n the Planning Division of the Ministry of Education.
5.
Educational Planner must be provided with necessary equipment tools and materials that are essential for the effective operation.
For instance, computers and other gadgets should be provided in the Ministry of Education to enhance the process of planning.
6.
Reliable population census should be conducted regularly in the country.
r. NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 7.
The public should be adequately enlightened about educational programmes to secure their operation (Ovwigho 1991).
Exercise 1.4 List at least 4 ways by which we can remedy the problems affecting educational planning.
4.0 Conclusion Many of the purposes and goals of education are political, economic, social and cultural; these factors affect the planning of education in Nigeria.
We have been able to study educational planning and its meaning, the various approaches to educational planning in terms of social demand, manpower and cost benefit approaches.
We examined the process of planning, the categories of plan, i.e.
long-range, medium-range, and short-range.
We specified the process of planning as it obtain in Nigeria, and lastly we outlined and discuss the various constraints which has bedevil educational planning in Nigeria with possible suggestions of how to remedy such.
5 .
0 S u m m a r y In this unit we have been able to identify and discuss the constraints affecting educational planning, illustrate with relevant examples each of the constraints and explaining ways of remedying the constraints.
6.0 References Adesina, Segun (1981) Introduction to Educational Planning: A book of Selected Reading, Ile Ife: University of Ife Press Limited M u s a a zi J.
C .
S , (1 9 8 2 ), T h e T h e o r y a n d P r a c t i c e o f E d u c a t i o n al Administration, London: Macmillan Ovwhigo M.Y., (1991) The Theory and Practice of Educational Planning in Nigeria, Kaduna: Think Publishing Co. Limited 7.0 Tutor-marked Assignment Discuss the political constraints as it affects educational planning process in Nigeria.
NOUN 113  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM IN NIGERIA Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 The Federal Government 3.1 Federal Ministry of Education 3.1.1 State Ministry of Education 3.1.2 State Schools Management Board 3.1.3 Zonal Schools Board 3.1.4 Local Schools Board 4.0 Summary 5.0 Further Reading 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction In Unit 15 we studied the various constraints that affect educational planning in Nigeria.
These constraints were political, economic, social, cultural, inadequacy of personnel and tools, and the lack of good will by the citizenry.
We also made suggestions as to how to remedy the above-mentioned constraints.
In this Unit, which is going to be the last but one unit, we shall be studying Organizational Structure of the Educational System in Nigeria.
This has become imperative so that our knowledge of Educational Administration and Planning will be seen in its appropriate context.
Under this broad Unit title, we shall discuss other contents as will be specified in the objectives below: 114 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning 2.0 Objectives At the end of this Unit Students should be able to: Describe the functions of the Federal Government.
(ii) Discuss the Administrative structure of Federal Ministry of Education.
(iii) Discuss the Administrative structure of the State Ministries of Education.
(iv) Explain the functions of both the Zonal Schools Board and the Local School Boards.
3.0 The Federal Government The responsibility to provide education in Nigeria is expressed in the Nigerian Constitution.
In Chapter 11 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1997, the commitment and obligations of Nigeria to education are clearly spelt out under the heading: "Fundamental objectives and directive principles of State Policy".
Section 18 of the constitution state the governments "Educational Objectives" and the degree of its commitment to a policy of educational provision, accessibility, and adequacy and its orientation towards Science, Technology and Eradication of illiteracy as follows: (1) Government shall direct its policy towards ensuring that there are equal and adequate educational opportunities at all levels; (2) Go vernment s hall pro mote Science and Technolo gy (3) Government shall eradicate illiteracy and when practicable provide .
(a) Free, compulsory and universal primary education (b) F r e e s e c o n d a r y e d u c a t i o n (c) Free uni versit y educa tion; and (d) F r e e a d u l t l i t e r ac y p r o gr a m m e I know your views might differ based on your political inclination.
However, from all evidence available, we can say that in the area of providing "free compulsory and Universal Primary Education, the present democratic government of President Olusegun Obasanjo, has introduced the Universal Basic Education Scheme (U.B.E) this programmes is on to enable government to achieve their objectives of free Universal Primary Education.
NOUN - J  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 The obligation of given equal and adequate educational opportunities is also reflected in the re-introduction of the Distant Learning Programme otherwise called the Open-University of Nigeria of which you are now a benefactor.
Exercise I:1 State the three basic elements under the Federal Governments Educational Objectives, Well done let us continue 3.1 Federal Ministry of Education A Minister appointed by the President heads the Federal Ministry of Education.
He is responsible for the formulation and execution of all national p o l i c y m a t t e r s i n e d u c a t i o n .
H e p r e s i d e s o ve r m e e t i n gs o f S t a t e Commissioners of Education.
He coordinates policy decisions initiated at Federal and State levels.
He takes final responsibility for all educational matters in the Federation.
Directly responsible to him are two Ministers of State appointed also by the President.
To these Ministers of State, the Minister of Education assigns specific areas of responsibilities.
Also directly responsible to the Minister is the Permanent Secretary, who is the Chief Administrator of the Ministry.
He coordinates the activities of the various divisions of the Ministry and ensures that the education policies of the Federal Government are implemented.
He presides over the meetings of the State' Permanent Secretaries of Education and represents the Federal Ministry of Education.
He also advises the Minister of Education on matters concerning the Ministry., The Minister's four heads of division are directly answerable to him.
The Federal Ministry of Education is organized into four divisions, namely ( 4 ) A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d P o l i c y D i v i s i o n ( 5 ) H i g h e r E d u c a t i o n D i v i s i o n ( 6 ) School s an d Educatio nal Ser vice s Di visi on ( 7 ) T h e i n s p e c t o r a t e d i v i s i o n Administrative and Policy Division: This division is headed by a Secretary for Education whose rank is equivalent to that of a Director of Education.
The division is split into the following sections: Personnel Management, Audit, Planning and Development Building, Finance and Accounts and Policy Matters.
These sections deals 116 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning with all the money matters of the Ministry.
It is concerned with budgetary proposals, the administration of funds, the control of expenditure and the payment of grants.
In the case of personnel management, all staff matters such as appointments, promotion staff development, transfers complaints and petitions leave tenure and retirements are dealt with by this section.
Hizher Education Division: The higher education division which is headed by a Director of Education, works in collaboration with the National Universities Commission and the Joint Admission Matriculation Board (JAMB) to take charge of University education throughout the country.
The division is also responsible for the Federal Government Technical Institutions.
It is also in charge of vocational and non-formal education.
Student's Affairs and Foreign Education.
The division handles all Federal Government Scholarships.
Schools and Educational Services Division: This division has responsibility for primary and secondary education, teacher education and adult education, school libraries, schools broadcasting examination and test development, vocational guidance and school welfare, It is also responsible for the preparation of various educational aids as felon strips, slides, and other teaching aids, and the production of radio and a television programmes, which is carried out at the National Education Technology Centre in Kaduna.
A Director of Education Heads the Division.
The Inspectorate Division: The Inspectorate Division is charged with the responsibility of improving and ensuring quality control of education throughout the Federation by carrying out regular supervision of schools.
Though its area offices located in each of the states inspects the Federal inspectors of educational institutions in the State.
However the Federal inspectors of Education are directly responsible to the Director of Education Inspectorate who is also the Head of the inspectorate Division in the Federal Ministry of Education.
The division also has a national coordinating committee, the Joint Consultative Committee (JCC) on education, which deal with all.
policy issues, especially those strictly related to professional courses, the certification of teachers, examination and curriculum charges.
NOU 117 N  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 The Ministry of Education administers two important advisory bodies.
These are the National Council on Education (NCE) and the Joint Consultative Committee on Education (JCCE) in terms of composition; the NCE is made up of the Minister and the State Commissioners of Education.
The Council meets in rotation in state capitals including the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja.
Its principal function is to deliberate on contemporary i s s u e s i n e d u c a t i o n a n d m a k e r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s t o t h e M i n i s t e r .
(Government) on the basis of the national objectives of education.
The JCC is composed of professional officers of the Federal and State Ministries of education, representatives of the Universities, faculties or departments of Education, the Nigerian Union of Teachers (NUT) and the National Manpower Board.
The Committee considers professional matters concerning education, such as quality of education remuneration and discipline of teachers, movement of teachers and students.
Like the NCE, it meets in rotation at Federal and State capitals.
Exericise 1.2 Mention at least three of the division in the Ministry of Education that is of direct relevance to you.
In terms of organizational hierarchy who is the head of the Ministry?
Well done !
Let us continues 3.1.1 State Ministry of Education Education at the state level is organized in a manner similar to that of the Federal Ministry of Education.
At the apex of the organizational structure is the Commissioner of Education, who is usually appointed by the Governor of the state.
Next to him, is the Director-General, who is the head of the Civil Servants in that Ministry directly responsible to the Director-General is the Director of Education.
The organogram (Organizational chart) of State Ministry of Education shows major organizational structures that specify inter-relationships and spheres of responsibilities and interactions among different positions.
Under the Director of Education there are several departments each headed by Chief Inspector of Education.
The departments are: (I) Primary; ( 2 ) S e c o n d a r y ( 3 ) A d u l t a n d N o n - F o r m a l E d u c a t i o n ; ( 4 ) S c i e n c e a n d T e c h n o l o g y ; 118 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning ( 5 ) R e s e a r c h a n d P l a n n i n g ; ( 6 ) I n s p e c t o r a t e ; a n d ( 7 ) A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d G e n e r a l .
There are variation in the organizational structure from one state to the other but such variations are minor, The functions of the State Ministry of Education among others include; (1) Formulation of educational policies, rules and regulation; (2) Enactment of educational laws (or edicts) to guide the conduct of the Ministry in matters related to administration, organization and control of education; (3) Planning and development of educational programmes through research; (4) Inspection and Supervision of both administrative and academic components of schools; (5) Award of bursaries and scholarships to deserving students; (6) Funding of Educational Institutions including State Universities, Polytechnics etc.
(7) Coordination and harmonization of educational activities throughout the state.
3.1.2 State Schools Management Board: The State Schools Management Board is a corporate body established by the law (or edict) of the State.
It is the arm of the State Ministry of Education, which has statutory functions of achieving the national objectives of Education.
The establishment of this body demonstrate the principle of division of labour.
You will recall we mentioned division of labour as an element of bureaucracy (Max Weber).
Throughout the country there is a considerable uniformity in the organizational structure and functions of the State Schools Boards.
The law establishing the Board determines the composition of the Board.
In some Boards there are six or more members.
The Executive Chairman is the highest member of the Board.
Some Boards specify the appointment of a NOUN 119  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning (5) Research and Planning; (6) I n s p e c t o r a t e ; a n d (7) A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d G e n e r a l .
There are variation in the organizational structure from one state to the other but such variations are minor, The functions of the State Ministry of Education among others include; (1) Formulation of educational policies, rules and regulation; (2) Enactment of educational laws (or edicts) to guide the conduct of the Ministry in matters related to administration, organization and control of education; (3) Planning and development of educational programmes through research; (4) Inspection and Supervision of both administrative and academic components of schools; (5) Award of bursaries and scholarships to deserving students; (6) Funding of Educational Institutions including State Universities, Polytechnics etc.
(7) Coordination and harmonization of educational activities throughout the state.
3.1.2 State Schools Management Board: The State Schools Management Board is a corporate body established by the law (or edict) of the State.
It is the arm of the State Ministry of Education, which has statutory functions of achieving the national objectives of Education.
The establishment of this body demonstrate the principle of division of labour.
You will recall we mentioned division of labour as an element of bureaucracy (Max Weber).
Throughout the country there is a considerable uniformity in the organizational structure and functions of the State Schools Boards.
The law establishing the Board determines the composition of the Board.
In some Boards there are six or more members.
The Executive Chairman is the highest member of the Board.
Some Boards specify the appointment of a NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 female member of the Board.
All the members are appointed by the Governor of the State.
The functions of the Board include; (I) The recruitment, appointment, posting, promotion, discipline and transfer of both academic and non-academic staff of government financial schools (2) Matters related to inter state transfers and continuity of service; (3) Da y -to - da y operatio ns o f the Board; (4) Inspectio n and su per vision o f School s; (5) B u s i n e s s M a n a g e m e n t o f t h e B o a r d ; (6) P r e p a r a t i o n o f t h e B o a r d ' s B u d g e t ; (7) Revenue collection and proper accounting of the Board's Financial activities.
(8) I m p l e m e n t a t i o n o f p o l i c y d e c i s i o n ; (9) Coordination of the Board's activities, including those of the Zonal Boards; (10) P r o v i s i o n o f p r o f e s s i o n a l s e r v i c e s (11) Remuneration of teachers.
3.1.3 Zonal Schools Board The Zonal Schools Board comprises of Primary and Post-Primary Schools located in two or more local government areas.
The boards is composed of five members including its Chairman.
All members are appointed by the State Governor except the supervisory councilor for Education, who is an elected official.
The functions of the Zonal Schools Board include: (1) Supervision of Primary and Post Primary Schools under its jurisdiction (2) Distribution of School equipment and furniture, diaries, register, chalk etc.
(3) Payment of salaries and allowances of academic and non-academic staff under its area of control 120 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning (4) Investigation of an action on complaints from Schools on members of the public (5) Carrying out such other duties and instruction as may from time to time be detailed to it by the State Schools Board 3.1.4 Local Schools Board The Constitution delegates the administration of primary schools to the Local Government in whose area the School is situated.
But in practice, the administration control and funding of Primary Schools is a concurrent responsibility that is shared by three tiers of government.
The Local Schools Board is headed by the Chief Inspector of Education.
Minor variation exists in the composition of the Board among the States, but usually each Board has five members.
The Board members are appointed by the State Governor.
The functions of the Local Schools Board include: (I) Supervision of Primary Schools within its area of authority (2) Payment of salaries and allowances of both academic and non- academic staff (3) Distribution of school equipment, furniture, register, diaries, chalk, dusters etc.
(4) Investigation in handling of complaints from schools or members of the public (5) D e p l o ym e n t a n d t r a n s f e r o f t e a c h e r s .
(6) Handling of minor disciplinary problems of staff of Primary Schools within its area of authority.
Exercise 1.3 List at least 3 distinct function of the Zonal Schools Board.
4.0 Conclusion In discussing the business of education it is clear that there is a need to identify the organizational structure of education in the Federal, State, and Local Government levels.
Although the functions of each of these bodies are similar, the fact that it gives a distinct explanation of each group's function goes a long way to justify the need for an effective administration and efficient plans that will enhance the achievement of goals and objectives of education.
All the various bodies mentioned above work toward achievement of the natural objectives as state in the content of this unit.
Although the Federal Government has the Constitutional power to direct education, it cannot do it alone in a country with 37 States, 776 Local NOUN [I ___ 1211  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Governments and a population of 120 million citizens.
An educational administrator certainly needs the knowledge of the workings of these various bodies and institutions so as to understand the education system in which he/she functions effectively.
Knowledge of these institutions will also assist educational planners with data and information on the variables needed for planning purposes.
5.0 Summary In this Unit we studied the organizational structure of the educational system in Nigeria.
In order that we might understand the structures and their functions, we examined them in this perspective.
The Federal Government and its functions, the Federal Ministry of Education, its structure and function.
The State Ministries with its structure and function, the Zonal Schools Boards and Local Schools Board.
We have been able to assist ourselves in broadening our knowledge of the organization and structure of this Educational Administration Planning in Nigeria.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Explain how education is managed by the Zonal Schools Board in your State.
7.0 References Adetoro, J. E. (1966) A handbook of Education in Nigeria, Ibadan Constituion of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (1979) Lagos: Federal Government Press, Chapter II, Section 18, Second Schedule Part II, Item L, Paragraph 27-30 Fafunwa A.B.
(1974) A History of Education in Nigeria, London: George Allen and Urwin Federal Republic of Nigeria, (1981) National Policy on Education, Lagos: Federal Ministry of Information Musaazi J.C.S (1982) T h e T h e o r y a n d P r a c t i c e o f E d u c a t i o n a l Administration, London: Macmillan Taiwo, C.O.
(1'980) The Nigerian Education System Lagos: Thomas Nelson Nigeria Limited.
122 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Unit 17 The Management and control of Education in Nigeria Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 1 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Federal Government Control of Education 3.1 Some Federal National Education Agencies 3.1.1 Foreign and International Bodies 4.0 Conclusions 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References 1.0 Introduction I n Unit 16 we studied organizational structure of the Educational system in Nigeria : This specifically enable us to have an understanding of the functions of both the Federal and State governments We also examined the Federal and State Ministries of Education in terms of their structure and functions.
In this unit, which is also the last in this module, we shall be studying the Management and control of Education in Nigeria, with other contents as will be specified in the objectives below: 2.0 Objectives: By the end of this unit, the students should be able to: (1) Examine the control as carried out by the Federal Government.
(2) Identify and discuss other Federal National Education Agencies NOUN  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning MAP 811 (3) Identify and explain the contributions of foreign and international bodies.
3.0 Federal Government Control of Education: In the area of educational management, the Federal Government has set itself a number of objectives.
These objectives involve: ensuring adequate and effective planning for all education services in the country: the provision of effective administrative and management control for the maintenance and improvement of education system; ensuring quality control through regular instruction and other educational services; and the provision of adequate financial support for all educational services in the Federation.
In order to achieve these objectives, the Federal Ministry of Education performs certain functions, It provides general direction for the development of education throughout the nation.
This means that the Ministry administers the National policy on Education so as to ensure uniform standards of quality control.
It offers advisory and consultancy services to all levels of education below universities.
Much of the advice is given to the state Ministries of education and Schools through seminars, conferences and workshops.
Through the Federal inspectorate, the Ministry organizes the supervision of schools for the improvement of the standard of education.
another important functions of the ministry is to organise forums where educational matter are discussed by the federal and the state educationist for the purpose of developing national policies on education.
These forums also afford people the opportunity to exchange ideas and maintain the national standard of education.
The Ministry also coordinate national examinations and provide a central registry for all teaches.
In addition, the Ministry is responsible for financing education by giving grants to State Government for the development of education in their area.
it also gives scholarships and bursaries to students and coordinates external aid for education.
the Ministry is also responsible for the establishment and administration of Federal Government educational institution of secondary and higher levels which are situated all over the Federation (Musaazi 1982).
124 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning Decree No 20 of 1986; the role of the Federal Ministry of Education in the control of education in the federation is further elucidated with the promulgation of Decree No.
20, 'otherwise known and cited as "the school year (variation) Decree 1986".
this decree gives additional responsibility to the Minister of Education.
The school duration (year) Decree empowers the minister to change the school year calendar from September to June, or July to January/November or December, with effect from January 1987.
All these are efforts made by the Federal Government to exercise their control on Education in the Federation.
Exercise 1.1 1.
Why does the Ministry administer the national policy on Education?
2.
Mention two roles of the Federal Ministry in the control of Education.
Well do ne!
!
Let u s now co nti n ue 3.1 Some Federal and National Educational Agencies: Apart from the Federal Ministry of Education, the Federal Government has established other bodies which are not part of the Ministry of Education, but which perform useful work in different relevant areas of Education.
Below are some of these bodies and their functions.
(a) National Manpower Board: This is the body responsible for the coordination of the work of the Ministries concerned with the survey of manpower needs and development in the country.
It works co- operatively with the Ministries of Education, Labour and Economic Development.
It makes a comprehensive survey of the various levels of manpower needs, makes projection of future requirements, and provides information about available manpower.
It makes recommendations to the appropriate Ministries for consideration and implementation.
(b) The West African Examination Council: Established in 1952, the West African Examination Council is responsible for organizing and conducting schools and public examination in some West African Countries, such as Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra Leone, Gambia and Liberia.
The Council Chief Executive is the Registrar whose headquarters are in Accra, Sierra Leone, and Bathurst, headed by a Senior Administrative NOUN 125  Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Staff.
In Nigeria the Council has its offices in all State capitals.
The Federal Ministry of Education through its representatives is in constant contact with this Council.
(c) The National Board for Evaluation and Measurement: This body has been set up by the Federal Government, among the other functions of the Board was the establishment of a National Examination Council (NECO) to award the Nigerian Secondary School Certificate.
(d) The National Education Research Development Council: It organizes Educational Research in the country.
Information collected by the council is used in improving the national curriculum programmes.
The Federal Ministry of Education is represented on this Council.
(e) National Universities Commission: The primary objectives of (NUC) are to ensure the orderly development on University Education in Nigeria to maintain its high standard and to ensure its adequate funding.
Among the many functions of the NUC are the following: (i) To advice the head of the Federal Government through the Minister on the creation of new Universities and other degree granting Institutions in Nigeria.
(ii) To prepare, after consultation with all the State Governments, the National Manpower Board and such other bodies as it considers appropriate periodic master plans for the balanced and coordinated development of Universities in Nigeria, such plans shall include: (1) The general programmes to be pursued by the Universities in order to ensure that they are fully adequate to national needs and objectives.
(2) The recommendation for t he establi shme nt o f new Universities as and when considered necessary to inquire into and advice the Federal Government on the financial needs both recurrent and capital of University Education in Nigeria among other functions.
(f) National Teachers Institute: The Institute organizes programmes for in- service training of practicing teachers.
In addition the certification of Grade II Teachers is also been carried out by the (N.T.I).
26 NOUN  EDA 811 Concepts and Theories of Educational Administration and Planning (g) The National Book Development Council: Its functions include promoting the development production and distribution of books for all levels and the encouragement of indigenous authors.
Other bodies and agencies for education are the Joint Admission and Matriculation Board (JAMB) responsible for organizing national examinations for adminission into the Universities.
The National Board for Technical Education has the responsibility of controlling standard in the area of Vocational and Technical Education in the country.
The last but not the least is the Universal Basic Education (U.B.E).
An Agency established to assist the Federal Government to accomplish its provisions of basic education to all citizenry.
Exercise 1.2 Mention at least three Federal Agencies of Education that you know.
3.1.1 Foreign and International Bodies Many foreign Countries have been actively involved in the promotion of Education in Nigeria, and have offered a wide variety of technical assistance, including awarding scholarship and bursaries, given grants and loans for specified educational projects and programmes and providing equipment for our educational institutions.
The main donor countries are Britain and her agencies such as the British Council, the Inter-University Council and Overseas Development Ministry, the United State of America and organizations such as the African-American Institute, the Ford Foundation, and the Rockefeller Carnegies Corporation.
Other donor countries include Russia, Canada, Germany and France.
The United Nations Organization (UNO) through its agencies (UNICEF, UNESCO, UNDP) has also given various forms of technical aids to Nigeria for her educational development.
4.0 Conclusion Education is one very important instrument, which the Federal Government of Nigeria has decided to use to achieve national development.
It is therefore a subject of crucial importance; consequently the main responsibility for the development of Education in Nigeria rests with the Federal Government.
It is the government that has the means, resources and power to make and carry out national policies on education to meet the goals and aspiration of the people.
However, the control of education in Nigeria is shared among the NOUN 121  Concepts and Theories of Echwational Administration and Planning EDA 811 Federal, State and Local Government.
The system of education in the country is relatively decentralized.
The administrative structures in the ministries of education differ from State to State, but there are more basic similarities than differences.
The political system makes each State responsible for the organization and administration of Education.
5 .
0 S u m m a r y In this Unit we studied the management and control of Education in Nigeria.
We examined the control as carried out by the Federal Government with the application of the National Objectives of Education.
Again, we identified other Federal and National Education agencies much as Manpower Board, WAEC, NBTE, NUC, Nil, JAMB, and so on.
We also discussed the contribution to education, and lastly we identify other foreign and international bodies relevant to the development of Education in Nigeria.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment Carefully examine the management and control functions of the Federal Government on Education in Nigeria.
7.0 References Adesina Segun (1981, Introduction to Educational Planning, Ile-Ife: University of Ife Press.
Constitution of the Federal Republic aof Nigeria (1979), Lagos: Federal Government Press Enaohwo J.O.
and Eferakoya O.A.
(1989) Educational Administration, lbadan: Paperback Publishers Federal Republic of Nigeria Official Gazette Decree No.
20 (School Variation) of 1986 Musaazi J.C.S.
(1982) The theor y a nd p ractice o f Educational Administration, London: Macmillan Ozigi A.O.
('1977) A handbook on School Administration, lbadan: Macmillan Press Taiwo C. 0.
(1980) The Nigerian Education System.
Past, Present and Future — Lagois: Thomas Nelson Nigeria Limited.
128 NOUN
