EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDA 852 COURSE TITLE: POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 1 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT BLURB (COURSE DESCRIPTIO N) EDA 852 Politics of Educational Management is a 2 unit course to be taken in the first year of the masters degree programme in Educational Management at the National Open University of Nigeria.
It will be taken as a core course by all students registered for the programme.
The course is made up of fifteen study units and a course guide.
It introduces students to the basic conceptual issues in politics and educational management.
The influence of politics on decision making in educational management is also discussed to get learners appreciate the fact that politics characterize the decision making process in education management.
Finally, contemporary political issues such as funding and equality of educational opportunities are discussed to inform learners of the need to keep abreast with national or even international issues in educational management.
Learners will be able to build on this foundation as they pursue their studies in the educational management programme.
2 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT COURSE GUIDE EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Course Developer: Dr. V.O.
Igbineweka Department of Educational Foundats and Management, Ambrose Alli University, Ekpoma, Nigeria.
Unit Writer: Dr. V.O.
Igbineweka Department of Educational Foundations and Management, Ambrose Alli University, Ekpoma, Nigeria.
Course Editor: Prof. N.A.
Nwagwu Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City Programme overseer Dr. Samuel O. Ogundiran School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Dr. Samuel O. Ogundiran School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
3 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT EDA852: POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Introduction to the Course 3.2 A Guide Through the Course 3.2.1 Course Aims and Objectives 3.2.2 Course Materials and Structure 3.2.3 How to Get the Most from the Course 3.3 Course Delivery 3.3.1 Facilitation 3.3.2 Tutorials 3.3.3 Counselling 3.4 Assessment 3.4.1 Self Assessment Exercises 3.4.2 Tutor-Marked Assignments 3.4.3 Final Examination 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings.
4 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 1.0 INTRODUCTION This course guide is an access device designed to introduce you to the course materials, and to show you how to use it.
Additionally, this course guide functions as a reference tool for you to consult whenever you have questions about the course.
Such questions may include how to plan available time; when to submit assignments and the support service available.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this Course Guide, it is expected that you will be able to - state he aim and objectives of a course guide; - outline the structure and contents of the course, EDA 852; - describe how the course should be studied; - provide information on available support services; - provide information on how the course will be assessed; - design and write your own personal course guide for this course and other courses in your M.Ed programme.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Introduction to the Course Welcome to EDA 852: Politics of Educational Management which is a two credit unit course offered in the first year to students of the postgraduate degree programme in Educational Management.
There are no prerequisites for studying this fifteen study Units course that has been developed with appropriate local examples suitable for the Nigerian audience.
This Course Guide is for distance learners registered for the M.Ed Educational Management Programme of the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
The guide is one of the several resource tools available to help you successfully complete this course and ultimately your programme.
In this guide, you will find very useful information about the course.
Such information includes the aims, objectives, course description, course materials, and available support services.
Other information on assignments and examination, guideline on how to plan your time for study are also available.
5 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT I strongly recommend that you go through this Course Guide and complete the feedback form at the end before you begin your study of the course.
The feedback form must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator along with your first assignment.
This guide also provides answers to several of your questions.
However, do not hesitate to contact your study centre if you have further questions.
I wish you all the best in your learning experience and successful completion of this course.
3.2 A Guide Through the Course 3.2.1 Course Aim and Objectives There are objectives to be achieved in each study unit of the course.
You should read them before studying each unit.
On completion of this course, you should be able to: - explain conceptual issues in politics and educational management; - examine the influence of politics on decision making in educational management.
- discuss contemporary issues in educational management.
- apply political principles in policy formulation and implementation.
- describe theoretical framework in policy making process - acquire skills and knowledge in influencing the behaviour of other people to your own advantage.
3.2.2 Course Materials and Structure Course Summary Module 1 introduces you to the conceptual issues in politics and educational management.
Module 2 examines the influence of politics on decision making in educational management and module 3 deals with contemporary political issues in educational management.
There are fifteen study Units in this course.
Each study unit consists of one week work and should take you about three hours to complete.
It includes specific objectives, guidance for study, reading materials and self assessment exercises.
Together with tutor-marked assignments, these 6 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of the individual study Units and of the course.
Study Plan Look at table 1 below; It is a presentation of the course and how long it should take you to complete each study unit and the accompanying assignments.
UNIT TITLE OF STUDY UNIT WEEKS/ ASSIGNMENT REMARKS ACTIVITY Course Guide 1 Module I Conceptual Issues in Politics and Educational Management 1 Meaning of Politics and some 2 Identify some interest groups in the political terminologies school system 2 The Politics of Nationhood 3 What are the ideals of politics 3 The meaning of Education 4 Describe the Nigerian educational system 4 Concept of Educational 5 Discuss the functional task areas of Management the school administrator.
5 The Influence of Politics on 6 Discuss the role of politics in TMA 1 to be Educational Management educational management.
submitted at the end of the week Module 2 The Influence of Politics on Decision Making in Educational Management 6 Educational Policy making 7 Describe the educational policy process making process.
7 The role of Interest Groups in 8 Advance reasons why you think it is Policy making process important to consider the opinion of workers unions in the education industry in formulation of 8.
Examination of Past and Present 9 educational policies.
Educational Policies in Nigeria Outline the major educational policies made by missionaries 9.
Decision making and policy 10 and Formulation the British colonial government.
10.
Devolution of Functions in 11 Explain the decision making process TMA 2 to be Educational Management submitted at the end of Discuss the role of Federal, the week.
States and Local governments in the Nigerian education system.
Module 3 Contemporary Political Issues in 7 Educational Management 11 Contemporary Political Issues of 12  Discuss the factors to be considered EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Funding Education and the UBE.
in preparing budget to implement UBE in your local government area.
12.
Contemporary Political Issues of 13 Do you support the agitation for the TMA 3 to be government take-over/handover of return of schools to original owners?
submitted at the end of schools.
the week.
13.
Contemporary Political Issue of 14 Highlight government s deliberate Equality of Educational policies to remedy educational opportunities.
imbalance in Nigeria.
14.
Contemporary Issues of Open and 15 What factors will you consider for distance learning (ODL) and the successful implementation of Private Education Institutions.
ODL Programmes in Nigeria?
15.
Issue of implementation of the 16 Discuss the problems of TMA 4 to be National Policy on Education.
implementing the national policy submitted at the end of on the week.
Revision 17 education.
Examination 18 *You are to use this overview to plan your personal timetable for the course.
3.2.3 How to Get the Most from this Course In distance learning, the Study Units replace the university lecturer.
The advantage is that you can read and work through the course materials at your pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
Just as a lecturer might give you in-class exercise, your Study Units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate times.
Each of the Study Units has common features which are designed to aid your learning.
The first feature is an introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives let you know what you should be able to do by the time you have completed the unit.
You should use these objectives to guide your study.
When you have finished the unit, you should go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
Self Assessment Exercises are interspersed throughout each study unit and answers are given at the end of the course.
These exercise are designed to help you recall what you have studied and to evaluate your learning by yourself.
You should do each Self Assessment Exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
The summary at the end of each unit also helps you to recall all the main topics discussed in the main content of each unit.
There are also tutor-marked questions at the end of each unit.
Working on these questions will help you to 8 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments which you will submit and the final examination.
It should take you about three hours to complete a study unit, the exercises and assignments.
When you have completed the first study unit take note of how long it took you and use this information to draw up a timetable to guide your study for the rest of your course.
The wide margins on the left and right side of the pages of your course book are meant for you to make notes of the main ideas or key points which you can use when revising the course.
If you make use of all these features, you will significantly increase your chances of passing the course.
3.3 Course Delivery As an open and distance learner, you learn through several ways.
You learn when you interact with the content in your course material in the same way as a student interacts with the teacher in a conventional institution.
You also learn when you are guided through the course; however you are not taught the course.
Instead, your course material is your teacher, and as such you will not be able to get answers to any questions which may arise from your study material.
It is for this reason that, in addition to the course material which you have received, the delivery of this course is supported by tutorial, facilitation, and counselling support services.
Although these services are not compulsory, you are encouraged to take maximum advantage of them.
3.3.1 Tutorial Sessions The total number of tutorial hours for this course is 8 hours.
Tutorials sessions form a part of your learning process as you have an opportunity to receive answers to questions or clarifications which you may have.
Also, you may contact you tutorial facilitator by phone or mail.
On your part, you will be expected to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant Study Units.
Write your questions so as to gain maximum benefit from tutorial sessions.
Information about the location and time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Tutorial sessions are a flexible arrangement between you and your tutorial facilitator.
You will need to contact your study centre to arrange the time schedule for the sessions.
This is the reason why you need to obtain your tutorial facilitator s phone number and email addresses.
9 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Tutorial sessions are optional.
However, the benefits of participating in them provide you a forum for interaction and peer group discussions which will minimize the isolation you may experience as a distance learner.
3.3.2 Facilitation Facilitation is learning that takes place both within and outside tutorial sessions.
Your tutorial facilitator guides your learning by doing the following: • provide answers to your questions during tutorial sessions, on phone or by email; • coordinate group discussions; • provide feedback on your assignments; • pose questions to confirm learning outcomes; • coordinate, mark and record your assignment/examination score; and • monitor your progress.
The language of instruction for this course is English.
The course material is available in print or CD formats, and also on the university website.
One your part, you will be expected to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant Study Units, write your questions so as to gain maximum benefit from facilitation.
Information about the location and time schedule for facilitation will be available at your study centre.
Time of facilitation is a flexible arrangement between you and your tutorial facilitator.
You should contact your tutorial facilitator if: • You do not understand any part of the Study Units.
• You have difficulty with the Self Assessment Exercises.
• You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutorial facilitator s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
3.3.3 Counselling 10 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Counselling forms a part of your learning because it is provided to make your learning experience easier.
Counselling is available to you at two levels, academic and personal counseling.
Student counselors are available at the study centre to provide guidance for personal issues that may affect your studies.
Your study centre manager and tutorial facilitators can assist you with questions on academic matters such as course materials, facilitation, grade and so on.
Make sure that you have the phone numbers and email addresses of your study centre and the various individuals.
3.4 Assessment There are three components of assessment for this course: Self Assessment Exercises and assignments at the end of each study unit; the Tutor-Marked Assignments; and a written examination.
In doing these assignments, you are expected to use the information gathered during your study of the course.
Below are detailed explanations on how to do each assignment.
3.4.1 Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs) There are Self Assessment Exercises spread out through your course material.
You should attempt each exercise immediately after reading the section that precedes it.
Possible answers to the exercise are provided at the end of the course book, however, you should check the answers only after you must have attempted the exercise.
The exercises are for you to evaluate your learning; they are not to be submitted.
There are also questions spread through each study unit.
You are required to attempt these questions after you have read a study unit.
Again, the questions are to help you assess your knowledge of the contents of the unit.
You are not required to submit the answers for SAEs.
3.4.2 Tutor-Marked Assignments (TMAs) There are four Tutor-Marked Assignments for this course.
The assignments are designed to cover all areas treated in the course.
You will be given your assignments and the dates for submission at your study centre.
You are required to attempt all four Tutor-Marked Assignments.
You will be assessed on all four, but the best three performance will be used for your continuous assessment.
Each assignment carries 10% and together will count for 30% of you total score for the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your 11 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT tutorial facilitators for formal assessment on or before the stipulated dates for submission.
The work that you submit to your tutorial facilitator for assessment will count for 30% of your total course score.
Guidelines for Writing Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
On the cover page of your assignment, write the course code and title, assignment number (TMA 1, TMA 2) and date of submission, your name and matriculation number.
It should look like this: Course Code: Course Title: Tutor-Marked Assignment Number: Topic of Assignment: Date of Submission: Name: Matriculation Number: School and Programme: 2.
You should endeavour to be concise and to the point in your answers and adhere to word limit where given.
Your answer should be based on your course material, further readings and experience.
However, do not copy from any of these materials.
If you do, you will be penalized.
Remember to give relevant examples and illustrations.
3.
Use ruled foolscap sized paper for writing answers.
Make and keep a copy of your assignments.
4.
Your answers should be hand-written by you.
Leave a margin of about 1.5 inches of the left side and about 5 lines before the answers to the next question for your tutorial facilitator s comments.
3.4.3 Final Examination and Grading The final examination for EDA 852 will be of two hours duration, and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the kinds of Self Assessment Exercises and questions in the Tutor-Marked Assignments which you have previously 12 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
You will find it useful to review your answers to Self Assessment Exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments before the examination.
For you to be eligible to sit for the final examination, you must have done the following: 1.
You should have submitted all the four Tutor-Marked Assignments for the course.
2.
You should have registered to sit for the examination.
The deadline for examination registration will be available at your study centre.
Failure to submit your assignments or to register for the examination (even if you sit for the examination) means that you will not have a score for the course.
Course Marking Scheme The following table lays out the marks that constitute the total course score.
Assessment Marks Assignments 1 -4 (four submitted, Each assignment carries 10%, but but the best three of all the only the best 3 assignments (30%) assignments will be selected to will constitute CA score form CA) Final examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, all the features of this course guide have been designed to facilitate your learning in order that you achieve the aims and objectives of the course.
They include the aims and objectives, course summary, course overview, Self Assessment Exercise and study questions.
You should ensure that you make maximum use of them in your study to achieve maximum results.
13 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 5.0 SUMMARY EDA 852 Politics of Educational Management provides you with a conceptual framework upon which you develop mastery in influencing the behaviour of people to your own advantage.
The course is aimed at equipping you with analytical skills for examining the influence of politics on policy formulation, review and implementation.
Upon completing the course, you should be able to influence the decisions of all stakeholders in education (students, teachers, administrators, parents, employers of labours, and government) to you own advantage.
I wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both interesting and useful.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) State the aim and objectives of this course.
(2) Outline the information on available support services for this course and give a concise description of how this course should be studied.
(3) Design and write your own personal course Guide for this course.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Your course materials is the main text for this course.
However, you are encouraged to consult other sources as provided for you in list of references and further reading below; Bibliography Abernethy, D.A.
(1969).
The Political Dilemma of Popular Education: An African Case.
Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.
Aderounmu, W.O.
and Ehiametor, E.T.
(1985).
Introduction to Administrative of Schools in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Evans Brothers Publishers Ltd 14 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Adeyemi, J.K. (1998).
Cost in Education in M. Nwadiani.
Educational Management for Sub-Sahara Africa.
(Pp.
66-80).
Benin City: Nigerian Society for Educational Planning (NSEP).
Agbebaku, P.E.
(2000).
Topics in Political Science.
Benin City: Sylva Publishing Inc. Ailoge, J. and Anegbode, J.
(2001).
Issues in Nigerian Government and Politics.
Akure; Sylva Publishing Inc. Aiyepeku, T.F.(1989).
6-3-3-4 System of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NPS Educational Publishers Limited.
Alele-Willaims, G, (1988).
The Politics of Administering a Nigerian university in A.U.
Kadiri (Ed.)
25 Years of Centralized University Education in Nigeria (Pp.
17-31).
Lagos: National Universities Commission.
Anuna, M.C.
(2004).
Educational Policies and the Nigerian Legal System, Enugu: SNAAP Press.
Ayo-Sobowale, S.M.O.
(2006).
Factors Militating against the Girl-Child Education in Nigeria in P.M.C Ogomaka and D.A.
Onyejemezi (eds.)
The Home, the Society and the Education of the Nigeria Child.
Lagos: 20th Annual Congress Book of Proceedings, Nigerian Academy of Education.
Babalola, J.B. (2003).
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
Babalola, J.B. (1993).
Diagnosis of Educational Policies and Reforms.
Ibadan: The Department of Adult Education, University of Ibadan Boudon, R. (1973).
Education, Opportunity and Social Inequality.
New York: John Willey and Sons Burger, R.H. (1993).
Information Policy: A Framework for Evaluation and Policy Research.
Norwood New Jersy: Ablex Coleman, J.S.
(1968).
The Concept of Equality of Educational Opportunity.
Harvard Educational Review, Vol.
38, Pp 7-22 15 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Durojaiye, M.O.A.
(1987).
Egalitarianism and Inequalities in Nigeria Education in A.M. Ejiogu and D. Ajeyaleni (Eds.)
Emergent Issues in Nigerian Education.
Lagos: Joja Press Ltd., (Pp.
12-18).
Durosaro, D.O.
(2004).
Crucial Issues in the Management of Primary Education in Nigeria in E.O Fagbamiye, J.B Babalola, M. Fabunmi and A.O.
Ayeni Management of Primary and Secondary Education in Nigeria (Pp.
73 80), Ibadan: NAEAP Easton, D. (1965).
A Framework for Political Analysis.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Ehiametalor, E.T.
(1995).
Data Management in School and Other Issues.
Benin City: NERA Publication.
Emenike, O.
(2004).
Law and Education Management.
Enugu: Empathy International.
Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1974).
History of Education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen & Urwin.
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(1999).
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Abuja: Government Printing Press Federal Ministry of Education.
(2002).
Blue Print and Implementation Plan for the National Open University and Distance Learning Programmes.
Abuja: Federal Ministry of Education.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos; NERDC Girdwood, A.
(1999).
Tertiary Education policy in Ghana: An Assessment, 1988 1998 Education 20261.
The World Bank Haddad, W.D.
(1994).
The Dynamics of Education Policymaking: Case Studies on Burkina Faso, Jordan, Peru and Thailand.
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Jegede, O.
(2001).
Producing Teachers for UBE through Open and Distance Learning.
Journal of Basic Education in Nigeria 1(1).
55-65.
16 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Jimoh, B.O.
(2006).
Introduction to Educational Administration in J.A.
Aghenta and E.O.
Omoregie (Eds.)
Fundamentals of Educational Management (Pp1-18).
Agbor: Krisbec Publications Joint Admission and Matriculation Board.
(2008).
UME/DE Brochure 2009/2010 Academic Session: Guidelines for Admissions to First Degree Courses in Universities and Degree Awarding Institutions in Nigeria.
Lagos: JAMB.
Key, V.O.
(1978).
Politics and Pressure Groups.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc. Koul, b.N.
(2005).
Induction Workshop for Staff of the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Lagos: NOUN Lasswell, H.D.
(1936).
Politics: Who Gets What, When & How?
New York: Mc Graw-Hill Book & Co. Lindblom, C. and Cohen, D.K.
(1979).
Usuable knowledge: Social Science and Problem Solving.
New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University.
Miller, S.I.
(1976).
Policy Issues in Education.
London Lexington Books.
Miller, R. and Schumann, W. (2006) The Policy Cycle Retrieved October 10, 2007 from http://www.dadalos.org/politikin/politik/policy- zyklus.html Montviloff, V. (1999).
National Information Policies: A Handbook on the Formulation, Approval, Implementation and Operation of A National Policy on Information.
Paris: UNESCO.
Njuguna, E. (2006).
ICT Policy in Developing Countries: Understanding the Bottlenecks.
Retrieved April 5, 2007 from http://www.ptc.org/events/ptc06/program/public/proceedings/emmanuel %20njugunapaper143.pdf Nwadiani, M. (1998).
Educational Management for Sub-Sahara Africa.
Benin City: Monose Amalgamates.
Nwadiani, M. (1993).
Faster Forward Jump Hypothesis: Implications for Educational Planning in Developing Countries.
Benin City: University of Benin Press.
17 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
The Politics of Education Policies in Nigeria.
Faculty of Education, Uniben, Distinguished Lecture Series No.1, Benin City.
Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
From UPE to UBE: Basic Planning consideration for Effective Implementation of Programmes in T. Ajayi (Eds.)
Universal basic Education in Nigeria.
(Pp 10-21).
Abuja: UNESCO Office in Nigeria.
Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
Management structure and Financing of Education in UNESCO (Ed.)
The state of Education in Nigeria.
(Pp.
10-21) Abuja: UNESCO Office in Nigeria.
Nwana, O.C.
(2000).
Aberrations in the Nigerian Education System.
The State of Education in Nigeria.
(Pp.
152) Abuja: UNESCO Nwagwu, C.C.
(2004).
Decision-Making in Organizations in N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma and C.C.
Nwagwu.
Organization and Administration in Education: Perspectives and Practices.
(Pp.210-224).
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Nwoko, D. (1992).
The Impoverished Generation.
Asaba : New culture Publications.
Ogonor, B.O.
(2004).
Management of Education in Nigeria in N.A.
Nwagwu; M.E.
Ijeoma and C.C.
Nwagwu (Eds.)
Organizations and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
(Pp.
304-322) Benin City: Festa printing Press Ltd. Ogunu, M.A.
(2004).
Government Take-Over of Schools from Voluntary Agencies and Moves to Return the Schools- A Critical Appraisal in E.O.
Fagbamiye; and A.O.
Ayeni.
Management of Primary and Secondary education in Nigeria.
(Pp134-156).
Ibadan: NAEAP Publications Ojogwu, C.N.
(2004).
Organization of the Nigerian Education System in N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma and C.C.
Nwagwu (Eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
(Pp.267-301).
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Olagboye, A.
(1997).
Educational System Administration in Nigeria: Structure Responsibilities and Practices.
Lagos: Tisons Ltd Olubor, R.O.
(2004).
Politics and Policies of Education in N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma and C.C.
Nwagwu (Eds.)
Organization and 18 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices, (Pp.156-176).
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Okunamiri, P.O.
(2005).
The Popularity of Privatization in Education in Nigeria in G.O.
Akpa; S.U.
Udoh and E.O.
Fagbamiye (eds.)
Deregulating the Provision and Management of Education in Nigeria (PP 123-129), Jos: NAEAP Publication.
Okunola, P.O.
(2004).
Public Participation in Education Policy-Making in Nigeria: Trends, Issues and Prospects in E.O.
Fagbemiye; J.B. Babalola; M. Fabunmi and A.O.
Ayeni.
Management of Primary and Secondary Education in Nigeria.
(Pp.
313-324).
Ibadan: NAEAP Omolewa, M. (2001).
The Challenge of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: University of Ibadan Ozigi, A.O.
(1982).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
Ibadan: Macmillian Nigeria Publishers Ltd. Terence, J.J. (1972).
Professions and Power.
London: The Macmillian Press.
The World Bank.
(1988).
Education in Sub-Sahara Africa: Policies for Adjustment, Revitalisation and Expansion.
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
The World Bank (2003).
School Education in Nigeria: Preparing for Universal Basic Education.
Human Development Africa Region September.
ThisDay Newspapers, (2002, March 13).
Taking Distance out of Education.
Ukeje, B.O., Akabogu, G.C.
and Ndu, A.
(1992).
Educational Administration.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co. Ltd UNESCO (2003).
A Decade of Basic Education Data in Nigeria.
Paris: UNESCO UNESCO.
(2000).
The State of Education in Nigeria.
Abuja: UNESCO Walson-Jack, N. (2000).
Education for Democracy.
Lagos: Central Educational Service Lecture Series Publication.
19 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT EDA 852: POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANEGEM ENT BY DR. V.O.
IGBINEWEKA DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AL FOUNDATINS AND MANAGEMENT AMBROSE ALLI UNIVERSITY, EKPOMA, EDO STATE.
EMAIL: igbinewekavict orogie2004@yahoo.com GSM NUMBERS: 08056410212, 07033246631 20 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Course Developer: Dr. V.O.
Igbineweka Department of Educational Foundats and Management, Ambrose Alli University, Ekpoma, Nigeria.
Unit Writer: Dr. V.O.
Igbineweka Department of Educational Foundations and Management, Ambrose Alli University, Ekpoma, Nigeria.
Course Editor: Prof. N.A.
Nwagwu Faculty of Education University of Benin Benin City Programme overseer Dr. Samuel O. Ogundiran School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
Course Coordinator: Dr. Samuel O. Ogundiran School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Victoria Island, Lagos.
21 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT MODULE ONE: CONCEPTUAL ISSUES IN POLITICS AND EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 1 MEANING OF POLITICS AND SOME POLITICAL TERMINOLOGIES Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Meaning of Politics 3.2 Some Political Terminologies 3.2.1 Political Socialization 3.2.2 Interest/Pressure Groups 3.2.3 Interest Articulation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings UNIT 2 THE POLITICS OF NATIONHOOD Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Concept of the Politics of Nationhood 3.2 Importance of Political Education 3.3 An Appraisal of the Nigerian Political Climate 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading UNIT 3 THE CONCEPT OF EDUCATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning, Scope and Purpose of Education 3.2 The Educational System 3.3 Basic Features of the Educational System 22 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 7.0 References/Further Readings UNIT 4 CONCEPT OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of Educational Management 3.2 Functional Areas of Educational Management 3.3 Purpose of Educational Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading UNIT 5 THE ROLE OF POLITICS IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Impact of Politics on Educational Management 3.2 The Role Education Plays in Political System Development 3.3 Political Factors and Educational Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References MODULE TWO: THE INFLUENCE OF POLITICS ON DECISION MAKING IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 1 DECISION MAKING AND POLICY FORMULATION Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 23 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Decision Making Process 3.2 Decision Making Determinants 3.3 Decision Making and Policy Plan 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings UNIT 2 EDUCATIONAL POLICY MAKING PROCESS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Concept of Educational Policy 3.2 The Educational Policy Making Process 3.3 Educational Policy Making Models 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings UNIT 3 THE ROLE OF INTEREST GROUPS IN POLICY MAKING PROCESS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Students and Parents Role in Education Policy making Process 3.2 Teachers Unions and Education Policy Making Process 3.3 The Role of Civil Servants in Education Policy Making Process 3.4 The Role of Political Parties in Education Policy Making Process 3.5 The Role of Religious and Ethnic Groups in Education Policy Making Process 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 8.0 References/Further Readings 24 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 EXAMINATION OF PAST AND PRESENT EDUCATIONAL POLICIES IN NIGERIA Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Educational Policies by Missionaries 3.2 Educational Policies by Colonial Government 3.3 Educational Policies by the Nigerian Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 9.0 References/Further Readings UNIT 5 DEVOLUTION OF FUNCTIONS IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Constitutional Provisions for Educational Management in Nigeria 3.2 Local Government s Role in Education Management 3.3 State Government s Role in Education Management 3.4 Federal Government s Role in Education Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings MODULE THREE: CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL ISSUES IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 1 CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL ISSUE OF FUNDING EDUCATION AND THE UBE IN NIGERIA Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 25 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of Funding Education 3.2 Sources and Stakeholders in the Funding of Education 3.3 Determinants of UBE Implementation in Nigeria 3.4 UBE Cost Sharing Amongst the Tiers of Government 3.5 The Challenge of Inadequate Funding of Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings UNIT 2 CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL ISSUES OF GOVERNMENT TAKE-OVER/HAND-OVER OF SCHOOLS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The history of Government take-over of Schools in Nigeria 3.2 Reasons for the Government take-over of Schools 3.3 The Effect of Government takeover of Schools 3.4 Controversy over Government Return of Schools to Original Owners 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings UNIT 3 CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL ISSUE OF EQUALITY OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of Equality of Educational Opportunities 3.2 Reasons for Educational Imbalance in Nigeria 3.3 Government Policy to Remedy Educational Imbalance 3.4 Challenge of Gender Imbalance in Education Participation 3.5 Politics of Location of New Educational Institutions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 26 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings UNIT 4 THE CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL ISSUES OF OPEN AND DISTANCE LEARNING (ODL) AND PRIVATE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of ODL 3.2 Characteristics of ODL 3.3 Factors that affect ODL Implementation 3.4 Concept of Private Educational Institutions 3.5 Arguments For/Against Private Participation in Educational Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings UNIT 5 ISSUE OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL POLICY ON EDUCATION (NPE) Table of Contents 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 The Philosophy and Goals of Education in Nigeria 3.2 Terms of Reference for NPE Implementation Committee 3.3.
Challenge of Implementing the National Policy on Education 3.4.
Reviews and Editions of the NPE 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 27 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT MODULE 1 CONCEPTUAL ISSUES IN POLITICS AND EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Unit 1- Meaning of Politics and some Political Terminologies Unit 2- The Politics of Nationhood Unit 3- The Meaning of Education Unit 4- Concept of Educational Management Unit 5- The Influence of Politics on Educational Management 28 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 1 MEANING OF POLITICS AND SOME POLITICAL TERMINOLOGIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 Meaning of Politics 3.2 Some Political Terminologies 3.2.1 Political Socialization 3.2.2 Interest/Pressure Group 3.2.3 Interest Articulation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction It is often said that everybody is a political animal.
This is because there is politics in everything we do.
There is politics in the decisions we take at home, in government, in educational management and even in religion.
It is therefore important that we understand the meaning of politics and some political terminologies.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: § explain the meaning of politics § identify some political terminologies § discuss what political socialization means § explain the meaning of interest/pressure groups § discuss what interest articulation means 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning of Politics This encompasses the activities involved in getting and using power in public life, and being able to influence decisions that affect a country or a society.
It includes matters concerned with getting or using power within a particular group or organization.
29 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Politics describes a system of political affairs.
Politics is therefore an act whereby someone uses his/her power or authority to influence the decision of others to his/her advantage.
Authority in this context means the power or right a person has to give orders to people.
Influence on the other hand is the power that somebody has to make people behave the way he/she wants them to behave.
Another element of politics is interest.
Politics is a kind of game play that involves activities which people enter into to pursue groups, personal or selfish interest(s).
3.2.1 Political Socialization Political values, beliefs and patterns of behaviour are acquired by the citizens of a given society through political socialization.
Political socialization is a long developmental process through which the citizens acquire the beliefs, feelings and information that help them comprehend, evaluate and relate to the political world around them.
The agents of political socialization include the family, peer groups, school, social clubs, political parties, mass media etc The Family The family is the nucleus of the society and it is the first point of contact between the new born-citizens and the political system.
It is the family that teaches the child his political system, mother s tongue, initial religious beliefs and some societal norms.
As he grows, he starts to learn from his parents the symbols of the community, the political parties and political figures favoured by his parents and those they dislike.
The place of the family as an agent of political socialization is so diffused and pervasive that one can know the political learning or preference of a particular family by listening to their children.
Some critics of the family as an agent of political socialization see it as an agent of introduction rather than educating the children.
At this early stage of growth, the child is more or less a duplicate of the parents political orientation.
The School The place of the school as an agent of political socialization can not be over-emphasized as it is a critical socializing structure in 30 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT the modern state.
The school has within its curriculum subjects like history, geography, and social studies etc which teach the students the different aspect of social life and by this a comprehensive cultural transmission takes place.
Having been exposed to the various areas and knowledge of the political system the student can now subject to critical evaluation the values he has been taught in the family.
The teacher stands a very good chance to indoctrinate the student but yet the student may still emerge independent of the preferences of his teachers since the child is now growing in maturity and also his exposition to numerous literatures.
A typical classroom is made up of children from different religious, social and family background.
They enter into all forms of relationships and these inter relationship may either strengthen or weaken their previously held political perception.
Civic Clubs People collaborate in order to realize their various interests because it is easier that way.
Therefore they form or join clubs, associations, unions, religious groups etc.
All these groups of different forms and colouration exist in all political systems and they perform socializing functions knowingly or unknowingly.
For example, many parents insist on sending their children to their religious denomination schools so that they can be taught their religious tenets.
The Catholic Church for instance preaches against abortion, divorce and other moral vices.
It advocates good moral virtues which are necessary for the survival of the political system.
Other clubs like Hitler Youth, Girls Guide, Boys Brigade, Boys Scout, Political Party Youth Wing, Koomsomol of the former USSR are formed by both the governments and citizens to transmit political culture.
Mass Media This is a powerful tool of political socialization.
With powerful and sophisticated electronic gadgets at its disposal, its power of informing and educating the people is very efficient and effective.
The media gives the day by day happenings in the nation and with globalization what is also happening all over the world.
The people are in contact with their leaders, the issues facing the nation, as well as the different positions on the issues.
In 31 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT contemporary politics, political parties float mass media outfits to enable government and opposition transmit their messages to the people.
Political Parties The political party is also an important agent of political socialization because it influences a large number of the people to be involved in the political life of the state.
With its manifestos, the party educates the people and makes them to be aware of the range of choices available to them.
Within and through the political party, the people are instilled with expectations, hope and love for the political system.
3.2.2 Interest/ Pressure Groups The persistence or survival of any political system depends on the information or supports it gets from the citizenry.
This support is provided by some people with common interest or ideology in the system that forms themselves into groups.
The groups are formed to advance specific demands and may, disappear as soon as their demands are achieved.
An interest group is an organized body of individuals that consciously come together to agitate, defend or articulate some kind of interests common to them in the system.
For example, some people come together in government, military, school, business, or even in religious organizations to agitate for or against whenever they feel their existence or interest is being threatened or not adequately catered for.
3.2.3 Interest Articulation Agitations expressed by interest groups are not of much use if they are not articulated or transformed into concrete policy alternatives suitable for rational decision making.
Interest articulation is the method or process by which pressure groups press their demands.
Such pressures are normally geared towards influencing public policies in their own favour or in direction that would benefit them.
This art of interest articulation is a sine qua non in any political system.
The advantage of allowing interests or opinions to be articulated can not be over-emphasized.
Allowing articulation of opinion or interest in any political system shows how democratic the system is.
When individuals or groups are permitted to air the views or opinions, however bad, the 32 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT necessary vent is given to potently prevent or discourage clandestine activities.
Conversely, bottle-up feelings that are not expressed in groups could lead to dissatisfaction and consequently to the eruption of violence in the society.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
How would you explain the concept of politics 2.
Identify some interest groups in the school system 3.
List any five (5) agents of political socialization 4.0 Conclusion In this unit, you have understood politics to mean the use of power to influence decisions that affect other people.
The use of this power as you have seen depends on proper understanding of the basic elements of politics.
The game of politics is very interesting when these terms are understood or applied in seeking to influence the decision of others to ones advantage.
5.0 Summary In this unit, you learnt the meaning of politics and some terms used in the game of politics.
It has served to introduce you to the meaning of political socialization, interest/pressure group and interest articulation.
The next unit will teach you the politics of nationhood.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
What is Politics?
2.
Write explanatory notes on the following terms: (a) political socialization (b) interest/pressure groups (c) interest articulation 33 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 References/Further Readings Ailoje, J. and Anegbode, J.
(2001).
Issues in Nigerian Government and Politics.
Akure: Sylva Publishing Inc. Agbebaku, P.E.
(2000).
Topics in Political Science.
Benin City: Sylva Publishing Inc. Easton, D. (1965).
A Framework for Political Analysis.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Key, V.O.
(1978).
Politics and Pressure Groups.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall Inc. Lasswell, H.D.
(1936).
Politics: Who Gets What, When & How?
New York: Mc Graw-Hill Book & Co. 34 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 THE POLITICS OF NATIONHOOD CONTENTS 8.0 Introduction 9.0 Objectives 10.0 Main contents 3.1 Concept of the Politics of Nationhood 3.2 Importance of Political Education 3.3 An Appraisal of the Nigerian Political Climate 11.0 Conclusion 12.0 Summary 13.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 14.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction Are you a politically active person?
Do you know how to use your power to influence the decision of others to your advantage in your place of work or family or club?
In this unit, you will learn the concept of nationhood and importance of political education.
You will also be guided to appraise the Nigerian political environment.
2.0 Objectives By the end of this unit, students should be able to: § discuss the concept of the politics of nationhood § highlight the importance of political education § appraise the Nigerian political environment 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of the Politics of Nationhood Man created society because he needed it to survive on the face of the earth, so it can be said that society takes care of half of his life while his individuality accounts for the rest.
Society means other human beings that he has voluntarily agreed to associate with and this agreement is mutual to all members of the society.
The association being voluntary and in total freedom, has seen 35 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT aggrieved people leaving their original societies and migrate to other societies of the people of like philosophies.
The structure of society is one in which all members depend on each other to find true fulfillment.
Every individual expects some service benefit from other individuals in the society especially in areas they are deficient or less endowed.
This interdependence of members of a society is the source of their enduring togetherness and unity in the face of adversities.
What hurts the entire society hurts its individual members and by the same token, what hurts the individual affects the entire society to the degree of the usefulness of that individual to his society.
The fate and fortune of the individual is therefore inseparable from that of the society in which he lives.
As a consequence, all actions and activities of individuals, separately and collectively, privately or in public have direct consequences on the structure and well being of the entire society.
There is no private affair of the individual which does not affect the life of some other persons who share the same piece of earth with him.
How much then of self interest can we say is not common interest and by the same token, we can only achieve effective self protection only when we have considered and protected the interest of other people in the society.
A nation of individualists, sectionalists, tribalists and religious demagogues is an underdeveloped and uncivilized society, because it has not exploited fully, its human resource potentials.
It is not a fully developed society because it has not attained the objective of the creation of society which is said to be the exploitation of the individuals playing diverse but complementary roles, according to their natural endowments to the benefit of each other- this is the foundation on which true democracy is anchored.
3.2 Importance of Political Education It is everybody s responsibility to support the education of children to cherish freedom and to accept responsibility for preserving and extending it.
The kind of critical thinking that is encouraged must rest on a solid base of factual knowledge.
First, citizens must know the fundamental ideas central to the political vision.
Second, citizens must know how democratic ideas have metamorphosed into institutions and practices- the history of the origins, growth and adventures of democratic societies.
How have these societies fared?
Who has defended them and why?
Who has 36 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT sought their undoing and why?
What conditions- economic, social, cultural, religious and military-have helped to shape democratic practice?
What conditions made it difficult- sometimes even impossible- for such societies to take root?
Thirdly, citizens in our society need to understand the current condition of the world and how it got that way, and to be prepared to act upon the challenges to democracy in our own day.
What are the roots of our present dangers and of the choices before us?
For intelligent citizenship, we need a through grasp of the daily workings of our society, as well as the societies of our friends, of our adversaries, and of the developed world.
Teaching about democracy is not an easy task.
Making electoral choices, understanding the importance of the rule of law, working in co-operation in order to improve society, showing tolerance towards political opponents, judging information provided by the media, knowing how to become active participants in social and political life, and a host of other things must be learned if democracy is to survive and prosper.
This is because such values are neither revealed truths nor natural habits.
There is no evidence that we are born with them.
Devotion to human dignity and freedom, to rights, to social economic justice, to civility and truth, to tolerance and diversity, to mutual assistance, to personal and civic responsibility, to self restraint and self-respect-all these must be taught, learned and practiced.
They should not be taken for granted or regarded as merely one set of option against which any other may be accepted as equally worthy.
Helping students master the skills and knowledge as well as develop the attitudes required for effective democracy demands skillful teaching and comprehensive educational programmes.
Effective education for democracy programmes is based on certain philosophical and methodological underpinnings.
Philosophically, all such programmes recognize the fundamental worth and dignity of all human beings.
As such, they require school environments.
Therefore, from the earliest school age, students must be taught to think for themselves as well as feel responsibility for others.
School and classrooms environment that are authoritarian- focusing on obedience as opposed to learning, restricting the development of students self expression, etc.
are not likely to prepare democratic citizens.
Rather they are likely to retard the development of democracy by reinforcing the existing political culture.
37 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.3 An Appraisal of the Nigerian Political Climate The beginning of anti democracy is the disenfranchisement of some members of a society or citizens of a Nation.
The first step to such disenfranchisement is the usurpation or appropriation of their right to make political decisions based on their own judgment and inclinations.
It is the stumbling block on the path to the development of true democracy in Nigeria today.
We are running a society in which few people want to arrogate to themselves the right to make political and social decisions on behalf of the people especially in the issue of choice of leadership.
In the process, they have proceeded to disenfranchise the average Nigerians.
Disenfranchisement is accomplished each time the electoral process is not allowed to run its constitutional course.
Money is used to induce people to catch their votes for candidates to the extent that the average Nigerian now expects to be paid to make a political choice.
In a party primary election, an entire ward refused to commence the process of voting because they have not received their share of monies sent by the candidates.
Nobody seems to notice the absurdity in a situation in which the same group of electorates receive monies from all the candidates, ostensibly to vote for them in an election they have only one vote each.
The versions of resolutions of such predicaments have to be witnessed than imagined, but the effect on the people is definite.
It has convinced them according to Walson-Jack (2000) that the entire undertaking is a travesty of political leadership.
They are convinced that no good government will emerge from the exercise so they make a festival of the occasion and try to forget it like a bad dream.
The general inclination is to believe that our political aspirants are in the race to loot public treasury and their extravagance during electioneering campaign is an indication that they will be generous with the dispensation of public funds while in office.
Public funds they say are inexhaustible and are for sharing among party faithful, relations, friends and self enrichment of political office holders.
Up till this day according to Walson-Jack (2000) no political party or any of their officers have taken any step to state that these popular views of politics are not correct.
Knowing that they are true of political actions on the field, they have not made any deliberate effort to correct their political aspirants and educate party members as to their correct 38 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT democratic role.
The citizens are left as ever before impoverished of the right political awareness.
The hope of the dawn of a new political culture is not as bright as we all anticipated.
There is not much positive teaching going on at the grassroots towards true democracy.
Self Assessment Exercise 1.
Advance any three reasons why it is important to teach people political education 2.
What are the ideals of politics 3.
Analyze the Nigerian political environment 4.0 Conclusion This unit conceptualized politics of nationhood and emphasized the importance of political education.
The ideals of politics were highlighted against which the Nigerian political environment was appraised.
5.0 Summary You have learnt from this unit what the politics of nationhood is all about.
The importance of providing political education was emphasized.
The appraisal of the Nigerian political climate revealed among others that money, greed and selfishness pervert the political process.
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 1.
Advance any three reasons why it is important to teach people political education 2.
What are the ideals of politics?
3.
Analyze the Nigerian political environment 39 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 References/Further Readings Alele- Williams, G. (1988).
The politics of Administering a Nigerian University in A.U.
Kadiri (Ed.)
25 Years of Centralized University Education in Nigeria.
(Pp.17-31) Lagos: National Universities Commission.
Nwoko, D. (1992).
The Impoverished Generation.
Asaba : New culture Publications.
Terence, J.J. (1972).
Professions and Power.
London: The Macmillian Press.
Walson-Jack, N. (2000).
Education for Democracy.
Lagos: A Central Educational Service Lecture Series Publication.
40 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 THE CONCEPT OF EDUCATION CONTENTS 10.0 Introduction 11.0 Objectives 12.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning, Scope and Purpose of Education 3.2 The Educational System 3.3 Basic Features of the Educational System 13.0 Conclusion 14.0 Summary 15.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 16.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction It is very good and commendable that you are interested in education.
In this unit therefore, the meaning, scope and purpose of education will be discussed.
The education system as a concept will be explained and the basic features of the educational system discussed.
2.0 Objectives After studying this unit, it is hoped that students will be able to: § explain the meaning, scope and purpose of education § discuss what the educational system means § highlight the basic features of the educational system 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Meaning, Scope and purpose of Education 3.1.1 Meaning of Education Education as an activity is as old as man across cultures.
It is therefore a concept that people have severally defined according to their own perceptions.
According to Emenike (2004), education is the acquisition of knowledge that tends to train and develop the individual.
Education embraces not only school experiences but 41 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT also indirect or incidental influences which help us to learn, such influences and activities affect our character, behaviours and perceptions.
Education as perceived by Kneller (1963); Phenics (1964); Farrant (1964); Hirst (1966) and Cermin (1978) is a process of learning to live as useful and acceptable members of society.
As a social institution, Emile Durkheim (1956: 28) defined education as: The influence exercised by adult generations on those that are yet ready for social life.
Its object is to arouse and to develop in the child a certain number of physical, intellectual and moral states which are demanded of him by both the political society as a whole and the special milieu for which is specifically destined.
The matters arising from this definition are twofold.
The first is that education is the process by which individuals are selected and assigned social roles while the second shows that the level of development in a society is dependent on the type (or quality) of education given to its members.
All in all, education is a continuous learning process through which members of a society acquire requisite knowledge and skills to facilitate effective performance of assigned social responsibilities.
3.1.2 Scope of Education The scope of education covers formal, informal and non-formal modes of learning.
Formal Education Formal education, referred to as school education is organized in primary, secondary and tertiary institutions of learning.
Rules and regulations formulated and administered by the Ministry of Education characterize this type of education that first started in Western or developed societies.
Policies are drawn up to guide and direct while laws are made by government to control the operations of education.
In this type of education, rules and regulations are made to guide the type of buildings, facilities, equipment required in the schools, the entry qualifications of students, their ages, the curricula, the rules guiding the students movement, the qualifications of the teachers, their workloads, their conditions of service and the students certification and graduation.
There is usually quality control mechanism.
This 42 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT formal education which was introduced to Nigeria by the Christian Missionaries in 1842 A.D has since grown steadily and in recent time speedily.
Indeed from a single primary school in Badagry in 1842 to 41,000 primary schools, about 6,400 secondary schools, about 89 colleges and 83 universities in 2006 (FRN, 2009).
Informal Education This is the education received from the family, peer group, the environment, resulting in the acquisition of the knowledge of local animals, trees, leaves, songs, traditions and so on.
It is life long education which is and continues to be acquired as knowledge, attitude, skills, and insights from daily experiences in the environment.
The learner without being conscious of what he is doing learns from observation and imitation.
There is no systematic learning method nor is there a syllabus.
Non-Formal Education Non-formal education is an organized educational activity outside the framework of the formal school.
It is designed to provide selected types of learning to particular groups in the population particularly the adults.
The education includes such out of school programmes as literacy and basic education, technical and vocational training, community development, family planning and agricultural extension services.
Others include the education and training programmes of trade unions, industries, professional associations, the military, the government, the church, the press, legal bodies and so on.
It takes many forms such as seminars, short courses examination.
It provides a wide range of learning services which are beyond the scope of formal education.
It is a means of extending the skills and knowledge gained in formal education and of course a counter balancing tool for correcting some of the distortions or lapses in formal education (Aghenta, 1993).
3.1.3 Purpose of Education A national educational investment, the educational effort of a people, whether or not it is articulated in the form of a policy, should have certain basic aims and objectives.
For Nigeria, the White Paper of March 1977 enunciated these fairly well.
Some 43 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT people have been thinking about what the aims and objectives of Education in the country should be and have come up with what may represent a paraphrasing of the policy declarations, though with more emphasis on a more active role for the recipient, and for all citizens.
§ The cardinal aim of education should be the total development of the individual, so that he or she can fully exploit his or her potential as human being, playing his or her full role in society as a citizen.
Since education is a great investment by society on its members, the citizens must reciprocate by using the education so received for services to the people, enjoining the good and forbidding the evil.
§ Education policy must seek to provide education that will equip all recipients with the necessary attitude, knowledge and skills to contribute to national and human development and to engender in them qualities of decency, fair play and good citizenship, as well as the stimulus for the continuous search for improvement and excellence.
§ The education policy must seek to discover the gifted in the society.
Human advancement through spectacular break- through has been achieved only through the work of geniuses.
Since it is known that giftedness can succumb to the ravages of adverse environments, every effort must be made to ensure that any trace of the genius is given every facility for full expression.
§ Education must produce those who can survive through being able to fend for themselves in this world and to help others to survive through generating work and solving problems.
Education should not lead to the production of a long line of unemployed school leavers (economic misfits and social parasites).
In other words, policy should generate and expand gainful employment opportunities for everyone, thereby generating wealth and narrowing the gap between men and women, the rich and the poor, urban and rural dwellers, and between urban opulence and urban ghettoes.
This social order is important for survival.
§ Education policy must have as one of its cardinal objectives accelerated economic and technological development in the country, in environment of stability and discipline, and with a preserved and healthy social structure emphasizing intrinsic values, self reliance and nationalism.
Nigerians must take pride in originality and productivity and must reject mental 44 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT subservience to other peoples values.
Education should confer on the individual and on the people the simple, common-sense acceptance of concept of the common good, including such things as love of the country, personal discipline, hard work, peaceful co-existence, dangers of overpopulation, and conservation; and be able to recognize, for example, the absurdity of fighting over urban plots, while the desert and erosion eat up hundreds of thousands of acres of usable land annually.
§ Education policy should rapidly transform the country into a truly united, democratic and dynamic nation, socially stable and technologically equipped to take its place as a nation among nations.
§ The educational system to be pursued should, to the extent the nation can afford, be accessible to all qualified citizens, whose sojourn through it will prove useful to them and to the society.
The system must enjoy the confidence of the people themselves and to the society.
The system must enjoy the confidence of the people, including its formulators and operators, who would demonstrate this confidence by proudly admitting their own children into it at all levels.
It must be a system the people will recognize as their own, belonging to them, like a mosque or Church or a Club, as a symbol of their individual and national aspirations and therefore in the growth and sustenance of which they will readily participate.
An educational system which places the people at one end receiving and the Government at the other end giving, is not the most viable proposition.
§ Apart from the societal objectives, the educational system has deep responsibility unto itself, and a harmonious atmosphere needs to be maintained in the entire system.
Teachers must be trained to acquire competence and develop the right attitude and orientation towards their students.
The administration of education must be competent at all levels with projects conceived and executive in a businesslike environment.
3.2 The Educational system Educational system is a concept that has been ill-defined by educators, educational administrators, learners and the public.
To many people, educational system is synonymous with formal education.
This concept is rather very narrow.
Educational system is much more than formal education.
Unfortunately, educational 45 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT policy statements and practices of most developing nations are tailored towards this narrow view of educational system.
For this reason, very many crucial aspects of learning are taken for granted in the process of supplying education to the people.
According to Coombs (1968:53) The phrase educational system means not merely the several levels and types of formal education (primary, secondary, post-secondary, general and specialized) but also all those system programmes and processes of education and training that lie outside formal education Currently, voices of criticism have been heard on formal education as the sole and a reliable process of knowing.
If education is the transmission of ideas of value for the development of the whole man in relation to the dynamic needs of the society; the fact that formalization of education has time dimension, formal education in the form of schooling can not provide the continuous ideas of value.
Hence there are other complementary forms of learning.
Educational system therefore is taken to mean not only formal schooling but all those processes, agencies including individuals that play different roles which are mutually inclusive in the provision of opportunities geared towards learning in any society.
Thus, educational system implies formal, informal and non- formal processes of learning.
It includes formal school education, in-service training, on-the-job education provided by apprenticeship centers, industries and firms, labour union activities, government agencies for farmers and other rural dwellers; forms of learning provided for migrant nomads and fishermen, legal institutions, the press and mass media (radio, T.V.
etc) orientation courses of whatever type, social rights of passage and even educational efforts provided by churches and political parties.
From this definition, what is central and common to all educational systems across space and time is learning.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What do you think education should do for people and the society?
2.
What are the main components of the Nigerian educational system?
46 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 4.0 Conclusion This unit explained the meaning, scope and purpose of education as well as what the education system means.
The characteristics of educational system were outlined and discussed so that you can appreciate the uniqueness of educational organizations.
5.0 Summary You have learnt that knowledge and skills for effective performance of social roles can be acquired through formal, informal and non-formal learning modes.
You have also learnt that the totality of all identifiable learning modes makes up the educational system with distinct features.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
What do we expect education to do for us as individuals and society?
2.
Describe the Nigerian educational system?
3.
What features distinguish educational organizations from other types of organizations?
7.0 References/Further Readings Aghenta, J.A.. (2000).
Educational Planning.
A Turning Point in Education and Development in Nigeria.
Inaugural Lecture Series 58.
University of Benin.
Aminu, J.M.
(1986).
Quality and Stress in Nigerian Education.
Maiduguri: Northern Nigerian Publishing Company.
Nwadiani, M. (1992).
Dialectics of Educational System in A.A. Akiri and M. Nwadiani (Eds.)
Comparative Education (Pp.20- 41).
Ekiadolor: Nigeria Educational Research Association NCE Series Nwadiani, M. (1998).
Educational Management for Sub-Sahara Africa.
Benin City: Monose Amalgamates.
47 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 CONCEPT OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Definition of Educational Management 3.2 Functional Areas of Educational Management 3.3 Purpose of Educational Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 Introduction This unit conceptualized the meaning of educational management and discussed the functional task areas.
There is no doubt that this will provide the necessary guidance to education programmes implementers to effectively perform their roles.
The purpose of educational management was also emphasized.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: § define educational management § highlight the functional task areas in educational management § discuss the purpose of educational management 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Definition of Educational Management Educational management is essentially concerned with educational planning and administration.
Educational planning is the exercise of foresight in determining the policies, priorities and cost of an educational system.
Educational administration on the other hand focuses on the arrangement and usage of available resources to achieve the desired objectives of an educational system.
The meaning of educational management therefore becomes very clear when the two concepts are married together.
In this context, educational management can be conceptualized to mean a deliberate and systematic process of making plans to 48 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT source, assemble, allocate and use resources to achieve the aims and objectives of the educational system.
The scope goes beyond the school system to include micro and macroeconomics in the national economy.
3.2 Functional Task Areas in Educational Management You have already learnt that educational management entails the utilization of available resources by management to achieve the school system pre-defined goals.
In doing this, the school management with the school head or administrator providing leadership perform the following functions.
Instructional Functions: The management of school instructional programmes constitutes one of the most important functions of the principal because the ultimate goal of educational administration is the improvement of teaching and learning.
The principal collaborates with the teachers, students and inspector in the selection and implementation of relevant and appropriate school activities that would enhance the instructional programmes of the school.
According to Ukeje, Akabogu and Ndu (1992), the principal designs efficient work schedules, assign reasonable workloads to teachers and ensure the utilization of available professional and material resources.
With the assistance of the teachers, the students are allocated into classes to form the best learning groups.
In the same vein, the principal provides avenue for extra-curricular activities (sports and debates) and other auxiliary services so as to ensure total development of the students.
Staff or Personnel Services: This function, often referred to as school personnel function, involves the selection and placement of staff, staff motivation, development and evaluation.
In the words of Aderounmu and Ehiametalor (1985), it is the establishment and maintenance of school climate.
This function demands that the principal be concerned with the professional and personal problems of his staff in order to guide against negative spill-over effects.
The principal must realize that the success of the school programme and that of the overall education goal depends on the quality, dedication and performance of available staff.
49 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Student Services : The students are at the center of the educational process.
Therefore all the activities that go on in the school are aimed at developing their total personality to the fullest.
This demands that the principal implements good instructional programmes and provide opportunities for students to develop responsible attitudes and acquire good moral training that will prepare them for their future lives (Ozigi, 1982).
The principal shows considerable concern for students, look into their teaching and learning situation, provide opportunities for their character development, endeavour to understand and solve their personal problems, and cater for their well-being and happiness.
Besides, the principal should have cumulative records for all the students and also develop a method of reporting to the parents the progress of their wards in school.
Pupil services may be categorized into admission and classification, guidance and counseling, social and recreational activities and the maintenance of school discipline (Jimoh, 2006).
Financial and Physical Resource Management: This function often referred to, as School business administration is another important function of the school principal.
Although the responsibility of providing appropriate material and financial resources to public schools in Nigeria is on government, yet the effective use of these resources for the accomplishment of the educational purpose rest on the school principal.
School buildings, equipment and supplies cost a great deal of money.
Therefore, they should be adequately maintained and cared for.
The storage and distribution of school supplies and equipment must be given adequate attention.
The principal must have a sound system of accountability for school supplies and school records kept and preserved (Ehiametalor, 1995).
As the chief accounting officer of the school, the principal ensures that a good accounting system based on sound accounting principles is maintained in all his financial transactions.
He works with the bursar to draw up the budget for the school.
If he is involved in any type of revenue collection like school fees, examination levies, PTA levies etc., he ensures that receipts are issued for such monies collected and records of all items of expenditure.
Although this schedule is that of the bursar, the principal has to supervise all financial transactions of the school.
50 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT School Community Relations: The school as an institution is a social system designed to serve the need of the society.
No school can operate in a social vacuum, outside the society, it is designed to serve.
The school derives its existence and sustenance from the community that supplies the input used in the school.
The school in turn process and refines the input which it sends back as output to the community to develop and advance it for the betterment of the larger society.
This dependence on the community makes it difficult for the school to function effectively without the support of the community.
Based on this symbiotic relationship, the school principal according to Jimoh (2006) should on regular basis, liaise with the community to acquaint it with the school vision, values and programmes in order to enlist its support.
School community relation is the reaching out of the school administrator to the various publics that make up the school system.
The school principal has a dual responsibility, one to the general public and the other to the internal operation of his organization.
This means that school community relations starts from the relationship with staff and students spread outwards to parents and then to the wider public which the school serves.
As a manager, the principal should recognize, strengthen and use this bond in a way that will enhance the realization of the school goals (Ozigi, 1982).
3.3 Purpose of Educational Management The success of any system of education is predicated on proper planning, effective administration and adequate financing.
Administration is a function of the organization structure, control, proprietorship, inspection and supervision put in place to actualize the aim of education.
The purpose of educational management among others include (a) ensure adequate and effective planning of all educational services; (b) provide efficient administrative and management control for the maintenance and improvement of the system; (c) ensure quality control through regular and continuous supervision of instructional and other educational services and; (d) provide adequate and balanced financial support for all educational services.
51 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Assuming you are a school headmaster, outline your duties to justify the salary that you receive 2.
What does educational management mean to you?
3.
Why do you think educational management is important in schools?
4.0 Conclusion You have learnt that educational management is basically concerned with the effective and efficient utilization of educational resources to achieve the aim of education.
The functional task areas of the school head include among others providing superintendentship over fund, curriculum, instruction, facilities, staff and student administration, and community relations.
5.0 Summary In this unit, the meaning of education was explained.
The purpose of educational management was stated to guide stakeholders perform their roles in the education business.
Finally, the functional task areas in education management were identified and discussed.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Define the concept of educational management 2.
Discuss the functional task areas of the school administrator.
3.
State the purpose of educational management 7.0 References/Further Readings Aderounmu, W.O.
and Ehiametor, E.T.
(1985).
Introduction to Administrative of Schools in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Evans Brothers Publishers Ltd Ehiametalor, E.T.
(1995).
Data Management in School and Other Issues.
Benin City: NERA Publication.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC.
52 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Jimoh, B.O.
(2006).
Introduction to Educational Administration in J.A.
Aghenta and E.O.
Omoregie (Eds.)
Fundamentals of Educational Management (Pp1-18).
Agbor: Krisbec Publications Nwadiani, M. (1998).
Educational Management for Sub-Sahara Africa.
Benin City: Monose Amalgamates.
Ozigi, A.O.
(1982).
A Handbook on School Administration and Management.
Ibadan: Macmillian Nigeria Publishers Ltd. Ukeje, B.O., Akabogu, G.C.
and Ndu, A.
(1992).
Educational Administration.
Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishing Co. Ltd 53 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 THE ROLE OF POLITICS IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Impact of Politics in Educational Management 3.2 The Role Education Plays in Political System Development 3.3 Political Factors and Educational Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference 1.0 Introduction This unit discussed the role of politics in educational management.
The impact of politics on educational management; the role effective management of education plays in political system development and; political factors and education management will be specifically discussed.
Do you think that after going through this unit, you will be more effective in the performance of managerial functions?
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students are expected to 1. discuss the role of politics in educational management 2. explain the role education plays in political system development 3. discuss how some political factors impact on educational management 54 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Impact of Politics on Educational Management Politics is all about the formulation of visions and finding ways to achieve them.
This entails setting goals and mobilizing the resources it takes to attain them (Hernes, 2002).
The effect of the political system on education is of concern because the potential impact of the school on politics is significant.
In other words, the relationship between the two is a reciprocal one and the extent to which political development takes place depends on the compatibility between the two systems.
The type of political system is important in determining the nature of its impact on the schooling process.
In many ways, the differences in education between capitalist and socialist regimes, developed and less developed countries and rural and urban societies are due to the effects of the political system in practice.
Politics is the authoritative allocation of the values of society (Easton, 1965).
Values refer to the cherished beliefs and resources of society such as egalitarianism, religion, education, money and the likes.
Lasswell (1936) defined politics as having to do with the distribution of stakes within a society.
Stakes means jobs, money, prestige, influence, status or even acceptance of ideas.
The educational system plays a unique role in political socialization for the society.
The distribution of education itself is a stake, the micro political system of the school and the notion of an educator as a political man (or woman) is all politics of education.
Almost all people in society care about the quantity and quality of education and especially how it is distributed.
Like other stakes, there cannot be enough education to satisfy everyone (e.g.
not enough mathematics, language etc teachers) so educators must make choices about who gets what and what of the resources available for education.
Sroufe (1977) pointed out that within a given school system or school building a micro political system exists that determines the distribution of education (teachers, curricular) to students and the struggle to gain influence with regards to these allocative decisions is constant.
The United Nations Educational and Scientific Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has categorized Nigeria as one of the countries that are unlikely to meet the 2015 55 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT deadline set by the global body as the year for Education For All (EFA).
This however is traceable to the declining budgetary allocation education has been receiving.
Could it be that education is not lobbying to get enough allocation?
In fact, government is being accused of paying lip service to EFA programme.
The government on its own part has reaffirmed its commitment to expand access to basic education and; this is manifested in the launching of Universal Basic Education (UBE) scheme which is regarded as one of the populist programmes designed by the present democratic dispensation.
The UBE is regarded as the highest provider of democracy dividend.
However, this is not without some constraints like finance and the global economic crises.
The big five donor countries real commitments to education declined dramatically throughout the nineties (Ajao, 2002).
Coleman (1965:3) argued that the educational system can be viewed as the major determinant of all aspects of change .
As a conserver of the political system and a contributor to political development, education has been regarded as serving three main functions: (a) Education is the main agent for the political socialization of the young into the national political culture.
The possibility for political socialization through the schools is much greater in less developed than developed societies because in less developed societies the political culture and a sense of nationalism may even have to be created through the school; (b) Education is the primary agent for the selection and training of political elites.
Fagerlind and Saha (1989) pointed out that in all societies, whether developed or less developed, capitalist or socialist, industrialized or agriculturally based, the stability, survival and effectiveness of the political system depends on those who constitute the elite and hold positions of power.
They can make or mar any system including the educational system.
Lungu (1986) in his study pointed out that during the period 1969 through 1982, the Zambian government made three attempts to remove British practices in the Zambian educational system only to have the 56 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT entrenched elites block these radical reforms in favour of a slower incremental change.
The situation in Nigeria is not quite different.
The implementation of the universal basic education programmes has been enmeshed in controversies such as how to harness the disparate policy outlines of the federal government; corruption and ineffective implementation of projects; lack of efficient monitoring mechanism and falsification of enrolment figures by states in order to get more allocation of funds.
The elite class should be held responsible for these ills because they are the ones in positions of authority that dictate and influence policy decision.
(c) Education is the main contributor to political integration and the building of national political consciousness.
Formal education or schools main task is to break down local or regional identities and replace them with national identities and loyalties through the use of national symbols such as the flag, the national anthem, and the constitution.
3.2 The Role Education Plays in Political System Development The success of any democracy depends on citizens who truly believe that every individual is entitled to respect and dignity; citizens who practice the responsibilities of citizenship in their daily lives; and parents who pass on these habits of the hearts to their children by their example.
The point here is that any meaningful effort at building and sustaining our democracy must begin with the education of the citizenry.
There is no doubt that education is always the means whereby citizens get their bearings and learn to live with and among one another.
Education always reflects a society s view of what excellent, worthy and necessary.
Education is a vital component of any democracy, the object being to produce citizens who are independent, and analytical in their outlook, yet deeply familiar with precepts and practices of democracy.
The education of people should be taken very seriously because as the Chinese people say: if you are planning for a year, sow rice.
If you are planning for a decade, plant trees.
If you are planning for a lifetime, educate a person .
Even Albert Einstein is 57 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT reported to have said, Education is that which remains, if one has forgotten everything he learned in school .
The best way to strengthen democracy both in Nigeria and elsewhere and to meet the challenges of the 21st century is to guarantee universal quality education for all children.
This is necessary for the combating of fear, ignorance and the prejudices that undermine freedom across the globe today in the form of ethnicity, religion and racism.
As President Clinton of the United States of America stressed in a speech on the importance of education to building democracy: Education is essential to creating a worldwide middle class.
It is essential to global prosperity.
It is essential to fulfilling the most basic needs of the human body and the human spirit.
That is why the 21st century must be the.
As the years pass by, our society becomes more complex.
We are becoming an increasingly diverse people, drawn from many tribal, linguistic and religious origins.
Our cultural heritage as Nigerians is as diverse as we are, with multiple sources of vitality and pride.
But our political heritage is destined by God to be one- the vision of a common life in liberty, justice and equality.
To protect that vision, there must be education for all citizens, to enable every man and woman judge for him or herself what will secure or endanger his or her freedom.
In democracy created of the people, by the people, and for the people, is essential that public opinion be enlightened, informed, and engaged.
The importance of an educated citizenry for the health of a newly found democracy like ours is recognized in the declaration of Thomas Jefferson that: every government degenerates when trusted to the ruler of the people alone.
The people themselves are its only safe depositories.
And to render even them safe, their minds must be improved to a certain degree.
Diverse peoples in various parts of the world commonly understand that if there would be government of the people, by the people, for the people , then there must be education of the people in the principles, practices, and commitments of democracy.
Education for democracy is the natural consequence of resurgence of democracy whether in the world or in Nigeria.
58 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Both established democracies and new ones depend upon good education for democratic citizenship for their maintenance and improvement.
Both peoples in pursuit of democracy and those in debt to ancestral founders of it recognize that schools must teach young citizens the principles and practices of democracy, if they would develop and sustain its institutions .
Education for democracy can be rationalized on three grounds.
The first is that attitude towards politics and governments are learned, not innate.
As Thomas Jefferson, the US President and author of the Declaration of Independence said, the qualifications for self-government in society are not innate.
They are result of habit and long training.
The second reason is that non-democratic values may be strongly rooted in a society s culture.
Only conscious and concerted effort can change attitudes and practices that are potentially harmful to democracy.
A vivid example is the culture in Nigeria to use threats in raising children.
We threaten children in teaching them to do something or not to do something, rather than explaining to them so that they understand themselves.
This kind of teaching explains why the military rulers who governed us in the past did not try to explain things to the citizens, but instead used threats to control us.
This is part of our culture; one that we should change.
Education is the key to achieving that change.
Governments, no matter how well functioning, how honest, how transparent, cannot by themselves create citizens.
Only civil society, which exists in the space between government and the economy, can do that work.
Indeed, all the institutions that shapes our private and public lives- family, church, mosque, school, government, media- share responsibility for encouraging democratic values in our children.
Our initial focus would be on the nation s schools and their teaching.
3.3 Political Factors and Educational Management An important feature of tertiary education institutions (particularly universities) has been their political significance.
This has been firstly in terms of their perceived importance as national symbols, historically reflecting the prestige and intellectual independence achieved by the former colonies at the time of independence.
Secondly, with only a small cadre of highly-educated people in leadership positions, there has always 59 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT been a strong inter-relationship between the tertiary institutions and those in governments (and even in opposition).
This has operated both on a personal basis, as individuals transfer regularly between the universities and government positions, and also on an institutional basis.
As institutions with a mandate to lead intellectual debate and to critique, universities can be a strong source of dissent or unwanted criticisms.
Specific examples have been chronicled by a number of writers (e.g Mwiria, 1992; Sawyerr, 1994).
However, the significance of this uneasy relationship cannot be overemphasized.
It makes the balance required for the state supervision model of tertiary education management (as opposed to state control) particularly difficult to achieve, and means that trust, transparency and widespread information regarding all transactions and initiatives are critical for the success of reform measures.
As in many developing or transitional economies, the power of the student body in Ghana for example to disrupt or destabilize, and to generate pressure on the Government has been regularly demonstrated.
In 1992, Eisemon wrote in a World Bank discussion paper universities in many countries, particularly their students, have a long tradition of political dissent and participation in the political process.
Students represent incipient political elite with claims to an influential, independent role in the political systems that are often recognized, implicitly, in negotiations between student groups and ministers (and heads of state) about campus and other grievances.
In these situations, university students are not passive objects of reform, but key political actors in the reform process.
Congregated on campuses, they are easily mobilized.
The location of many universities in capital cities in close proximity to government institutions makes student protest politically difficult to ignore (Eisemon, 1992,).
Attention has been drawn elsewhere (e.g.
Watson, 1995) to instances where governments have been overthrown as a direct result of disturbances initiated by student unrest.
Electoral cycles will very likely remain as important factors in determining the rate and pace of reform implementation.
Controversial reforms are unlikely to be introduced in the periods preceding elections in order to avoid the risk of possible political backlash.
This reduces the time-span for the introduction of change that will greatly constrain the extent to which reform of this highly-volatile sector can be undertaken.
It may be the case 60 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT that such political constrain will diminish to a certain extent as the political process stabilizes, but unrest and protest are likely to be significant.
More importantly, to the extent that tertiary education policy may appear as party platforms (especially given the level of political involvement on the campuses), the danger of policy commitments pledging financially non-viable change for political gain seems likely to increase.
This would be highly detrimental to the tertiary education system.
Every effort should therefore be made by all those likely to be affected by tertiary education policy to explore and make public the educational and equity issues underlying policy decisions.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Do you believe students have any power to change the pattern of government?
If yes, in what ways?
2.
Discuss how politics and educational management affect one another.
4.0 Conclusion You have learnt in this unit that the relationship between politics and education is inseparable.
It is therefore important that you appreciate the important role politics play in the management of educational institutions.
Political factors such as the power of the students and significance of education as a potent tool for socialization impact on management of education.
5.0 Summary In this unit, the role of politics in education management was discussed.
The role education plays in political system development was also discussed.
What you have also learnt in this unit is how political factors such as power of the student and political significance of education impacts on educational management.
61 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Discuss the role of politics in educational management 2.
Do you think that education plays any role in political system development?
3.
Explain how political factors such as electoral cycles, political significance of education and power of students impact on educational management.
7.0 References/Further Readings Girdwood, A.
(1999).
Tertiary Education Policy in Ghana: An Assessment, 1988- 1998.
Education 20261.
The World Bank.
Olubor, R.O.
(2004).
Politics and Policies of Education in N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma and C.C.
Nwagwu (Eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices, (Pp.156-176).
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. Walson-Jack, N. (2000).
Education for Democracy.
Lagos: Central Education Services 62 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT MODULE 2 THE INFLUENCE OF POLITICS ON DECISION MAKING IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Unit 1- Decision Making and Policy Formulation Unit 2- Educational Policy Making Process Unit 3- The Role of Interest Groups in Policy making Process Unit 4- Examination of Past and Present Educational Policies in Nigeria.
Unit 5- Devolution of Functions in Education Management 63 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 1 EDUCATIONAL POLICY MAKING PROCESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Concept of Educational Policy 3.2 The Educational Policy Making Process 3.3 Educational Policy Making Models 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Do you know that policies are principles and rules of action for achieving specific organizational goals?
The rule tells us what to do while the principle explains why that rule must be obeyed.
In this unit, you will be exposed to the meaning of educational policy, the educational policy making process and some models that guide educational policy making process.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, learners should be able to: § explain the meaning of educational policy § discuss the educational policy making process § describe some educational policy making models 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Concept of Educational Policy Educational policy is basically a statement (written or unwritten) that contains principles, rules and regulations that seek to provide answers to the following questions: § How will people be educated?
§ Where will the people be educated?
§ What skills and knowledge will the educated people acquire?
§ Where will the educated people be employed?
§ How will the education of the people be financed?
64 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT § Who will teach the people?
§ What job(s) will the educated people do?
§ To what extent will the people be educated?
§ How will learning and teaching aids be produced and accessed?
Educational policies are very important for the achievement of the goals of the educational system.
Put simply, educational policies are the agreed ways the educational system should be operated or managed.
It is also important to state that educational policies are necessary in order to ensure that direction is given to any action taken on education.
Nobody can just on his/her own take action on any aspect of education without recourse to the agreed ways (policies) of operating the system.
3.2 The Educational Policy Making Process The educational policy making process is a cycle that is made up of seven recurring activities.
These activities according to Haddad (1994) include policy formulation, evaluation, adoption, application, assessment, adjustment and analysis.
The policy process starts with formulation usually done in two phases.
The first phase has to do with the analysis of existing situation while the second phase is concerned with the generation of policy options.
The evaluation of the policy options follows from the generation of various options.
After evaluating the policy options, what follows is the adoption of the most efficient options(s) as a policy decision.
The next stage is the application of the policy option that has been adopted.
Policy impact assessment comes next.
There will be an adjustment that will start the policy cycle all over again if there is any gap or unsatisfactoriness in the policy impact assessment.
65 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT E v a lu a tio n n o ti p o d A Polic y Analysis nt e m st u dj A n o ati c pli p A Assessment Figure 1: Policy Making Process Source: Writer s Conceptualization of the Policy Making Process The policy process making exercise will then commence with policy analysis as shown in figure 1.
The policy analysis phase either commences or ends the policy making process.
Factors identified to impede application of the policy are removed during the time of assessment and adjustments.
Also during the time of analysing the policy, certain factors identified to favour the adoption of the policy are incorporated or supported for adoption.
3.3 Educational Policy Making Models A model is a framework that helps us to describe, understand, predict and explain a phenomenon.
In education management, the following models help us to understand the educational policy making process.
§ Synoptic Model of policy Making § Incremental Model of Policy Making § Organizational Process Model 66 n o ati ul m or FEDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT § Governmental Politics Model § Haddad Consolidated Model Synoptic Model The synoptic model of policy making proposed by Lindblom and Cohen (1979) assumes that the policy environment will enable the education manager to have a complete knowledge of what are required to make a sound policy.
It further assumes that the existing problem(s), its environment (political and economic inclusive) and the process itself will be fairly stable.
It is assumed, that the process itself will be fairly stable.
In other words, the actors themselves will be rational and therefore, stick to the synoptic method of policymaking for a reasonable length of time.
This method is also based on the assumption that there exist agreed and objective criteria by which solutions can be reached.
Once these assumptions are met, it is the belief of the proponents that drastic reforms can be introduced by carrying out a situation analysis and coming up with a solution blueprint that will automatically lead to the expected outcome without undue influence.
In the developing countries, most of the assumptions of synoptic approach cannot however hold.
This is because there are unstable political, economic, and social situations that will not permit a satisfactory extrapolation of data gotten from the analysis of the existing situations.
Human behaviour and the future are unpredictable for a synoptic view.
Moreover, actors in the developing world are limited by the technical ability to generate data and solutions.
It is therefore difficult to equate the outcome of an agreed solution to a blueprint that has not been polluted by influences, subjectivity and human errors.
It might be necessary to note that the rationality behind the assumption of the synoptic model seems unrealistic since it is necessary for successful policies to take political realities into consideration.
Education being a social service, must take its inputs from the providers, consumers (parents, learners and employers of labour) politicians, technocrats and bureaucrats.
Incremental Method of Policymaking This involves policymaking under uncertainty, negotiated or politicized environment and incomplete knowledge approach to policymaking.
Once there is a problem, a tentative or temporary solution is proffered as a blueprint, but only as a step forward.
If one takes the first step and it works then one moves another step 67 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT forward.
But if it does not work, then one takes a backward step to start all over.
One increases one s step gradually in search of the best solution.
For instance, the incremental approach will talk about school improvement while the synoptic method will talk about school reforms.
This is because the former focuses on how to add a small feather to the existing cap of schooling, without claiming that the best has been achieved.
The actors while taking a step forward will still be expecting the best to happen in a future date.
On the other hand, the synoptic approach assumes that the best can be achieved now through an agreed and well-thought guideline on how to reform the schools.
This model of making policy on the incremental basis has its problems in spite of the fact that it is based on multiple rationalities, principle of flexibility and participatory approach.
It takes political, social and bureaucratic realities into consideration but with a high degree of politicization leading to a pattern of vague and unsystematic political decisions loaded with self-interest, patronage and value judgments (Haddad, 1994:7).
Organizational Process Model The organizational process model posits that government s behaviour is more or less a reflection of what happens in government s coordinated organizations in the society.
These organizations send signals to the government about problems within their areas of jurisdiction.
Government in response to the signals sent will define alternatives and identify consequences.
For example, the Ministry of Education will send signals concerning educational problems and issues.
Ministry of Health will send that of health and so on.
All the problems will now be analyzed centrally by the government as inputs to policymaking.
This decision model is based on rational choice but monolithic in nature.
Government Politics Model This model posits that policymaking is a joint action of individuals or personalities in government and various organizations.
Organizations are not merely signals senders but active participants in policymaking.
Leaders, whose behaviours are determined by personal conception of the problem as well as personal and organizational interests represent their organizations during policymaking.
This approach is highly participatory but 68 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT equally heavily politicized because decisions are reached by negotiations among interest groups.
Haddad Consolidated Model Wadi Haddad (1994) proposed a policymaking model that synthesized the four dimensions involved in Lindblom and Allison s models.
According to Haddad, the synoptic and the personality modes are political dimensions of policymaking.
With this classification, we can divide policymaking into two broad categories, namely: the rational and the political/personal.
The rational model, which is composed of the synoptic and the bureaucratic modes is characterized by unitary, rational, centrally controlled, and completely technical and value maximizing decision-making.
On the other hand, the political/personal model which is a combination of incremental and the government politics models, is characterized by self-interest, political bargaining, value judgment and multiple rationalities.
As argued by Babalola (2003), most policymaking fall somewhere between these two extremes.
Nevertheless, there is need for a balanced view of policymaking in which analytical rationality is placed within the context of political and administrative aspects of decision-making.
This is particularly so in education, which is by nature, a social service with a complex socio-political context (Babalola, 2003).
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What does education policy mean to you?
2.
Formulate a policy that will resolve any problem identified by you in the school system.
3.
Can you think of a model that best guides school administrators in policy formulation?
4.0 Conclusion You have seen that the educational policy making process is a continuous exercise.
Any gap in the policy evaluation makes it mandatory for the entire policy document to be reviewed or adjusted on a continuous basis.
It should be noted also that the existing models that guide policy making are eclectic in nature.
What this means is that the models complement one another in the policy making process.
69 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 5.0 Summary Educational policy has been conceptualized to mean the principles, regulations and rules that guide the provision and management of education.
The educational policy making process is a continuous exercise that is guided by available models.
The essence of these models is to ensure that mistakes are not made or repeated in the course of formulating educational policies.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
What is educational policy?
2.
Describe the educational policy making process 3.
Explain any three (3) educational policy making models.
7.0 References/Further Readings Babalola, J.B. (2003).
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan Babalola, J.B. (1993).
Diagnosis of Educational Policies and Reforms.
Ibadan: The Department of Adult Education, University of Ibadan Haddad, W.D.
(1994).
The Dynamics of Education Policymaking: Case Studies on Burkina Faso, Jordan, Peru and Thailand.
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Lindblom, C. and Cohen, D.K.
(1979).
Usuable knowledge: Social Science and Problem Solving.
New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University.
70 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 THE ROLE OF INTEREST GROUPS IN POLICY MAKING PROCESS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Students and Parents Role in Education Policy Making Process 3.2 Teachers Unions and Education Policy Making Process 3.3 The Role of Civil Servants in Educational Policy Making Process 3.4 The Role of Political Parties in Education Policy Marking Process 3.5 The Role of Religious and Ethnic Groups in Education Policy Formulation.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Do you know that it is very important to familiarize yourself with the environment within which educational policies are made?
Are you agitated in your mind to know why this is so?
If your answer is yes, to understand the environment is important because policy analysis is better made when we have a good knowledge of the major pressures or stakes acting on education matters at the point of decision making.
This unit exposes how major pressure groups can influence education policy making process.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to: o discuss the role of students and parents in education policy making process.
o highlight the role(s) played by trade unions in the education sector during policy making process.
o identify the role of civil servants in education policy making process 71 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT o discuss the role of political parties in education policy making process o identify the role of religious and ethnic groups in education policy formulation.
3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Role of Students/Parents in Education Policy Making Process The importance of pressures from students and parents in the education policy making process can not be over-emphasized.
There is need to know how students unions operate to influence decisions in education.
Are they powerful?
If yes, how powerful are they and how willing are they to exercise their power?
There is need to know whether or not they will support any change in policy.
Students in tertiary institutions of learning for example are very powerful to the extent that they can support or oppose government policies in education.
It is therefore important to identify powerful elements within the students with a view to assessing their respectability or otherwise to policies that are being proposed.
Parents can also organize themselves into pressure groups providers of education to make policies that will be favourable to them.
Parents that are very close to politicians and policy makers in Nigeria for example have been observed to influence several policies.
3.2 Workers Unions and Education Policy Making Process Workers unions in the education industry directly or indirectly influence the policy making process.
It is important therefore that these unions interest(s) be considered in the process of decision making in education.
Examples of these workers unions in the Nigerian school system include the following: - Nigeria Union of Teachers - Conference of Secondary School Principals - Academic Staff Union of Polytechnics - Non Academic Staff Union of Universities - Senior Staff Association of Nigeria Universities - Conference of Secondary School Teachers - Academic Staff Union of Colleges of Education 72 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.3 The Role of Civil Servants in Education Policy Making Process Civil servants are the bureaucrats that draft, gazette and implement proposed or formulated policies in education.
The role of civil servants in formulation and implementation of education policies can not be over-emphasized.
Verification of factual documentation with people responsible for educational data collection and management is carried out by civil servants.
Additionally, civil servants in the education industry do not only discuss policy options within the education sector but also with other government agencies like the ministries of finance, economic planning, industry etc.
3.4 Role of Political Parties in Education Policy Making Process The political party that controls the government in power no doubts exerts considerable influence on the education system.
In many countries, especially developing countries, the provision of education is used as a vote catching device to cajole the uninformed and poverty stricken electorates.
This is why education policy making process in the final analysis is heavily politicized.
Setting the objectives of education, the provision, funding and management are tied to politics.
Politicians make or influence educational policies on behalf of the people with the belief that they know the needs of the people.
In those countries, need assessments are rarely done unlike in the developed countries such as the United States of America, Canada, England, Japan, Germany etc.
It is for this reason the ever widening gap between education and the economy exists in less developed countries.
3.5 The Role of Religious and Ethnic Groups in Education Policy Formulation.
Religious and ethnic groups are very important interest groups that influence the way educational policies are formulated.
These religious and ethnic groups are Church leaders, Moslem scholars including traditional rulers that have the responsibility as custodians to protect or preserve religious and cultural believes.
In doing this, they ensure that curriculum contents, pedagogy, planning and administration at all levels of education are in harmony with the tenets of what they believe in.
It is for this 73 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT reason religious instruction, social studies, traditional dancing, singing, greeting, cooking, dressing and other sundry crafts are taught today in all Nigerian schools.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Discuss how you as a student can influence policy formulation in NOUN to your own advantage.
2.
Discuss how parents, religious and ethnic groups can organize themselves into pressure groups to influence government policies on education.
4.0 Conclusion An educational system is characteristically multi-faceted in purpose, the reason why the divergent stakes are difficult to harmonize.
In education policy making process therefore, all the identified pressure groups are considered and their opinions utilized for the policy outcome to be purposeful and supported.
It is only when this is done that the policy objective(s) is (are) achieved.
5.0 Summary This unit examined the role of pressure groups in education policy making process.
The specific roles of students, parents, workers unions and political parties were discussed.
Also discussed in the unit is the critical role of civil servants in education policy formulation.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Advance reasons why you think it is important to consider the opinion of workers unions in the education industry in formulating educational policies 2.
Are political parties important in the education policy making process?
If yes, state your arguments.
3.
The involvement of civil servants in education policy formulation is a matter of debate.
Discuss your support or otherwise.
74 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 References/Further Readings Babalola, J.B. (2003).
Basic Text in Educational Planning.
Ibadan: Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan Babalola, J.B. (1993).
Diagnosis of Educational Policies and Reforms.
Ibadan: The Department of Adult Education, University of Ibadan Miller, S.I.
(1976).
Policy Issues in Education.
London: Lexington Books.
75 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 EXAMINATION OF PAST AND PRESENT EDUCATIONAL POLICIES IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Educational Policies by Missionaries 3.2 Educational Policies by Colonial Government 3.3 Educational Policies by the Nigerian Government 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction You have learnt from previous units in this study material that the provision and delivery of education all over the world are guided by policies.
In Nigeria, educational policies made by missionaries, British Government that colonized Nigeria and by the Nigerian government since independence in 1960 will be examined in this unit.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, learners should be able to: § highlight the various educational policies by Missionaries that brought Christianity and Islamic religions to Nigeria § discuss the educational policies by the British government for Nigeria § examine the various educational policies by the Nigerian government from 1960 to date.
3.1 Educational Policies by Missionaries The Christian and Islamic missionaries provided and managed education to win converts between 1842 and 1882.
Each missionary organization therefore made policies to facilitate the attainment of this goal.
Although there was no official educational policies in the different parts of the country, two policies were 76 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT however common in all the missionary-managed schools.
The two policies were: (i) the policy of mother tongue as a medium of instruction and; (ii) the policy of compulsory religious studies Concerning the policy of mother tongue, it was generally believed that the gospel is best spread if converts or learners are taught in their own native language.
As a way of implementing this policy, language teachers in Nigerian languages especially Hausa, Yoruba and Igbo were trained to instruct school pupils including adults that took advantage of the adult literacy centers to learn.
Additional, books and other learning aids were developed and produced in several native languages to facilitate teaching and learning.
The compulsory religious studies was implemented by making the teaching of Christianity compulsory in all Christian missionary schools while Islamic studies was also made compulsory in all Moslem schools and literacy centers.
3.2 Educational Policies by British Colonial Government The colonial government strongly criticised missionary schools that were more or less denominational in nature.
The argument was that the school leavers were not fit to become clerks who were much needed in the colonial administration and commercial businesses owned by the colonialists.
Some of the policies formulated to redress this problem are highlighted below: § The policy of partnership among missionaries, individuals and the government in the provision and management of schools.
In this same policy, freedom of religion and a unified curriculum were incorporated.
§ Vischer s policy of natural adaptation.
The essence of this policy was to ensure that the customs and tradition of school pupils were preserved.
The teaching of local crafts, history, literature etc were encouraged as a way of implementing this policy.
The education ordinance of 1926 structured primary education to last for 8 years for the whole country.
Classes 1 and 2 were called infant classes while standard 1 to 6 were called primary classes.
By 1930, the duration of primary education was again reduced 77 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT from 8 to 6 by Mr. E.R.Z Hussey.
The series of memoranda and ordinances made to streamline the provision and management of education especially at the primary level however popularized the need to universalize access to primary education.
In 1955 and 1957 therefore, the Western and Eastern regional government approved free primary education policy respectively with the Northern regional government endorsing the policy years later.
The Ashby report of 1960 introduced for the first time a comprehensive policy on education at all levels.
The policy focused on the production of different categories of manpower needs for all sectors of the Nigerian economy.
Consequently, the Nigerian school system by the policy was repositioned for this onerous task.
3.3 Educational Policies by the Nigerian Government Soon after independence, plans were made for a national curriculum conference to re-direct the course of Nigerian Education.
The first national curriculum conference was slated for 1966.
Unfortunately, this coincided with the military take-over of government and the problems and political upheavals which followed.
The conference could not be held therefore until 1969.
The National Curriculum conference that held in Lagos from 18th 12th September 1969 was therefore the first major step the nation took on the road to a new education policy.
In the words of the then Chief Federal Adviser on Education.
It was the beginning of a national programme to revitalize and renew education in Nigeria (Aiyepeku, 1989).
The conference was a great success.
It was very well attended from all parts of the country by educationists and non- educationists (including farmers and traders) and many interesting papers were read and debated.
The conference spelt out in great detail what it considered the national philosophy, goals, purposes and objectives of Nigerian education and made recommendations for a national curriculum reform.
After the National Curriculum Conference, a seminar of experts drawn from a wide range of interest groups within Nigeria was convened in 1973.
The seminar, which included voluntary agencies and external bodies, deliberated on what a national policy on education for an independent and sovereign Nigeria 78 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT should be.
The outcome of the seminar was a draft document which; after due comments were received by the states and other interest groups led to the final document, that is today known as the National Policy on Education.
Since the publication of the first education policy in 1977, the 2nd 3rd and 4th editions were published in 1981, 1998 and 2004 respectively in keeping with the dynamics of social change and the demands on education.
The 4th edition was necessitated by some policy innovations and changes, and the need to update the 3rd edition (1998) accordingly.
These innovations and changes include: § The lifting of the suspension order on open and distance learning programme by government; § Revitalization and expansion of the National Mathematical Center (NMC); § Establishment of Teachers Registration Council (TRC); § Introduction of information and communication Technology (ICT) into the school system; § Prescription of French Language in the primary and secondary school curriculum as a second official language; § Prescription of minimum number of subjects to be taken by SSCE candidates; § The integration of basic education in the programme of Quaranic schools, to ensure equal opportunity and effective implementation of UBE; § Repositioning science, technical and vocational education in the scheme of national education for optimum performance and; § General contextual change to reflect the state of professional practice in education, among others.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Discuss the main contents of any named educational policy in your local government area.
2.
Identify the things that were wrong with both the missionaries and colonial government educational policies in Nigeria.
79 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 4.0 Conclusion You have seen that in this unit, the past and present educational policies in Nigeria have been examined.
One thing that is common to the policies by missionaries, colonial masters and the government of Nigeria is that at one time or the other, they were able to guide the decisions and actions of those that provided or managed education at all levels.
5.0 Summary This unit examined past and present educational policies in Nigeria.
Specifically, the educational policies by missionaries, colonial government and the Nigerian government were highlighted.
The success or failure or even the merits and demerits of the policies were not discussed, as they are outside the scope of the unit.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Outline the major educational policies made by the British Colonial government.
2.
What are the main features of the educational policies made by Missionaries?
7.0 References/Further Readings Aiyepeku, T.F.(1989).
6-3-3-4 System of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NPS Educational Publishers Limited.
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC.
Fafunwa, A.
B.
(1974).
History of Education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen & Urwin.
The World Bank.
(1988).
Education in Sub-Sahara Africa: Policies for Adjustment, Revitalisation and Expansion.
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Miller, S.I.
(1976).
Policy Issues in Education.
London: Lexington Books.
80 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 DECISION MAKING AND POLICY FORMULATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Decision Making Process 3.2 Decision Making Determinants 3.3 Decision Making and Policy Plan 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Do you know that the outcome of any decision making process is a policy plan?
It is when this policy plan is implemented in organizations that set goals or objectives are achieved.
You can therefore see that decision making is very central or critical in policy formulation.
This unit discusses the relationship between decision making and policy formulation.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: § discuss the decision making process § identify the determinants of decisions making § explain the relationship between decision making and policy plan 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Decision Making Process The decision making process is simply a cycle of related activities.
The activities are related because they are not mutually exclusive of one another.
Thus, decisions are made at every stage that will eventually culminate at the final or ultimate decisions.
The diagram in figure 1 explains clearly the cycle of activities.
81 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Emergence of Problem problem from identification and implementation definition Hypothesize solutions to identified problem Adopt decision for implementation Feedback Design framework and methodology for arriving at solution Taking decisions on the basis of findings Data analysis and Collection of relevant discussion of data to resolve the findings problem Figure 2: The Decision Making Process Source: Writer s Conceptualization of the Policy Making Process The advantage of this scientific model is that decisions arrived at can be replicated in resolving similar problems either in the future or other departments in the organization.
Another advantage of this model is that it eliminates personal biases from the decision making process 3.2 Determinants of Decision Making in Organizations The following factors influence the type and quality of decisions taken in organizations: (i) Environment:- A community where people are more informed or influential will be able to influence decisions at any level than other people not so endowed.
(ii) The political party that controls government:- It is believed that he who pays the piper dictates the tune.
Therefore, politicians and government functionaries influence all kinds of decisions at all levels in a subtle manner.
82 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (iii) Ethnicity and Religion:- These two factors are powerful instruments used to generate sentiments.
These interests are passionately protected or defended by affected people whenever decisions that affect their interests are taken.
(iv) Extant Laws and Regulations:- Every organization has a body of rules and regulations that predict behaviour.
To a very large extent therefore, decisions are heavily influenced by these laws.
(v) The Peculiarity of the Organization:- Education for example is a very peculiar organization.
It is a public good and therefore not a profit making organization.
The type of decisions taken therefore must reflect this peculiarity unlike such other organizations in the manufacturing or economic sector.
3.3 Relationship between Decision Making and Policy Plan Policies are products of the decisions making process.
That is, any decision that has been taken and adopted for implementation with strategic directions is a policy.
For example, the present National Policy on Education (NPE) represents the collective decisions of the 1969 celebrated National Curriculum Conference that held in Lagos to chart a new course for the Nigerian educational system.
Laws and Regulations or decisions, as it were, have their origins and interpretations on the NPE as a clearing house.
An organization is often described as good or bad to the extent that every of its members are mobilized to participate in the decision making process that ultimately culminates in policy plans that guide organizational behaviour.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Can you attempt to use a diagram to explain the cycle of activities in the decision making process?
2.
What are the things to be considered in making decision?
3.
Why is decision making and policy formulation not the same?
4.0 Conclusion Administrators are expected to make scientific-based decisions.
This is because decisions made now have implications for both the present and future.
Therefore, personal biases and other irrational acts must be eschewed from the decision making process.
Good decisions will ultimately lead to good policies.
83 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 5.0 Summary In this unit, the relationship between decision making and policy formulation has been discussed.
The scientific model was used to explain the decision making process while some decisions making determinants were identified.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Explain the decision making process 2.
Enumerate the factors that influence decision making 3.
Discuss the relationship between decision making and policy formulation.
7.0 References/Further Readings Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC.
Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
The Politics of Education Policies in Nigeria.
Faculty of Education Distinguished Lecture Series.
University of Benin.
Nwagwu, C.C.
(2004).
Decision-Making in Organizations in N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma and C.C.
Nwagwu.
Organization and Administration in Education: Perspectives and Practices.
(Pp.210-224).
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Okunola, P.O.
(2004).
Public Participation in Education Policy- Making in Nigeria: Trends, Issues and Prospects in E.O.
Fagbemiye; J.B. Babalola; M. Fabunmi and A.O.
Ayeni.
Management of Primary and Secondary Education in Nigeria.
(Pp.
313-324).
Ibadan: NAEAP 84 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 DEVOLUTION OF FUNCTIONS IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Local Government s Role in Education Management 3.2 State Government s Role in Education Management 3.3 Federal Government s Role in Education Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction You have already been taught that the management of education in Nigeria is a joint responsibility of the three tiers of government- Local, States and Federal.
What perhaps is not clear to you is the specific functions the National Policy on Education (NPE) has assigned to each level of government.
In this unit therefore, the specific role(s) of each tier of government according to NPE will be outlined.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, learners will be expected to: § identify the role of Local governments in education management § highlight the functions the National Policy on Education has assigned to the States government in education management § enumerate the education management functions of the Federal government 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The Responsibility of Local Governments in Education Management Local governments shall, through their Local Education Authorities (LEAs) have responsibility for the financing and management of primary education within their local government 85 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT areas.
In particular, the Local Education Authorities shall be responsible for:- (i) the payment of primary school teacher s salaries and allowances; (ii) the payment of pensions and gratuities; (iii) the retraining of teachers; (iv) the overall management of their educational plans; and (v) supervision and quality control in all primary schools in their areas in conjunction with Federal and State authorities.
3.2 States Governments Role in Education Management State Ministries of Education shall have responsibility for the following:- (i) policy and control over primary, secondary education and tertiary institutions owned by the State in accordance with the requirements of the national policy on education; (ii) planning, research and development of education; (iii) inspectorate services for monitoring and improving standards; (iv) the provision of broad educational services; (v) coordination of activities of school Boards and/or Local Education Authorities as prescribed by law; (vi) examinations, testing and evaluation at primary and junior secondary school levels; and (vii) providing appropriate education laws and ensuring their enforcement 3.3 Federal Governments Responsibility in Education Management The Federal Ministry of Education shall be responsible for: (i) enunciating a national policy on education; (ii) setting and maintaining uniform standards; (iii) coordinating educational practices in Nigeria; (iv) establishing a Federal Inspectorate Services; (v) planning and research on a national scale; (vi) acquiring, storing and disseminating national education data; (vii) coordinating non-formal education including adult education, vocational improvement centers, correspondence courses, etc; 86 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (viii) coordinating international cooperation in education; and (ix) coordinating national school examinations, testing and evaluation (x) Additionally, the Federal Government shall prescribe the minimum standards of education at all levels.
In this regard, § there shall not be more than 20 pupils to a teacher and a helper (assistant) in pre-primary schools; § there shall not be more than 35 and 40 pupils respectively to a class in primary and secondary schools; § there shall not be more than 20 pupils for practical work in technical and vocational colleges; § primary, post-primary and tertiary education shall be the responsibility of the Local, State and Federal governments § education Boards or similar authorities shall be responsible for the management of schools and appointment, posting and discipline of teachers within defined area of authority.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Discuss the role of Federal, States and Local governments in the Nigerian education system.
2.
What level(s) of government will you hold responsible for the observed malady in the Nigerian educational system?
4.0 Conclusion States Ministries of Education and Local Education Authorities (LEA) in collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Education shall be responsible for the organization, supervision and inspection of educational institutions.
It is important to note that appropriate legislations have been enacted to give legal backing to the respective ministries and their parastatals.
5.0 Summary You have learned in this unit that the management of education in Nigeria is a joint responsibility between the Federal, States and Local governments.
Additionally, you have learned that though the different levels of government have their specific roles, the roles however complement one another.
87 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Identify the role Local governments in educational Management.
2.
What are the responsibilities of the States government in educational management?
3.
Highlight the educational management functions of the Federal government 7.0 References/Further Readings Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(1999).
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
Abuja: Government Printing Press Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC.
Nwana, O.C.
(2000).
Aberrations in the Nigerian Education System.
The State of Education in Nigeria.
(Pp.
152) Abuja: UNESCO Omolewa, M. (2001).
The Challenge of Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: University of Ibadan Olagboye, A.
(1997).
Educational System Administration in Nigeria: Structure Responsibilities and Practices.
Lagos: Tisons Ltd 88 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT MODULE 3 CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL ISSUES IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Unit 1 Contemporary Political Issues of Funding Education and Universal Basic Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Contemporary Political Issues of Government Take- Over/Hand over of School Unit 3 Contemporary Political Issue of Equality of Educational Opportunities Unit 4 The Contemporary Issues of Open and Distance Learning (ODL) and Private Educational Institutions Unit 5 Issues of Implementation of the National Policy on Education.
89 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 1 CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL ISSUES OF FUNDING EDUCATION AND UNIVERSAL BASIC EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of Funding Education 3.2 Sources and Stakeholders in the Funding of Education 3.3 Determinant of Cost of UBE Implementation in Nigeria 3.4 UBE Cost Sharing Amongst the Tiers of Government 3.5 The Challenge of Inadequate Funding of UBE Scheme 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction The Universal Basic Education (UBE) scheme covers free and compulsory attendance for the first nine (9) years of schooling.
There is no doubt that the cost of implementing this laudable project is too enormous for one tier of government to bear.
So, how do you think the cost can be shared among the three tiers of government?
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students are expected to: § conceptualise the meaning of funding education; § identify the sources and stakeholders in the funding of education; § highlight the determinants of cost of implementing UBE; § propose a formula for sharing UBE cost amongst the three tiers of government; § discuss the challenges of inadequate funding of UBE scheme; 90 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of Funding Education Education is an expensive social service and therefore requires adequate financial provision from all stakeholders including government for successful implementation of all identified educational programmes adopted for implementation.
Education is expensive because money is needed to hire, train and pay teachers; provide and maintain facilities (like classrooms, laboratories, studios, workshops) and replace consumable equipment on a continuous basis.
Unfortunately in Nigeria, successive governments have erroneously encouraged people to believe that Government alone can provide free education at all levels.
This state of affairs is not only wasteful in itself but has made it very difficult to formulate policies that will make the Nigerian people contribute to finance education.
Even though the government has realized its mistakes and is now begging or welcoming or encouraging the participation of local communities, individuals and organization to assist in funding education, there is an urgent need to embark on a programme of reorientation of the Nigerian people to appreciate the need to adequate finance education.
On the part of government, relevant sectoral bodies such as the Education Trust Fund (ETF), Industrial Training Fund (ITF) and National Science and Technology Fund (NSTF) have been established to respond (by way of intervention) to the funding needs of education.
3.2 Sources and Stakeholders in the Funding of Education Education is a very expensive social service.
The expensive nature notwithstanding, education can be adequately financed through various sources.
Some of these sources are quite conspicuous and described as major sources while other neglected traditional sources if improved upon could augment the funding of public education in Nigeria.
The sources are highlighted below: Government Grants:- Government is the owner of public schools and therefore is responsible for the provision of substantial proportion of the funds expended on education at all levels.
School fees:- School fees are means of generating funds from students that are direct beneficiaries of education.
Appropriate 91 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT fees for quality education should therefore be charged for different educational programmes at all levels.
External Aids:- These aids in form of money, equipment, facilities and even personnel are provided by wealthy countries and organizations like the United States of America, Britain, Canada, UNESCO, Ford Foundation, Rockefeller Foundations etc for indigent countries.
Nigeria as a poor country therefore should take advantage of these aids by applying for them.
School Revenue Yielding Businesses:- Schools can get fund by establishing revenue yielding projects like farms, consultancy services, bookshops catering and rental services etc.
Other sources include the following:- - Endowment funds and donations - Contributions from parents - Company profit tax - Loans - Work study schemes - Contribution by industry - Income tax - Purchase tax (for goods and services) - Gift duty or transfer tax - Entertainment tax.
3.3 Determinants of Cost of Implementing UBE Scheme The determinants are discussed below: Class Size This is the average number of pupils the national policy has approved to be in one classroom.
Here in Nigeria, the approved class size is 40 pupils per classroom.
Dividing total pupils enrolment or pupils expected in school by the class size therefore will reveal the number of classrooms needed for the scheme.
Cost of Classroom Construction This is very simple.
The cost of constructing one classroom is multiplied by the total number of classrooms needed.
Information on cost of classroom construction can be gotten from the Budget Office of the Ministry of Finance.
92 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Pupils-Teacher Ratio To get the teachers needed to implement the UBE scheme, total number of pupils expected in UBE classes is divided by 40, being the approved pupils-teacher ratio in the policy.
Information on cost of paying teachers salary can be obtained from the National Salaries and wages Commission.
The size of the cost will however depend on the experience, qualification, marital status, area of specialization of the teacher etc.
Inflation Inflation has a very devastating effect on the cost of implementing UBE policy in Nigeria.
Costs of stationeries, fuels and other bills are on the increase daily.
As a matter of fact, inflation has not only made the construction of new classrooms impossible but has made the cost of maintaining already existing schools prohibitive.
Parents are not even able to afford private cost of schooling because of inflation.
Other Factors Other factors such as curriculum, location and age of schools have the potential to influence the cost of implementing UBE scheme.
3.2 UBE Cost Sharing Amongst the Tiers of Government One tier of government, whether Federal, States or Local council can not single handedly fund UBE.
The reason for this is because of the enormity of cost required to finance the scheme.
Funding the scheme successfully therefore will have to be a joint responsibility of all levels of government.
Since the federalism is lopsided in favour of the federal government, the following cost sharing formula is proposed.
93 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Table 1: UBE Cost Sharing Formula Amongst the Three Tiers of Government Tier of Government Cost to be Borne Federal (i) Construction and furnishing of needed classrooms (ii) Payment of teachers salaries States (i) Provision of books for all pupils (ii) Provision of laboratories, studios, workshops facilities and equipment Local Council (i) Provision of stationeries including chalk (ii) Payment of bills for fuel, telephone and other sundry items 3.3 The Challenge of Inadequate Funding of UBE Funding basic education in Nigeria is very inadequate.
According to a World Bank survey on Nigeria, government expenditure on education, primary education share of total education budget that was 16.9 percent in 1998 slumped to a paltry 7.5 percent in 2002.
Sectoral analysis shows that education share of the total national budget that was 9.9 percent in 1997 fell to 8.0 in 2002.
Ever since, this picture has not significantly changed.
The inadequate fund is further depleted by misappropriation and corruption that characterize the management of the school system.
The issue of under-funding of education is so endemic that it is now the bane of poor quality education observed in several primary and post primary schools in the country.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What factors do you think government should take into consideration when preparing budget to implement UBE scheme in Nigeria 2.
What level of government is responsible for the under-funding of UBE scheme in Nigeria?
3.
Do you think that the Federal government alone can pay the salaries and allowances of UBE teachers in Nigeria?
4.0 Conclusion There is need for government to stop playing politics with the funding of UBE scheme in Nigeria.
The national assembly should 94 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT as a matter of urgency enacts laws to clearly define the extent each level of government will fund the scheme.
If this is done, Nigerians will know what level of government to hold accountable for the problem of inadequate funding that currently characterize the scheme.
5.0 Summary This unit has discussed the contemporary political issue of funding UBE scheme in Nigeria.
The factors that need to be taken into consideration during UBE budget preparation have also been enumerated.
The formula for sharing UBE cost among the three tiers of government was proposed to guide law enactment by the legislature.
Finally, the challenges of under-funding that characterize UBE implementation were discussed.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 1.
Discuss the factors to be considered in preparing budget to implement UBE in your local government area.
2.
Discuss how you will like the cost of implementing UBE scheme be shared among the three tiers of government.
3.
What are the implications of inadequate funding on the UBE scheme?
4.
What are the sources for financing education in Nigeria?
95 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 References/Further Readings Adeyemi, J.K. (1998).
Cost in Education in M. Nwadiani.
Educational Management for Sub-Sahara Africa.
(Pp.
66-80).
Benin City: Nigerian Society for Educational Planning (NSEP).
Durasaro, D.O.
(2004).
Crucial Issues in the Management of Primary Education in Nigeria in E.O.
Fagbamiye, J.B., Babalola, M. Fabunmi and A.O.
Ayeni.
Management of Primary and Secondary Education in Nigeria (Pp.
73-80), Ibadan: NAEAP Publication.
The World Bank (2003).
School Education in Nigeria: Preparing for Universal Basic Education.
Human Development Africa Region September.
UNESCO (2003).
A Decade of Basic Education Data in Nigeria.
Paris: UNESCO 96 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL ISSUE OF GOVERNMENT TAKE-OVER/HAND-OVER OF SCHOOLS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 The history of Government Take-Over of Schools in Nigeria 3.2 Reasons for the Government Take-Over of Schools 3.3 The Effect of Government Take-Over of Schools 3.4 Controversy Over Government Return of Schools to Original Owners.
4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Education has witnessed active participation by non- governmental agencies, communities and individuals as well as government intervention.
The reasons for government s intervention among others are to prescribe and maintain national minimum standards in the education system.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, students should be able to: § discuss the history of government take-over of school in Nigeria § enumerates the reasons for the government take-over of schools § discuss the effect of Government take-over of Schools on the education System.
§ enumerate the arguments for/against government return/handover of schools to their original owners.
97 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 History of Government Take-Over of Schools in Nigeria The provision and management of schools in Nigeria by non- governmental organizations dates back to 1882.
This effort was pioneered by the Wesleyan Methodist Mission that built a school in Badagry.
Other Christian and Islamic groups followed in quick succession and established schools in different parts of Nigeria.
Soon after independence in 1960, government started making deliberate policies to use education to forge national unity and integration in the country.
On May 16, 1970 therefore, the government of the defunct East Central State of Nigeria formally took over all primary and secondary schools owned by individual and religious organizations.
In 1974, the government of the defunct Mid-Western State formally took over all primary and secondary schools owned by voluntary agencies.
Other States in the South and Northern parts of the country formally took over schools from voluntary agencies at different times before the 1970 decade ended.
The Validation Decree of 1977 was promulgated by the Federal government to give legal backing to all the schools taken over by the different States governments in the country.
3.2 Reasons for Government Take-Over of Schools The official reason given for the take-over of schools from individuals and religious organizations was to guarantee uniform standards, fair distribution of educational facilities and reduce cost of running schools.
Another reason given for the take-over of schools was to secularize education.
Government emphasized the need for all schools to be totally non-denominational.
Religious instruction was to be taught in schools only on non- denominational basis.
3.3 Effect of Government Take-Over of Schools Government take-over of schools as a policy has both advantages and disadvantages.
For the first time, government has been able to implement a national policy on education.
The policy prescribes minimum standards for all schools in the different States of the Federation.
Additionally, the government take-over of schools has also to a large extent guaranteed equal educational opportunities, quality and access.
It needs not to be over-emphasized that the 98 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT policy of government s control of schools has inculcated religious tolerance and national unity in different parts of Nigeria.
These advantages not withstanding, some stakeholders, particularly religious organization are demanding for the return of schools to the original owners.
Moral laxity, the breakdown of moral values is the reason the agitators are giving why schools should be returned to religious organizations.
Another reason advanced for schools to be returned to original owners is government s inability to adequately fund education in Nigeria.
The results of inadequate funding are noticeable in overcrowded classrooms, shortage of all school input except students and poor academic performance.
It is hoped that with adequate funding and effective supervision of schools, the agitation of people for the return of schools to original owners (that lack sincerity and patriotism) will go into oblivion.
3.4 Controversy Over Government Return of Schools to Original Owners Let us recall the reasons for government take-over of schools in the 1970s in unit 3.2 of this module.
It is also important to recall the effect of government take-over of schools policy on school administration and students learning outcomes in unit 3.3 of module 1.
The advantages and demerits of the take-over policy notwithstanding, the call for the schools to be returned or not to be has continued to re-echo.
The original owners of the schools argument is that the economic and moral well-being of the nation has been endangered by government take over of schools policy.
Other stakeholders particularly teachers, parents and students however think differently.
According to them, the provision of education is a social responsibility of government that must never be allowed to be abdicated.
In addition, they argue that returning schools to erstwhile owners that charged exorbitant fees, poorly remunerated teachers and religiously denominationalised schools is akin to commercialization, privatization and talibanalisation of education with grave consequences for the Nigerian society.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Do you support the agitation for the return of schools to original owners?
2.
Recall the antecedents that lead to government take-over of schools in the 1970s.
99 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.
Discuss the effect of government take-over of schools on the Nigerian education system.
4.0 Conclusion The contemporary political issue of government take-over/hand- over of schools has been discussed in this unit.
Government s recognition of private individuals and organizations in the provision and management of schools in the national policy on education seemingly make the agitation unnecessary.
According to the Nigerian Union of Teachers NUT, government s contemplation to return schools to original owners is not only political but misguided.
They argue that the decision is akin to commercialization and privatization of education.
Any individual or religious organization that is interested in school business should go ahead and establish schools and stop misguiding (or hiding under government s insincerity) government to relinquish its control on the provision and management of schools.
5.0 Summary In this unit, the history of government take-over of schools was discussed.
The reasons for government take-over of schools and the effects were also x-rayed.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Give a historical account of government take-over of schools in Nigeria.
2.
Outline the reasons given for government take-over of schools in Nigeria.
3.
Discuss the effects of government take-over of schools on the Nigeria educational system.
7.0 References/Further Readings Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC Ogunu, M.A.
(2004).
Government Take-Over of Schools from Voluntary Agencies and Moves to Return the Schools- A Critical Appraisal in E.O.
Fagbamiye; and A.O.
Ayeni.
Management of Primary and Secondary education in Nigeria.
(Pp134-156).
Ibadan: NAEAP Publications.
100 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 CONTEMPORARY POLITICAL ISSUE OF EQUALITY OF EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of Equality of Educational Opportunities 3.2 Reasons for Educational Imbalance in Nigeria 3.3 Government Policy to Remedy Educational Imbalance 3.4 Challenge of Gender Imbalance in Education Participation 3.5 Politics of Location of New Educational Institutions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Education is a right and not a privilege.
This means that nobody, big or small, male or female, indigene or non-indigene can be denied education.
This notwithstanding, equalizing opportunity or access to education at every level is a difficult task all over the world particularly in Nigeria.
In what way(s) therefore do you think the seeming inequality of educational opportunities can be redressed?
2.0 Objectives At the end of this lesson, students should be able to: § explain the concept of equality of educational opportunities § discuss the reasons for educational imbalance in Nigeria § enumerate government policy to remedy educational imbalance in Nigeria § Discuss the challenges of gender imbalance in Nigeria § Explain how politics influence the location of new education institutions.
101 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of Equalization of Educational opportunity Equality of educational opportunity means the removal of all forms of imbalances in the course of providing education to every person in the society.
It is not just to universalize access to education but to ensure that no one is discriminated against in terms of funding, curriculum, school location, sex and teachers distribution.
It is strongly believed that equality of educational opportunity is an antidote to solve the problem of social inequality.
In the United States of America for instance, education was made available to the Blacks, women and people of low socio-economic status who were identified after the World War II as victims of discrimination.
Today, the educational attainment gap between all classes of people in the US has become reasonably low with corresponding political will by the government to exterminate all traces of inequality among the American people.
3.2 Reasons for Educational Imbalance in Nigeria The lack of uniformity in the provision and management of education in the different parts of Nigeria is as a result of religious, ethnic and socio-cultural differences.
Western education that Christian missionary groups brought to Nigeria was received first by Christian adherents in the South before others in the North.
Even within the South, the Yoruba ethnic groups were the first to receive and benefit from western education not only because the first school was located in their ethnic area, Badagry but were privileged to have exposure to persons and institutions outside the shores of Nigeria.
These set of people and areas that received western education earlier than others became the dominant groups during the colonial and post colonial political arrangements.
In present day Nigeria, these areas that received western education earlier have been christened educationally advantaged and those that received late disadvantaged areas.
The imbalance in the equation however is not only due to religion and ethnicity but such other factors like geography, socio-economic background, culture etc.
102 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.3 Government Policies to Remedy Educational Imbalance As you are already aware, Nigeria is a multi-ethnic and socio- cultural society.
Education has therefore been identified as a potent instrument of unity in diversity.
Additionally, the national policy on education endorses education as the necessary foundation for building: (i) a free and democratic society; (ii) a just and egalitarian society; (iii) a strong and self-reliant nation (iv) a great and dynamic economy and; (v) a land full of bright opportunities for all citizens For every Nigerian to have equal opportunity to receive education therefore, government has formulated the following deliberate policies.
At the Primary Education Level Government has formulated the Universal Basic Education (UBE) policy.
This policy makes it mandatory for all Nigerians irrespective of religion, ethnicity, socio-economic status, sex, and age to receive primary education free of charge.
In this regard everyone is guaranteed equal opportunity to receive the same type of primary education.
At the Secondary Education Level Free and compulsory secondary education for the first three years has also been provided for in the national policy on education.
Private individuals and organizations are also being encouraged to partner with government as a matter of policy in providing senior secondary education for all Nigerians.
The reason for this partnership in principle is to encourage non-governmental organizations to locate schools in areas where government school are non-existent.
Adult education and literacy centers including special schools for the physically challenged have been provided for in the policy to give every Nigerian equal opportunity for both basic and secondary education.
At the Tertiary Level To guarantee equal opportunity of all Nigerians to receive higher education, the government established the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) to place suitably qualified candidates in all universities, polytechnics and monotechnics in the country.
In doing this over the years, JAMB has a well established and properly defined guidelines for the equitable 103 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT placements of qualified candidates.
The guidelines are listed below: (i) The Merit Criterion:- A certain percentage of all qualified candidates is admitted based on merit.
(ii) The Catchments Area Criterion:- Another percentage is approved for catchments area.
The catchments area in most cases is the geographical or socio-cultural area contagious to the university or polytechnic or monotechnic in the area.
The states of the federation and the Catchments/locality area according to JAMB are listed below in the case of federal universities: Table 1: Catchments Areas for Universities S/N State/Catchments Area Universities 1 Abia FUTO, NAU, UNN 2 Adamawa YOLA, MAIDUGURI, ATBU, ABU 3 Akwa-Ibom UYO, CALABAR, BENIN, UNN 4 Anambra NAU, UNN, FUTO 5 Bauchi ATBU, ABU, YOLA, MAIDUGURI 6 Bayelsa BENIN, CALABAR, UYO, UNN 7 Benue JOS, ILORIN, MINNA, ABU 8 Borno MAIDUGURI, YOLA, ATBU, ABU 9 Cross River CALABAR, UYO, BENIN, UNN 10 Delta CALABAR,UYO, BENIN, UNN 11 Ebonyi UNN, FUTO, NAU 12 Edo BENIN, CALABAR, UYO, UNN 13 Ekiti FUTA, OAU, LAGOS 14 Enugu UNN, NAU, FUTO 15 Gombe ATBU, YOLA, ABU, MAIDUGURI 16 Imo FUTO, UNN, NAU 17 Jigawa BUK, UDU, ABU 18 Kaduna BUK, UDU, ABU 19 Kano BUK, UDU, ABU 20 Kastina BUK, UDU, ABU 21 Kebbi UDU, BUK, ABU, ILORIN, MINNA 22 Kogi ILORIN, JOS, MINNA, ABU 23 Kwara ILORIN, JOS, MINNA, ABU, UDU 24 Lagos LAGOS, OAU, FUTA 25 Nasarawa JOS, MINNA, ILORIN, UDU, ABU 26 Niger JOS, MINNA, ILORIN, UDU, ABU 27 Ogun OAU, LAGOS, FUTA 28 Ondo OAU, LAGOS, FUTA 29 Osun OAU, LAGOS, FUTA 30 Oyo OAU, LAGOS, FUTA 31 Plateau JOS, MINNA, ABU, ILORIN 32 Rivers CALABAR, UYO, BENIN, UNN 33 Sokoto UDU, BUK, ABU, ILORIN, MINNA 34 Taraba YOLA, ABU, ATBU, MAIDUGURI 35 Yobe YOLA, ABU, ATBU, MAIDUGURI 36 Zamfara UDU, ILORIN, BUK, MINNA, ABU 104 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT The following universities have all the States of the Federation as their catchments areas: University of Ibadan, University of Abuja, University of Port Harcourt, University of Agriculture, Abeokuta; University of Agriculture, Makurdi; Michael Okpara University of Agriculture, Umudike and Federal University of Petroleum Resources, Effurun.
Note therefore that all the States have their quota reserved in the universities belonging to the catchments area or locality.
(iii) Special Consideration for candidates from Educationally Less Developed States (ELDS) Criterion:- A proportion is also reserved for candidates from ELDS.
The ELDS States are Adamawa, Bauchi, Bayelsa, Benue, Borno, Cross River, Ebonyi, Gombe, Jigawa, Kaduna, Kano, Kastina, Kebbi, Kogi, Kwara, Nasarawa, Niger, Plateau, Rivers, Sokoto, Taraba, Yobe and Zamfara.
Additionally, States that established universities to complement Federal government s effort in providing university education have all the Local government Areas within the States as catchments areas.
This arrangement no doubt, guarantees fairness and equity in the placement of qualified candidates in the limited spaces in the universities and other tertiary institutions in the country.
3.4 The Challenge of Gender Imbalance in Education Participati on.
Department of Public Information of the United Nations Organization (UNO) in 1995 revealed that 67 percent of the world one billion illiterates are women.
The report also shows that more than 80 million out of the 130 million children that lack access to primary schools are girls and, that by the age of 18, girls have received 4.4 years less education than boys.
A cursory look at this research report shows that there is gender inequality of education opportunities, a situation whereby the males are more favoured than the females.
In Nigeria, Ayo-Sobowale (2006) reported that less than 50 percent females are in primary and secondary schools while less than 40 percent in tertiary institutions.
Many factors militate against the girl child education in the Nigerian society.
105 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Factors such as religion, poverty, tradition and cultural norms subordinate the girl child to suffer the following: - low educational attainments (in most cases, the girl child does not go beyond primary and secondary school level)., - prostitution and forced marriages leading to early school dropout - child abuse in the form of hawking, baby sitting etc.
3.5 Politics of Location of New Educational Institutions Effective school mapping is the bane of even school distribution.
The importance of effective school distribution can not be over- emphasized as access to school and regular school attendance is improved upon.
This distribution framework is however distorted when politics is taken into consideration in locating new educational institutions.
The result of this is over concentration of schools is some places while in other places, schools are sparsely distributed.
Even in places where schools are concentrated, they are still for political reasons located nearer the houses of politicians that are in control of government than those in opposition.
This explains why more federal universities and colleges for example are located in the North than in the South where partisan politicians have always been in opposition.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
What is the meaning of the concept of equality of educational opportunities?
2.
Identify the causes of educational imbalance in Nigeria.
3.
In what ways do you think the problem of education imbalance can be solved?
4.
Discuss the challenges of gender imbalance in Nigeria 5.
Explain how politics influence the location of new education institutions.
4.0 Conclusion We have seen in this unit the commendable efforts government has made to universalize access to education at all levels.
Additionally, government has enshrined fairness and equity in the selection process of all persons that place demand for education.
To a large extent, the observed educational imbalance among ethnic and social groups in the country is being balanced to foster development and national unity.
106 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 5.0 Summary In this unit, the contemporary political issue of equality of educational opportunity was discussed.
The concept of equality of educational opportunity was explained and the reasons for imbalance in the Nigerian educational system discussed.
Government deliberate policies to remedy the observed educational imbalance were highlighted to guide all stakeholders.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Explain the concept of equality of educational opportunity 2.
Discuss the reasons for educational imbalance in Nigeria 3.
Highlight governments deliberate policies to remedy educational imbalance in Nigeria.
4.
What are the challenges of gender imbalance in education participation.
5.
Explain how politics can influence location of new educational institutions.
7.0 References/Further Readings Ayo-Sobowale, S.M.O.
(2006).
Factors Militating against the Girl-Child Education in Nigeria in P.M.C Ogomaka and D.A.
Onyejemezi (eds.)
The Home, the Society and the Education of the Nigeria Child.
Lagos: 20th Annual Congress Book of Proceedings, Nigerian Academy of Education.
Coleman, J.S.
(1968).
The Concept of Equality of Educational Opportunity.
Harvard Educational Review, Vol.
38, Pp 7-22 Boudon, R. (1973).
Education, Opportunity and Social Inequality.
New York: John Willey and Sons Durojaiye, M.O.A.
(1987).
Egalitarianism and Inequalities in Nigeria Education in A.M. Ejiogu and D. Ajeyaleni (Eds.)
Emergent Issues in Nigerian Education.
Lagos: Joja Press Ltd., (Pp.
12-18).
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC Joint Admission and Matriculation Board.
(2008).
UME/DE 107 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Brochure 2009/2010 Academic Session: Guidelines for Admissions to First Degree Courses in Universities and Degree Awarding Institutions in Nigeria.
Lagos: JAMB.
108 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 THE CONTEMPOR ARY ISSUES OF OPEN AND DISTANCE LEARNING (ODL) AND PRIVATE EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of ODL 3.2 Characteristic of ODL 3.3 Factors that affect ODL Implementation 3.4 Concept of Private Educational Institutions and Partnerships 3.5 Arguments for and Against Private Participation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 Reference/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction Do you know that education is a right and not a privilege?
It is the duty of government therefore to provide education for all persons.
Many persons that can not attend conventional or regular schools either because of job or distance or health reasons can not be denied education.
The open and distance learning scheme is a sine qua non that has been recognized all over the world to bring education to the door steps of people that can not attend conventional schools.
2.0 Objectives At the end of the lesson, students should be able to: § explain the concept of open and distance learning § discuss the characteristic of ODL § identify factors that affect ODL implementation § discuss the meaning of private education institutions and partnership § what are the arguments for/against private participation in education?
109 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Concept of Open and Distance Learning (ODL) Open and distance learning (ODL) is a system where the tutor contacts the learners in different ways other than the conventional face-to-face pedagogy.
It is based on selective use of instructional media that promote the self-teaching-learning process.
It is the organization and delivery of instructions to learners that do not have immediate or physical interactions with teachers.
ODL combines the mixture of learning through print, correspondence and electronic media instruction.
The applicability of ODL cut across all levels of education.
For example, the National Teacher Institute (NTI) employs the use of ODL to provide education at all levels for all persons that can not attend conventional schools.
Also, the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) provides university education using the ODL instrument to persons that time and space debar from attending regular universities.
3.2 Characteristics of ODL In ODL, there is freedom from restriction and rigidity which usually characterize the conventional system of learning.
There is also openness with regards to admission, teaching media, space, time and course content.
According to the Federal Ministry of Education (2002), a significant proportion of the teaching- learning process is conducted by teachers removed in space and/or in time from the learner.
The National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN) summarized the major characteristics of ODL as follows: (i) There is no fixed location or time for this kind of education.
It can take place anywhere and at any time- at home, work place and even while traveling.
(ii) There is little or no physical interaction between tutors and students (iii) It is learner-centred.
Therefore, the learning materials must be designed to meet learners needs.
(iv) The tutor is built into the text material.
This means that in the text, the writer must invoke the same feelings and reactions that a student gets when he or she is in a conventional teaching-learning environment.
110 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.3 Factors that Affect ODL Implementation The successful implementation of ODL scheme at any level of education depends on the following factors: (i) Data for Planning: Planning for ODL requires data on prospective beneficiaries, facilities, and equipment.
The characteristics of the prospective beneficiaries in terms of age, sex, culture, occupation, educational preferences etc have to be investigated and recorded.
(ii) Establishment of study centres: Although ODL is delivered using communication media like radio and television or printed materials, there is still the need for the establishment of study centers to provide opportunities for students to interact among themselves and with the teachers.
The advantage of this is that the feeling of isolation associated with ODL by students is removed and, common problems tackled with avenues for students to benefit from one another created.
(iii) Production of printed materials: Printed materials are still very relevant in ODL.
Other instructional aids are also needed to supplement printed texts when the students come together for tutorial classes at the study centers.
(iv) Funding: Government has to invest adequate resources in the establishment of study centers and fund the procurement of facilities and equipment.
(v) Student Support: This include all activities beyond the production and delivery of course materials that assist in the progress of students in their studies.
There are two major categories of student support.
The first is academic support that covers cognitive, intellectual and knowledge issues affecting a course or some courses.
The second is the non-academic or counseling support that focuses on the affective and the organizational aspects of their programme(s) (vi) Student Evaluation: Continuous assessment and examinations are combined to evaluate students academic achievements in ODL.
Results of continuous assessment will enable the students to carry out self-analysis about the progress being made.
These assignments have the additional advantage of helping students to remain focused in their studies.
111 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.4 Concept of Private Educational Institutions and Partnerships The concept of private sector participation in the provision and management of education is akin to privatization/commercialization of education.
Privatization generally is the process of involving private individuals and organizations in the management and ownership of public enterprises.
Privatization of education is however done with great caution because of the nature of education as both a public and merit good.
Due to the very expensive nature of education, governments all over the world encourage individuals and organizations including communities to establish and manage school at all levels of education.
The role of government in the circumstance is to make legislations to enforce minimum standards.
The extent to which education is privatized varies from country to country and from time to time.
Two levels or forms of privatization of education have been identified by Nwadiani (2005).
The first is zero privatization of education a situation whereby the State or the private sector bears the full cost of providing and managing education.
The second form of privatization is the Public/Private Partnership (PPP) in which private individuals and agencies are allowed to own and run schools at all levels.
3.5 Arguments For/Against Private Participation in Educational Management Allowing private sector participation in the ownership and management of schools at all levels of education has been a matter of debate.
Some stakeholders argue that education is both a public and merit good.
Therefore, allowing the private sector to take over the establishment and management of schools will not only affect access to the commodity by the poor majority in the society but will according to Okunamiri (2005) affect the content and eventual quality of the service.
Another argument is that with government monopolizing the provision and management of education, the school plant including school leavers would be of very poor quality and dysfunctional especially in the market place.
There is still another argument that government has over the years borne the cost of providing education.
Now that the world economy is experiencing a melt down, users of the end products of education should take part in sharing the burden of training these school graduates.
112 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Explain the concept open and distance learning 2.
Discuss the characteristics of ODL 3.
What makes the implementation of ODL difficult in Nigeria?
4.
Discuss what private education institutions and partnership mean.
5.What are the argument for/against private participation in educational management?
4.0 Conclusion Teaching and studying at a distance can be affective when the methods and technologies used are appropriate to the instructional task.
A robust student-to-student interaction combined with a very timely teacher-to-student feedback will no doubt make the goals(s) of ODL realizable.
5.0 Summary The unit examined the contemporary issue of open distance learning emerging programmes in Nigeria.
The concept of ODL was explained while the characteristics of distant learning were highlighted.
Factors that affect the successful implementation of ODL were identified and discussed.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
Explain the meaning of open and distance learning 2.
List at least three characteristic of ODL 3.
What factors will you consider for the successful implementation of ODL?
4.
Discuss what private education institutions and partnership mean.
5.
What are the argument for/against private participation in educational management?
113 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 References/Further Readings Federal Ministry of Education.
(2002).
Blue Print and Implementation Plan for the National Open University and Distance Learning Programmes.
Abuja: Federal Ministry of Education.
Jegede, O.
(2001).
Producing Teachers for UBE through Open and Distance Learning.
Journal of Basic Education in Nigeria 1(1).
55-65.
Koul, b.N.
(2005).
Induction Workshop for Staff of the National Open University of Nigeria (NOUN).
Lagos: NOUN Nwadiani, M. (1993).
Faster Forward Jump Hypothesis: Implications for Educational Planning in Developing Countries.
Benin City: University of Benin Press.
Okunamiri, P.O.
(2005).
The Popularity of Privatization in Education in Nigeria in G.O.
Akpa; S.U.
Udoh and E.O.
Fagbamiye (eds.)
Deregulating the Provision and Management of Education in Nigeria (PP 123-129), Jos: NAEAP Publication.
ThisDay Newspapers, (2002, March 13).
Taking Distance out of Education.
114 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 ISSUES OF IMPLEMENTA TION OF THE NATIONAL POLICY ON EDUCATION (NPE) CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main contents 3.1 The Philosophy and Goals of Education in Nigeria 3.2 Terms of Reference for NPE Implementation Committee 3.3.
Challenges of Implementing the National Policy on Education 3.4 Revisions and Editions of the NPE 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 Introduction A nation s policy on education is government s way of realizing that part of the national goals which can be achieved using education as a tool.
No policy on education however can be formulated without first identifying the overall philosophy and goals of the nation.
This is why it is severally believed that no nation can rise above the quality of education that is provided.
Do you believe this?
How then can the policy on education be implemented for the purpose and goals of education to be achieved.
2.0 Objectives At the end of this lesson, students should be able to: (i) state the philosophy and goals of education in Nigeria (ii) identify the terms of reference for the NPE implementation committee (iii) discuss the problems of implementing the national policy on education (iv) Identify the revisions and editions in the NPE document 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Philosophy and Goals of Education in Nigeria Nigeria s philosophy of education is based on: (i) the development of the individual into a sound and effective 115 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT citizens (ii) the full integration of individual into the community (iii) the provision of equal access to educational opportunities for all citizens of the country at the primary, secondary and tertiary levels both inside and outside the formal school system For the philosophy to be in harmony with Nigeria s national goals, education has to be geared towards self-realization, better human relationships, individual and national efficiency, effective citizenship, national consciousness, national unity as well as towards social, cultural, economic, political, scientific and technological progress.
Based on the above philosophy, the national educational goals are: (a) the inculcation of national consciousness and national unity; (b) the inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society; (c) the training of the mind in the understanding of the world around and; (d) the acquisition of appropriate skills and the development of mental, physical and social abilities and competencies as equipment for the individual to live in and contribute to the development of the society 3.2 Terms of Reference for the NPE Implementation Committee Following the adoption of the NPE document, the federal government set up a national implementation committee with the following terms of reference: (i) Translate the policy into workable blueprint and to develop programmes for the implementation of the policy.
(ii) Coordinate and monitor the implementation of the programmes developed under the policy.
(iii) Advise government on, and to assist in providing the infrastructures and other requirements for the policy.
116 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (iv) Provide a continuous review and assessment of the aims, objectives and target of the policy with a view to ensuring the adequacy and continued relevance of the policy to our national needs and aspirations and to propose modifications on any aspects as may be found necessary.
Each state of the federation was mandated to set up implementation task force to organize workshops and publicize the contents of the national policy.
3.3 Problems of Implementing the National Policy on Education A number of problems observed in the operating environment affect the full attainment of the policy expected outcomes.
A few of these problems include: (i) Inadequate teachers: The country has not been able to provide adequate teachers, particularly in technical and science subjects (ii) Inadequate and unreliable data in the making of major decisions: Recently for example, the government came up with the policy of feeding pupils in all existing primary schools in the country without first collecting data on pupils that will benefit from the decision; average cost of feeding a pupil, availability of water for the pupils to drink after eating or even data on toilets to serve as conveniences for the pupil after eating.
(iii) Poor leadership:- Many lapses in various aspects of administration have also been observed to negatively impact on the successful implementation of the education policy.
(iv) Continuous assessment problem:- The importance of continuous assessment can not be over- emphasized.
It plays corrective roles and help both students and teachers to be focused on the teaching- learning process.
But today in most schools, no meaningful continuous assessment is observed.
Even in schools where continuous assessment takes place, poor administration and falsification of performance data characterize the exercise.
117 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (v) Overcrowded classrooms:- Teacher-pupils ratio in several schools is observed to be above the specified standards because classrooms, laboratories, workshops, library (where available) benches/desks etc are inadequate.
(vi) Other problems include poor curriculum development, social violence, poverty, poor understanding of the purpose of education etc 3.4 Revisions and Editions of the NPE Document The need for a national policy on education came about as a result of the 1969 National Curriculum Conference which was attended by a cross-section of Nigerians.
The conference was a culmination of expressions of general dissatisfaction with existing education system which had become irrelevant to national needs, aspirations and goals.
After this, another conference of experts drawn from a wide range of interest groups within Nigeria was convened in 1973.
The conference deliberated on what a national policy on education for an independent and sovereign Nigerian nation should be.
The outcome of the seminar was a draft document which, after due comments were received from government and other stakeholders led to the final document, the maiden National Policy on Education, first published in 1977.
Since the publication of the 1977 edition, the 2nd and 3rd editions were published in 1981 and 1998 respectively in keeping with the dynamics of social change and the demands on education.
The present 4th edition came about as a result of some policy innovations and changes.
Self Assessment Exercises 1.
Highlight the philosophy and goals of education in Nigeria.
2.
In your own opinion, is it the implementation committee of the national policy on education that should be held responsible for non- achievement of the policy objectives thirty years after implementation?
3.
What problems are militating against the effective implementation of the national policy on education?
4.
Identify the revisions and editions in the NPE document 118 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 4.0 Conclusion More than thirty years after the NPE document was adopted for implementation, no significant achievements have been recorded in terms of policy objective attainment.
Inadequate funding and poor mal-administration both at micro and macro level have been identified as reasons for the elusive attainment of policy objectives.
Deliberate policies to redress the identified problems in the course of implementing the policy will no doubt translate policy objectives into desired results.
5.0 Summary This unit examined the issue of implementation of the national policy on education.
The philosophy and goals of education in Nigeria as well as terms of reference for NPE implementation committee were highlighted.
Finally, the challenges of implementing the national policy on education discussed.
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments 1.
State the goals and philosophy of education in Nigeria.
2.
Identify the terms of reference of the committee implementing the national policy on education.
3.
Discuss the problems of implementing the national policy on education.
4.
Give reasons for the revision of NPE from time to time 7.0 References/ Further Readings Aiyepeku, T.F.
(1989).
6-3-3-4.
System of Education in Nigeria.
Zaria: NPS Educational Publishers Limited.
Federal Republic of Nigeria.
(2004).
National Policy on Education.
Lagos: NERDC Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
From UPE to UBE: Basic Planning consideration for Effective Implementation of Programmes in T. Ajayi (Eds.)
Universal basic Education in Nigeria.
(Pp 10-21).
Abuja: UNESCO Office in Nigeria.
Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
Management structure and Financing of Education in UNESCO (Ed.)
The state of Education in Nigeria.
(Pp.
10-21) Abuja: UNESCO Office in Nigeria.
119 EDA 852 POLITICS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Ogonor, B.O.
(2004).
Management of Education in Nigeria in N.A.
Nwagwu; M.E.
Ijeoma and C.C.
Nwagwu (Eds.)
Organizations and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
(Pp.
304-322) Benin City: Festa printing Press Ltd. Ojogwu, C.N.
(2004).
Organization of the Nigerian Education System in N.A.
Nwagwu, M.E.
Ijeoma and C.C.
Nwagwu (Eds.)
Organization and Administration of Education of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
(Pp.267-301).
Benin City: Festa Printing Press Ltd. UNESCO.
(2000).
The State of Education in Nigeria.
Abuja: UNESCO 120
