 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDA 807 COURSE TITLE: TOPICAL ISSUES IN EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 1 COURSE GUIDE EDA 807 TOPICAL ISSUES IN EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION Course Developer Dr.
I.
A. Ajayi Department of Educational Foundations and Management Faculty of Education, University of Ado-Ekiti, Ado-Ekiti.
Course Writer Dr.
I.
A. Ajayi Department of Educational Foundations and Management Faculty of Education, University of Ado-Ekiti, Ado-Ekiti.
Course Editor Professor J.
B. Babalola Faculty of Education University of Ibadan Ibadan.
Staff in Charge Dr. S. O. Ogundiran School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Coordinator Dr. S. O. Ogundiran School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
2 COURSE GUIDE TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Introduction Course Aims Course Objectives Working through this course Study units Study plan References/Further Readings How to get the most from this course Tutorial sessions Facilitation Counseling Self Assessment Exercises Tutor-marked assignments Final examination and grading Conclusion Summary 3Introduction Welcome to EDA 807: Topical Issues in Educational Administration, which is two credit unit course, offered by students of Ph.D degree programme in Educational Administration.
The course consists of fifteen study units.
This course guide is for distance learners enrolled in the doctorate programme in Educational Administration of the National Open University of Nigeria.
This guide is one of the several resource tools meant to help you successfully complete this course and by extension your programme.
You will find very useful information in this guide about this course.
Such information contain aims, objectives, what the course is about, the course materials you will be using, available services to support your learning; information on assignments and examination.
It will also provide you the guidelines on how to plan your time for study; the amount of time you are likely to spend on each study unit, your tutor-marked assignments.
I strongly urge you to go through this course guide and do not hesitate to contact your study centre if you have further questions.
Wishing you all the best in your learning experience and successful completion of this course.
Course Aims The course aims to give an understanding of some topical and contemporary issues in educational administration and how such issues have influenced the educational system in Nigeria.
Course Objectives In order to achieve the aims, there are overall objectives being synthesized from the specific objectives of each unit which are always featured at the beginning of each unit.
You have to ensure that you have achieved the objectives after you must have diligently studied each unit.
Generally, you should be able to achieve the following general objectives at the end of the course: (cid:216) Explain the evolution of educational administration in Nigeria (cid:216) Discuss the various principles of educational administration.
(cid:216) Describe leadership in educational administration (cid:216) Illustrate the use of power and authority in school administration (cid:216) Discuss the relevance of communication in the school system (cid:216) Explain how to manage time in school administration (cid:216) Describe the preparation and administration of budget in the school system (cid:216) Examine motivation of staff in the school system (cid:216) Explain how successful school administration can be ensured through school- community relations (cid:216) Discuss the solutions to examination malpractice in Nigerian educational system.
(cid:216) Explain how to manage cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions (cid:216) List the causes and effects of students(cid:8217) crisis in Nigerian tertiary institutions (cid:216) Describe the influence of globalization on educational system in Nigeria 4(cid:216) Examine the roles of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in educational development in Nigeria (cid:216) Identify the problems of educational administration in Nigerian and their solutions Working through this Course Before the completion of this course, you are expected to read the study units, text books and other prescribed materials.
In each unit, there are self assessment exercises and tutor-marked assignment questions for the purpose of evaluation.
You will be given assignments and class works periodically and you will write final examination after the completion of the course.
The course will take you 15 weeks and time is allocated to each unit.
Course Materials The major components of the course are as follows: 1 Course outline 2 Course guide 3 Study units 4 Text books Study Units There are fifteen study units in this course.
These were presented in four modules as follows: Module 1 Unit 1: Historical development of educational administration in Nigeria.
Unit 2: Principles of Educational Administration Unit 3: Leadership in Educational Administration Unit 4: Power and Authority in School Administration Module 2 Unit 1: Communication in the school system Unit 2: Time Management in School Administration Unit 3: Budget preparation and administration in the school system Unit 4: Motivation in school administration Unit 5: School-Community Relations Module 3 Unit 1: Examination Malpractice in Nigerian educational system Unit 2: Cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions Unit 3: Students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institution Module 4 Unit 1: The influence of globalization on educational system in Nigeria Unit 2: Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in Education Unit 3: Problems of Educational Administration in Nigeria 5 In each unit, you will find the introduction, objectives, contents, conclusion, summary, self assessment exercises, tutor-marked assignment and references/further readings.
The self assessment exercises will assist you to achieve the stated objectives of each unit and the overall objectives of the course.
Study Plan This table presents the course and how long it should take you to complete each study unit and the assignments you are expected to do.
Unit Title of study unit Weeks Assignment /Activity Course Guide 1 Course Guide form 6Module 1 1 Historical development of educational 2 Assignment administration in Nigeria 2 Principles of Educational Administration 3 Assignment 3 Leadership in Educational Administration 4 Assignment 4 Power and authority in school 5 TMAs for administration module 1 to be submitted Module 2 1 Communication in the school system 6 Assignment 2 Time Management in school administration 7 Assignment 3 Budget preparation and administration in the 8 Assignment school system 4 Motivation in school administration 9 Assignment 5 School-community relations 10 TMAs for module 2 to be submitted Module 3 1 Examination malpractice in Nigerian 11 Assignment educational system 2 Cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions 12 Assignment 3 Students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary 13 TMAs for institutions module 3 to be submitted Module 4 1 The influence of globalization on 14 Assignment educational system in Nigeria 2 Information and Communication 15 Assignment Technology (ICT) in education 3 Problems of educational administration in 16 TMAs for Nigeria Module 4 to be submitted Revision 16 Examination 17 Total 17 References/Further Readings The course material serves as your main text for this course.
Nevertheless, you are also encouraged to consult other sources as provided for you in the list of references and further reading stated as follows: References Edem, D.A.
(1987): Introduction to Educational Administration in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Spectrums Book Limited.
Obi, E. (2004): Issues in Educational Administration Enugu: Empathy International.
7Nwankwo, J.I.
(1982): Educational Administration: Theory and Practice.
India: Vikas Publishing House PVT Ltd. Udoh, S.U.
and Akpa, G. O.
(2007): Educational Administration in Nigeria: Theory and Practice (Revised Edition).
Jos: M.P.GINAC Concept Ltd. Further Readings Ajayi, I.A.
and Ayodele, J.B. (2002): Fundamentals of Educational Management.
Ado Ekiti: Green line Publishers.
Anuna, M.C.
(2004): Dynamics of Organisational Theory in Education.
Enugu: valen publishing co. Ibukun, W.O.
(1997): Educational Management: Theory and Practice.
Ado-Ekiti: Bamgboye & Co Press (Nig.)
Ltd. Mgbekem, S.J.A.
(2004): Management of University Education in Nigeria Calabar: University of Calabar Press.
How to Get the Most from this Course The study units serve as a substitute for university lecturer in a distance learning programme.
The advantage is that you can read and work through the course materials at your own pace, time and place that suit you best.
In order to aid your learning, each of the study units has been designed with common features.
At the beginning of each unit, there is an introduction to the subject matter which gives an overview of what you are going to study.
After this, the objectives of the unit are stated to enable you find out whether you have achieved them on completion of the unit.
Each study unit also contains self assessment exercises and answers to them are provided at the end of the unit.
The exercises will help you recall what you have studied through self evaluation.
The summary that is usually presented at the end of each unit work also help you to recall the contents of the topic treated.
There are also tutor-marked questions at the end of each unit which are to assist you to achieve the objectives of the unit.
These questions will prepare you for the assignments which you will submit and the final examination.
Each study unit is expected to take you about three hours to complete.
On completion of the first study unit, try to take note of how long it took you and use the information to draw up your own time table for the rest of your course.
The wide margins on the left and right sides of your course book were deliberately created for you to make notes of main ideas or key points which you can find useful when revising the course.
If you diligently make use of the features of each unit, you will be successful in this course.
Tutorial Sessions There are 16 hours of tutorial sessions provided in support of this course.
As soon as you are allocated to a tutorial group, you will be given necessary information regarding the dates, time, location of the tutorials, the name and phone number of your tutors.
You must submit your tutor-marked assignments to your tutor before the due date.
The tutor will mark and turn the assignments to you as soon as possible.
8 In case you need help, do not procrastinate in contacting your tutor through telephone, e-mail or discussion board.
You are strongly advised to attend the tutorial sessions because this is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor.
Such attendance will give you the opportunity to ask questions and as well raise any problem you encountered in the course of your study.
Your active participation in tutorials will aid your learning immensely.
Facilitation Facilitation is learning that takes place both within and outside of tutorial sessions.
To guide your learning, your tutorial facilitator will do the following: (cid:216) Provide answers to your questions during tutorial sessions, on phone or by e- mail; (cid:216) Coordinate group discussions; (cid:216) Provide feedback on your assignments; (cid:216) Pose questions to confirm learning outcomes; (cid:216) Coordinate, mark and record your assignment/examination score; and (cid:216) Monitor your progress.
English is the language of instruction for this course and the course material is available in print or CD formats, and also on the university website.
In order to gain maximum benefit from facilitation, you have to prepare ahead of time by studying the relevant study units and write your questions.
If you have any problem regarding your course, you should contact your tutorial facilitator.
Counselling For the purpose of making your learning experience easier, counseling is provided for you at two levels, academic and personal counseling.
At the study centre, there are student counselors who will provide guidance for personal issues that may affect your studies while your study centre manager and tutorial facilitators will provide you academic counseling.
They will assist you regarding questions on academic matters such as course materials, facilitation, and grades among others.
Please ensure that you have the phone numbers and e-mail addresses of your study centre and various individuals so that you can contact them when the need arises.
Self Assessment Exercises (SAEs) You will find Self Assessment Exercises under the various sections of your course materials.
After reading the section preceding each exercise, you have to attempt the exercise.
Thereafter, you have to check your answers against the ones provided at the end of each unit in order to evaluate yourself.
You are not required to submit the answers for self assessment exercises.
Tutor-Marked Assignments The course material contains four modules and there are four groups of Tutor- Marked Assignments for this course.
You are advised to attempt and submit all the assignments in the study units under each module after the completion of each module.
The dates for submission of the assignments will be given to you at your 9study centre.
You will be assessed on all the four groups of Tutor-Marked Assignment but the best three performances will be used for your continuous assessment.
Each assignment carries 10 marks and together will count for 30% of your total course score.
You should submit all your assignments to your tutorial facilitator on or before the stipulated date for submission.
The cover page of your assignment should contain the following: Course code: Course title: Tutor-marked assignment: Date of submission: School and programme: Matriculation number: You have to be concise in your answer with relevant examples and illustrations.
Your course material, further readings and experience should guide you in your answers.
You will be penalized if you copy explanations directly from the course material.
You should use ruled foolscap sized paper for writing answers and make sure you have a copy of the assignments submitted to your tutor.
Your answers should be hand-written by you and ensure that you leave a margin of about 1.5 inches of the left side and about 5 lines before the answer to the next question for the comments of your tutorial facilitator.
After the completion of your assignments, ensure that you submit them to your tutorial facilitator on or before the deadline.
If you are unable to complete your assignments at the appointed time, contact your tutor before the assignments are due for discussion for possible extension.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for EDA 807 will be of two hours duration, and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the types of self assessment exercises and questions in the tutor-marked assignments which you have previously encountered.
Ensure that you review your answers to self assessments before the examination.
You can constitute a discussion group of considerable number and practice or discuss the exercises and assignments written in each unit before the examination period.
For you to be eligible to sit for the examination, you should have submitted all the tutor-marked assignments for the course and you should have registered for the examination.
Your failure to do these means that even if you sit for the examination, you will not have a score for the examination.
Course Marking Scheme The following table shows the marks that constitute the total course score: Assessment Marks Assignments 1-4 (four submitted, but Three assignments marked out of 10% the best three of all the assignments totaling 30% selected Final examination 70% of overall course score Total 100% of course score 10  Conclusion In conclusion, this course guide is meant to facilitate your learning so that you can achieve the aims and objectives of the course.
Its contents include the aims and objectives, course summary, course overview, self assessment exercises, tutor-marked assignments among others.
Please make the maximum use of them in your study to achieve maximum results.
Summary EDA 807: Topical Issues in Educational Administration provide you the knowledge of pertinent issues in the administration of educational system.
It is aimed at giving you an understanding of some topical and contemporary issues in educational administration and how such issues influenced the educational system in Nigeria.
On completion of this course, you should be able to explain: the historical development of educational administration in Nigeria; the principles of educational administration; leadership; time management; budgeting; motivation; school- community relations; examination malpractices; cultism; students(cid:8217) crises, globalization; information and communication technology; and problems of educational administration in Nigeria.
I wish you success in the course and hope that you will find it interesting and useful.
11  EDA 807 TOPICAL ISSUES IN EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION COURSE MATERIAL Course Developer Dr.
I.
A. Ajayi Department of Educational Foundations and Management Faculty of Education, University of Ado-Ekiti, Ado-Ekiti.
Course Writer Dr.
I.
A. Ajayi Department of Educational Foundations and Management Faculty of Education, University of Ado-Ekiti, Ado-Ekiti.
Course Editor Professor J.
B. Babalola Faculty of Education University of Ibadan Ibadan.
Staff in Charge Dr. S. O. Ogundiran School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
Course Coordinator Dr. S. O. Ogundiran School of Education National Open University of Nigeria Lagos.
12  13 MODULE 1 UNIT ONE TOPIC: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA.
1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Colonial Era 3.1.1 The Missionary Education Practice (1842-1882) 3.1.2 The development of colonial government(cid:8217)s interest in education (1882-1908) 3.1.3 The development of education between 1908-1948 3.1.4 The era of regionalisation of education (1952-1960) 3.2 Educational Practice during the First Republic (1960-1966) 3.3 The Practice of Education during the First Military era (1966-1979) 3.4 Nigerian Educational System during the Second Republic (1979-1983) 3.5 Educational System in Nigeria during the Second Military Era (1983- 1999) 3.6 Nigerian Educational System in the Third Republic (1999-) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION From the colonial period to date, various educational policies have been made in Nigeria.
These policies have informed various educational decisions at one time or the other, many of which have influenced the educational system positively and negatively.
In this unit, you will study the historical development of educational administration in Nigeria which will be presented in stages.
These stages are the colonial period, the first republic (1960-1966), the first military era (1966-1979), the second republic (1979-1983) the second military era (1983-1999) and the third republic (1999 to date).
2.0 OBJECTIVES When you have diligently studied this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) Explain various educational policies and their influence on education development during the colonial era.
(cid:216) Identify and discuss the major educational policies during the first republic (1960-1966) and their impact on the educational system.
(cid:216) Appraise the major contributions of the military era (1966-1979) to educational development in Nigeria (cid:216) Examine how the educational policies during the second republic (1979- 1983) influence the educational system 14 (cid:216) Assess the impact of the second military era on educational development in Nigeria (cid:216) Explain the significant contribution of the civilian regime to functional literacy during the third republic 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Colonial Era 3.1.1 The Missionary Education Practice 1842-1882 The origin of modern education in Nigeria dates back to September 24, 1842 when Rev.
Thomas Birch Freeman and Mr. & Mrs. William De Graft of the Wesleyan Methodist arrived at Badagry to start both Christian and education work.
Later, other missions such as the Church Missionary Society (CMS), the Roman Catholic Mission and the United Presbyterian Church arrived Nigeria for the same purpose.
It was the general policy of all missions that missionary education should aim at converting the children to Christianity.
To this end, religious instructions were given to children to win them from paganism.
Educational programmes were designed to develop the moral character of the children.
The evangelistic view of education hindered the training of teachers, most of who ever recruited from the top classes of the elementary schools.
Teachers were poorly paid because the belief was that they rendered services to God and they had to make sacrifice and looked for the rewards in heaven.
This was the beginning of poor conditions of service in the teaching profession.
Missionary education practice was characterized by lack of coordination as each mission pursued its own line of interest.
There was no generally accepted curriculum as each mission taught what it deemed necessary and practicable subject to the availability of teachers.
There were no common textbooks for the use of various classes in all the mission schools, school hours were not uniform as subjects to be taught and the period of teaching were determined by the teachers based on their ability and convenience.
Apart from the fact that there was no way a uniform qualification and salaries for teachers could be enforced as each mission decided these on its own, the pupils(cid:8217) teacher ratio had no limit.
Moreover, the language of instruction in schools varied.
The catholic schools used Portuguese as medium of instruction while the non-catholic used English language as medium of instruction.
In the next section, I will explain the development of colonial government(cid:8217)s interest in education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Highlight the problems of missionary education practice in Nigeria between 1842 and 1882.
3.1.2 The development of colonial government(cid:8217)s interest in education 1882-1908 The colonial government started to show interest in education in 1877 when it provided 200 pounds to each of the three missions operating school in Lagos.
This 15 continued till 1882 when the government enacted the West African Education ordinance.
On 6th May, 1882, a bill was passed into ordinance for the promotion and assistance of education in the Gold Coast colony including Lagos colony.
The provisions of the 1882 ordinance include: (cid:216) The constitution of General Board of Education with power to appoint and dissolve Local Boards of Education at such places as they may consider desirable.
(cid:216) The constitution powers and duties of a Local Board of Education.
(cid:216) Classification of schools into two categories: Government schools which would be exclusively funded by government and assisted schools established by voluntary agencies, Christian missions or private persons and aided from public funds.
(cid:216) Grant in aid would be made to assisted schools based on good organization and discipline, pupil achievement, physical facilities, and teachers(cid:8217) salaries.
(cid:216) In government schools, religion was not to be taught while in voluntary agency schools, pupils were not to be forced to attend religious functions against their will.
(cid:216) School curriculum would consist of reading, writing, English language and arithmetic.
Needle work was also provided for girls while History and Geography would be optional subject.
(cid:216) Special grants to industrial schools.
(cid:216) Admission of pauper children into government and assisted schools.
(cid:216) Grants to training colleges and institutions for teachers in view of the large number of untrained teachers employed by voluntary agencies.
Rev.
Metcalfe Sunter, a former principal of Fourabay College, Sierra Leone was appointed as the first inspector of schools for the West African colonies.
By 1883, he has inspected 68 schools.
He could not achieve much as a result of the following reasons: 1.
Attendance at school was low.
2.
Teachers(cid:8217) salaries were in arrears.
3.
The cost of running voluntary agency school was almost $5,000 while government contributed only $425.
4.
Local Boards were never established.
5.
The General Board was never wholly constituted while the secretary to the Board was appointed without budgetary provision for his salary It must be emphasized that 1882 ordinance recorded little success because of the following reasons: (cid:216) It was modeled after British system of education.
(cid:216) The situation in the Gold Coast and Nigeria were different and therefore using the same system to operate created problems.
(cid:216) The curriculum was also based on English pattern and books used were unsuitable.
(cid:216) There was no provision for teaching of a local language contrary to the practice of the missionaries.
16 (cid:216) The system of grants-in-aid was cumbersome.
The 1887 Education Ordinance The colony of Lagos was separated from the Gold Coast in 1886 and this necessitated the Nigerian education ordinance.
On 30th May, 1887, an education ordinance was enacted.
The provisions of the ordinance include: 1.
Establishment of a Board of Education comprising the Governor, members of the legislative council, inspector of schools and four members nominate by the Governor.
2.
The appointment by the majesty of an inspector of schools for the colony, a sub-inspector of schools for the colony and other education officers.
3.
Grants-in-aid to schools and teacher training institutions.
4.
Establishment of scholarships for secondary and technical education.
5.
The governor has power to open and maintain schools.
6.
Certification of teachers.
Apart from the fact that the ordinance established partnership in education between the government and voluntary agencies/private individuals, it entrenched freedom of religion and unified curriculum.
It also encouraged manual and technical skills.
For the first time, it made government to accept the responsibility for secondary education.
Henry Carr (later Dr), a Nigerian, was the first African to be appointed as sub- inspector of schools in 1889.
He was later appointed Deputy Inspector of schools in 1891 and he became Her Majesty(cid:8217)s inspector of schools for the colony of Lagos from 1892 to 1900.
Henry Car was an advocate of government control of education.
He believed that the mission had no place in education.
He laid emphasis on payment of fees, school attendance and increase in government subvention to mission schools.
The major problems of 1887 education ordinance include stalled development and proliferation of illegal schools.
There was a difference between English-centred education, which the ordinance sought to provide and the African-centred education, which the nationalist clamoured for.
The establishment of Southern and Northern Protectorates The Southern protectorate of Nigeria was established in 1900.
This comprised Western, Eastern and Mid-Western Nigeria and the Delta.
Also in 1900, the Northern protectorate was established with Lord Lugard as its first High Commissioner.
In 1903, an education department was established for the protectorate and an education code was promulgated.
The code laid down rules for the provision of primary and secondary education, provision of grants-in-aid to all schools based on average attendance, examination results and inspection.
These conditions made it impossible for not more than one school to receive grants in two years.
In 1906, the colony and protectorate of southern Nigeria was created followed by a new education ordinance in 1908.
There was re-organisation of the education department to enable it cope with enormous work before it.
The education department 17 comprised a director of education, four superintendents of schools and three European school masters.
The next section will examine the development of education between 1908 and 1948.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Mention three major events in the development of colonial government(cid:8217)s interest in education between 1882 and 1908.
3.1.3 The development of education between 1908 and 1948 In 1909, the first government secondary school, Kings College was founded in Lagos.
As at 1913 the primary school population in the South was 35,716 while that of the North was 1,131.
However, the North had over 140,000 children in its Quranic schools as against 50,000 in the South.
There were eleven secondary schools in the South in 1914 while there was none in the North.
These show that there was considerable disparity between the North and South in the area of education.
In 1914, there was political amalgamation of the South and the North under Sir Fredrick Lugard as the Governor-General.
Despite the amalgamation, the educational systems in the two areas were different as each area maintained separate educational departments with different policies.
While there was the practice of 2-6-6 educational system in the South (2 year elementary school, 6 year primary school and 6 year secondary school) the 2-4-4-4 educational system was practiced in the North (2 year elementary school, 4 year primary school, 4 year middle school and 4 year secondary school.
In 1929, the departments of education in the North and South were merged.
During the 1930s, attempts made to use the Quranic schools for spreading the (cid:8216)knowledge of the 3Rs failed and had to be abandoned.
The period also witnessed allocation of dwindling resources to education.
In 1943, two commissions were set up to look into university development in the British colony and West Africa respectively.
These were the Asquith Commission and the Elliot Commission.
The Asquith Commission was to look into university development in the British colony (East Africa, West Africa, Canada, Australia among others).
Some of the recommendations of the commission include: the establishment of universities as soon as possible in areas not served by an existing university, the first step being creation of university college; and the training of teachers for secondary schools (cid:8216)must take a high place(cid:8217) among the vocational subjects(cid:8217) others include the creation of an inter-university council for education in the colonies and for a start the colonial colleges should enter into a special relationship with London university under which their students may be awarded the degrees of that university.
The Elliot Commission was to limit its work specifically to West Africa.
The commission came up with two separate reports namely the majority report and the minority report.
The majority report recommended that 3 university colleges be established in the British West Africa and should be situated at Ibadan, Achimota and at a site to which Fourabay college could be moved to serve both Sierra Leone and Gambia.
The minority report recommended the establishment of only one university college for the West African colonies to be sited at Ibadan and named West African 18 college.
But each of the remaining territories should have a college that would be capable of producing, intermediate manpower needs of the territories.
After the general election in Britain in 1945 which was won by the Labour Party, the reports of both the Elliot Commission were accepted in addition to the recommendations of the Asquith Commission.
To this end, a university college was to be established at Ibadan in 1948.
Gold coast was dissatisfied with this and therefore decided to establish her own university college in 1948.
The college was affiliated to London University.
In 1948, an educational ordinance was enacted as a result of the problems of the 1944 memorandum on education.
The 1948 education ordinance was the first education ordinance that covered the whole country and it followed the spirit of Richard constitution of 1946.
The objectives of 1948 education ordinance were: (cid:216) The establishment of Central Board of Education and Regional Boards for the East, West, North and the colony of Lagos.
(cid:216) Registration of all teachers.
(cid:216) The procedure for opening a new school and for closing any one deficient was laid down.
(cid:216) The right of inspection of schools.
(cid:216) Encouragement of local education authorities and local education committees.
(cid:216) Grants-in-aid regulations which were based on the relevance of the schools.
For teacher(cid:8217)s training institutions, it must be educationally necessary and efficient, and for primary schools, it must be socially useful.
The major achievements recorded by the 1948 education ordinance include: 1.
There was rivalry in promotion and expansion of education in Nigeria.
2.
It enhanced communities and government joint venture in education through the establishment of Local Education Authorities.
3.
It established the role of government as the ultimate authority in education through the generous terms for grants-in-aid.
4.
It allowed greater consultation with the communities on policy, administration and control of education.
In the next section, I will discuss educational policies during the era of regionalization.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Identify four major changes in education development in Nigeria between 1908 and 1948.
3.1.4 The Era of Regionalisation of Education (1952-1960) The Macpherson constitution of 1951 granted each region the power to legislate on a number of areas of which education was one.
In 1952, an education act was enacted to reflect the provisions of the new constitution.
This brought about some changes in the educational system.
The colony board was abolished as the colony was merged with the Western Region.
There was increase in school fees and there was the 19 need to mobilize the community.
Local Education Authorities and Committees were established and the burden of primary education was shared by the central, regional and local governments, the communities and the parents.
There were variations in the approach to the provision of education in the regions.
Specialized commissions were established to study the problems of each region(cid:8217)s educational system with a view to making appropriate recommendations.
Free Universal Primary Education (UPE) policy was introduced in the Western Region in 1955.
This led to increase in enrolment of pupils as well as the education budget.
Nevertheless, the UPE programme faced some problems such as predominance of untrained teachers, too large classes, an unsatisfactory syllabus, inadequate supervision of schools, lack of cooperation by parents and guardians among others.
These led to falling standards in the primary schools.
In 1957, UPE was introduced in the Eastern Region.
This led to increase in pupils(cid:8217) enrolment and financial allocation to education.
Some problems were encountered in the implementation of the programme.
First, new schools were started with untrained teachers.
Second, the shortness of time for planning resulted in inadequate buildings, equipment and facilities, poor management and use of unsuitable building.
Third, because of inadequate funds, many teachers were laid off and many schools were closed down by 1958.
Fourth, the Catholic who constituted more than 60 percent Christians in the East and owned majority of the schools in the region strongly opposed the scheme.
As at the time the UPE scheme was implemented in the Western and Eastern Regions, the Northern Region could not introduce the scheme because of financial reasons coupled with the large number of children of school age in the region.
Moreover, most leaders in the region were not favourably disposed to Western Education.
Government in the region was more concerned on the development of education in rural areas and the promotion of adult literacy.
Primary education in the Northern Nigeria was planned on a provincial basis in 1958 and attempts were made to ensure that an increase in pupils(cid:8217) enrolment was subject to availability of qualified teachers.
Hence, the region did not encounter the problem of untrained teachers as witnessed in the Western and Eastern Regions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What are the problems faced by Western and Eastern Regions in the implementation of UPE?
3.2 Educational Practice during The First Republic (1960-1966) Recall that in the previous section, I stated that educational practice in each of the three regions in Nigeria faced some problems.
This necessitated the setting up of Banjo Commission (1961) in the Western Region, Dike Committee (1962) in the Eastern Region to look into these problems and make appropriate recommendations.
After independence, the Banjo Commission was set up in the Western Region in 1961 to review the existing structure and mode of operation of the primary school, modern school and the grammar school systems in the region.
It was to review the inter relationship between the various levels of education.
The commission observed 20 some problems which include a lot of untrained teachers in the school system, large class size with under age children, unsatisfactory syllabi, inadequate supervision of schools, the lukewarm and uncooperative attitudes of parents and guardians among others.
Based on the observed problems, Banjo Commission made some recommendations.
These include: (cid:216) Reduction in the number of children in the classes especially, the lower classes to a manageable number for effective control.
(cid:216) Gradual reduction in the number of untrained teachers through more emphasis on training of qualified teachers.
(cid:216) Establishment of a special training college for technical and vocational guidance teachers.
(cid:216) Introduction of inspectors to check the school for accountability (cid:216) Improvement in the conditions of service of the teachers (cid:216) Transformation of existing modern schools to junior secondary schools and the grammar schools to senior secondary schools and (cid:216) Text books used in the primary schools should be written by Nigerians.
In the Eastern Region, the Dike committee was also set up to review the problems faced by the government in implementing UPE and make appropriate recommendations.
The committee observed that initially the government was spending one-third of its total revenue on education and to implement free primary education, all the revenue would be spent on education.
Dike committee made some recommendations.
These include: (cid:216) organization of education on provincial basis; (cid:216) increase in the number of inspectors in the ministry of education; (cid:216) opening of more secondary schools and admission of students should be through common entrance examination; (cid:216) introduction of foreign language into the curriculum of secondary schools; (cid:216) establishment of a college for teachers(cid:8217) education in Enugu; and (cid:216) more aid to local authority schools in form of special grants, staffing and equipment.
The Old man Commission was set up in the Northern Nigeria to look into the financial and administrative problems that would arise in implementing UPE in the region.
The commission realised that substantial foreign aid would be needed to carry out the capital programme and that a much greater burden than hither to would fall on local resources to meet the increasing recurrent expenditure.
The recommendations of the Old man Commission include: (cid:216) separation of administrative and inspectorate duties; (cid:216) establishment and organization of education authorities; (cid:216) the setting up of a course to train educational administrators to staff the new education authorities The Oldman Commission(cid:8217)s report formed the basis of the Northern Nigeria(cid:8217)s education law of 1962.
21  Ashby Report of 1960 was the major educational policy at the national level.
The commission which was set up in April, 1959 was to conduct an investigation into Nigeria(cid:8217)s need in the field of post-school certificate and higher education over the next 20 years.
The recommendations of the committee covered primary education, secondary education, teacher education, university education, and manpower projections.
The recommendations of the committee led to the establishment of universities at Nsukka, Lagos, Ife and Zaria in 1962.
In line with the Ashby Report (1960), the First National Development Plan (1962-1968) advocated for an education programme designed to increase as rapidly and as economically as possible the high-level manpower which is indispensable to accelerated development.
The three major priorities set for education in the plan were: 1.
Reinforcement of secondary education and the development of teacher training 2.
Improvement of the quality of primary education through the building of better classrooms and the introduction of modern aids to teaching 3.
Assistance to the regional universities Educational development during the First National Development Plan was adversely affected by the political crisis of 1966 and the civil war which started in 1967.
In the next section, you will study the practice of education during the military era (1966- 1979).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 List the major educational reform at regional and national levels during the first republic?
3.3 The Practice of Education during the First Military Era 1966-1979 In this section, the educational practice during the military era will be examined under three major events namely the curriculum conference of 1969, the Universal Primary Education (UPE) of 1976 and the National Policy on Education (1977).
The Curriculum Conference of 1969 The National Curriculum conference was held in Lagos in September 1969.
It was the first national attempt to change the colonial orientation of the Nigerian educational system and promote national consciousness and self-reliance through the educational processes.
It was a conference in which Nigerians from many different walks of life were brought together to deliberate on the goals of education.
The major task of the conference was to review the old and identify new national goals for Nigerian education.
Attention was to be given to the needs of youths and adults in the task of nation building and national reconstruction for social and economic well being of the individuals and the society.
The conference based its recommendations on nine specific decision areas namely the national philosophy of education, goals of primary education; objectives of secondary education; purposes of tertiary education; the role of teacher education; 22 functions of science and technical education; the place of women(cid:8217)s education; education for living; and control of public education.
Some of the recommendations emphasised among others: (cid:216) national unity (cid:216) citizenship (cid:216) national consciousness (cid:216) nationalism and national reconstruction (cid:216) better preparation of teachers and improved conditions of their service (cid:216) encouragement of adult and women education (cid:216) science and technical education (cid:216) defence of academic freedom in the Nigerian universities (cid:216) the sharing of control of education between local authorities, state governments and federal government.
These recommendations re-focused educational practice in Nigeria after the civil war.
Universal Primary Education (1976) The Universal Primary Education (UPE) scheme was launched on 6th September 1976 by General Olusegun Obasanjo.
The scheme was in line with the educational plans which UNESCO had proposed for its less developed members.
Under the scheme, every Nigerian child had inalienable right to a minimum of six years of education to function effectively as a citizen of Nigeria.
In addition, it was meant to address the problem of educational disparity within and between the states of the federation.
In the third National Development Plan (1975-1980), $300 million was allocated to the scheme.
Pupils(cid:8217) enrolment in primary schools doubled within a period of five years as a result of the scheme.
Some problems which militated against the effective implementation of the UPE scheme include: (cid:216) inadequate planning (cid:216) inadequate funding due to economic recession witnessed in Nigeria after the launching of the scheme (cid:216) lack of proper statistics on enrolment (cid:216) inadequate trained teachers (cid:216) mass promotion of pupils from one class to another which affected the standards The National Policy on Education 1977 The National Policy on Education was formulated in 1977 following the previous attempts made by the Federal Government to make the educational system responsive to the needs and aspiration of Nigeria.
This became necessary having realized that the type of education inherited from the colonial masters was not likely to satisfy the needs and aspirations of Nigeria.
All aspects of educational system from pre-primary to higher education as well as educational services, administration and planning of education and financing of education were covered by the policy.
The National Policy on Education was based on the five national objectives of Nigeria as contained in the second National Development Plan.
23 These objectives were the building of: (cid:216) a free and democratic society; (cid:216) a just and egalitarian society; (cid:216) a united, strong and self-reliant nation; (cid:216) a great and dynamic economy; (cid:216) a land of bright and full opportunities for all citizens.
According to the policy, the national educational aims and objectives are 1. the inculcation of national consciousness and national unity; 2. the inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society; 3. the training of the mind in the understanding of the world around; 4. the acquisition of appropriate skills, abilities and competences both mental and physical as equipment for the individual to live in and contributed to its society.
The National Policy on Education was able to introduce the 6-3-3-4 system in Nigeria(cid:8217)s educational system.
In the next session, you will study the educational system in the second republic 1979-1983.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 1.
What are the areas emphasized in the recommendations of the curriculum conference of 1969?
2.
Identify the problems which militated against the effective implementation of UPE in 1976.
3.
What are the national educational objectives as contained in the National Policy on Education (1977)?
3.4 Nigerian Educational System during the Second Republic 1979-1983 The civilians came to power in October 1979 and started the democratization of educational administration in the country.
The policy of government take-over of schools was revisited and many schools were returned to private and voluntary owners.
This reduced the heavy financial responsibility of government.
It must be emphasized that the National Policy on Education put in place in 1977 was revised in 1981.
The civilian regime, according to the revised policy, adopted education (cid:8220)as instrument par excellence for effecting national development(cid:8221) the second republic also featured the official launch of the 6-3-3-4 system of education which was earlier contained in the National Policy of Education (1977).
The programme was launched in September 1982.
The 6-3-3-4 system emphasized academic and pre-vocational education.
When the programme was launched, many states of the federation were not prepared to implement the programme.
While the programme was implemented in the federal government colleges and some states controlled by the ruling party, states controlled by the opposition parties did not commence the implementation of the programme till the military take-over of government in 1983.
Another landmark in the educational policy during the second republic was the re-introduction of free education in the states controlled by the Unity Party of Nigeria.
These states were Bendel, Lagos, Ogun, Oyo and Ondo.
The administration and 24 management of primary education became the responsibility of the local government in states like Benue and Plateau.
Grants for primary and secondary education, teacher training and technical education were withdrawn at the federal level.
The 1979 constitution made the establishment of universities and legislation on them the concurrent responsibility of the Federal and state governments.
To this end, state universities were established in Lagos, Ogun, Ondo, Imo, Bendel, Rivers, Benue and Kano while universities of Technology/Agriculture were established by the Federal Government in the states that had no university before the period.
In the next section, you will study the educational practice in Nigeria during the second military era (1983-1999).
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 Explain the major changes in Nigerian educational system during the second republic 1979-1983.
3.5 Educational System in Nigeria during the Second Military Era 1983-1999 The educational system during the second military era was not radically different from the preceding one.
However, the economic problems witnessed during the period influenced the educational policies of the government.
Initially, the military government had the intention of implementing free primary education but was constrained with the harsh economic situation in the country.
School fees were introduced in most states of the federation.
Students in tertiary institutions were adversely affected as school authorities withdrew from their feeding and reduced their accommodation on campus.
Only about one-third of the students(cid:8217) population was to be accommodated on campus.
Moreover, budgetary allocation to universities was drastically reduced while rationalization of academic programmes of the universities was initiated.
A policy of changing the former school calendar from (September to September) to (January to December) was also initiated by the military regime.
Maintenance of discipline in schools and drastic measure against examination malpractice were given priority attention.
In the next section, I will examine the educational system in Nigeria during the third republic.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 8 Enumerate the major changes in Nigerian educational system during the second military era (1983-1999).
3.6 Nigerian Educational System in the Third Republic The major landmark in the educational system in Nigeria during the third republic is the Universal Basic Education (UBE).
The UBE programme was launched on 30th September, 1999 by President Olusegun Obasanjo.
You will recall that he also launched the Universal Primary Education (UPE) in 1976 when he was a military head of state.
The UBE emphasized formal basic education encompassing the first nine years of schooling, primary and junior secondary education for all children.
25  According to the UBE implementation guidelines (FRN, 2000), the objectives of the programme are: (cid:216) developing in the entire citizenry a strong consciousness for education and strong commitment to its vigorous promotion; (cid:216) the provision of free compulsory Universal Basic Education for every Nigerian child of school-going-age; (cid:216) reducing drastically drop out rate; improved relevance and efficiency; (cid:216) catering for the learning needs of young persons who for one reason or the other, had to interrupt their schooling; (cid:216) Ensuring the acquisition of appropriate levels of literacy; numeracy; manipulative communicative and life skills as well as the ethnical, moral and civic values needed for laying a solid foundation for lifelong learning.
The scope of the UBE as stipulated in the UBE implementation guidelines (FRN, 2000) are: 1. programme initiatives for early childhood care and socialization; 2. special programmes for nomadic populations; 3. out-of-school, non-formal programmes for updating the knowledge and skills of persons who left school before acquiring the basic education needed for life long learning; 4. non-formal skills and apprenticeship training for adolescents and youths who have not had the benefit of formal education; and 5. the formal school system from the beginning of primary education to the end of the junior secondary school.
The three levels of government, federal, state and local governments are involved in the funding of the programme with the federal government having the highest financial burden.
In order to ensure effective implementation of the UBE, the community, voluntary agencies, non-governmental organizations, international organizations and private individuals are expected to support the governments in achieving the objectives of the programme.
Various problems militate against the effective implementation of the UBE programme.
These problems include inadequate funding, lack of adequate personnel, inadequate infrastructural facilities, inaccurate statistical data among others.
Another important development in the educational system during the third republic is the growth of private universities in Nigeria.
The first private university in Nigeria, Igbinedon University, Okada-Benin was issued take-off licence in 1999.
Since 1999 to-date, more than 26 private universities have been established in the country.
However, private universities in the country are facing the problems of inadequate infrastructural facilities, lack of adequate personnel, lack of good leadership, inadequate funding among others.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 9 What are the major events in Nigerian educational system during the third republic?
26 4.0 CONCLUSION The historical development of educational administration in Nigeria examined in this unit has shown that various policies and decisions made from the colonial period to the third republic have impacted positively on the educational system.
However, the deficiencies inherent in some of the policies coupled with socio-political and economic problems of the country made the successes recoded in the implementation of various educational programmes fall below expectations during the period.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you learnt the missionary education practice and the development of colonial government interest in education.
You also learnt the 1882 and 1887 education ordinances as well as the establishment of Southern and Northern protectorates.
The unit also presented the development of education between 1908 and 1948 and you also learnt the practice of education during the era of regionalization.
Educational practices during the post independence period were also presented to you in stages.
These stages were the first republic, the first military era, the second republic, the second military era and, the third republic.
The next unit will teach you the principles of educational administration.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain four major issues in educational development during the colonial era.
2.
Discuss how the major educational policies during the first republic contributed to the development of education in the country.
3.
In what ways did the educational policies during the first and second military era influence the educational system.
4.
Discuss the major contributions of the civilian regime to educational development during the second and third republics.
7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, I.A.
and Ayodele, J.B. (2002): History and Development of Education.
Ado Ekiti: PETOA Publishers.
Ajayi I.A., Ayodele J.B. and Tembiaje, D.J.
(2002): Education in Nigeria: Past and Present.
Ado-Ekiti: Greenline Publishers.
Fafunwa A.B.
(1974): History of Education in Nigeria.
London: George Allen and Unwin Fajana, A.
(1982): Education in Nigeria (1842-1939): An Historical Analysis.
Ikeja: Longman.
27  Federal Republic of Nigeria, (2000): Universal Basic Education (UBE) Implementation, Guidelines.
Abuja: Federal Ministry of Education.
Ibukun, W.O.
(1996): History of Education and Educational Development in Nigeria.
Lagos: Greenline Publishers Okon, E.O.
(2006): Historical Development of Educational Administration in Babalola, J.B., Ayeni A.O., Adedeji S.O., Suliman A.A. and Arikewuyo (eds) Educational Management: Thoughts and Practice.
Ibadan: Codat Publications.
Udo, S.U and Akpa, G.O.
(2007): Educational Administration in Nigeria: Theory and Practice (Revised Edition).
Jos: M.P.
GINAC Concept Ltd. 28 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 1.
It was characterized by lack of coordination.
2.
There was no generally accepted curriculum.
3.
There were no common textbooks for the use of various classes.
4.
School hours were not uniform.
5.
Uniform qualification and salaries for teachers could not be enforced.
6.
The language of instruction in schools varied.
SAE 2 1.
The 1882 educational ordinance.
2.
The 1887 educational ordinance.
3.
The establishment of southern and northern protectorates.
SAE 3 1.
Establishment of the first government secondary schools in 1909.
2.
The amalgamation of the South and North in 1914.
3.
Departments of education in the North and South were merged in 1929.
4.
The 1948 education ordinance.
SAE 4 Problems of UPE in the Western Region 1.
Predominance of untrained teachers.
2.
Too large classes.
3.
Unsatisfactory syllabus.
4.
Inadequate supervision of schools.
5.
Lack of cooperation by parents and guardians.
Problems of UPE in the Eastern Region 1.
New schools were started with untrained teachers.
2.
Shortness of planning resulted in inadequate facilities.
3.
Inadequate funds resulted in sacking of teachers and closing down of schools.
4.
The catholic who constituted more than 60 percent Christians and owned majority of the schools in the region opposed the scheme.
SAE 5 1.
The Banjo Commission (1961) in the Western Region.
2.
The Dike Committee (1962) in the Eastern Region.
3.
The Oldman Commission (1962) in the Northern Region.
4.
The Ashby Report of 1960 at the national level.
29 SAE 6 1.
(cid:216) National unity (cid:216) Citizenship (cid:216) National consciousness (cid:216) Nationalism and national reconstruction (cid:216) Better preparation of teachers and improved conditions of their service.
(cid:216) Encouragement of adult and women education (cid:216) Science and technical education.
(cid:216) Defense of academic freedom in Nigerian universities.
(cid:216) The sharing of control of education between local authorities, state government and federal government.
2.
(cid:216) Inadequate planning (cid:216) Inadequate funding due to economic recession.
(cid:216) Lack of proper statistics on enrolment.
(cid:216) Inadequate trained teachers.
(cid:216) Mass promotion of pupils from one class to another which affected the standards.
3.
(cid:216) The inculcation of national consciousness and national unity.
(cid:216) The inculcation of the right type of values and attitudes for the survival of the individual and the Nigerian society.
(cid:216) The training of the mind in the understanding of the world around.
(cid:216) The acquisition of appropriate skills, abilities and competences both mental and physical as equipment for the individual to live in and contribute to its society.
SAE 7 1.
The revision of the National Policy on Education of 1977 in 1981.
2.
The launching of the 6-3-3-4 system of education in 1982.
3.
The re-introduction of free education in the states controlled by the Unity Party of Nigeria.
4.
Establishment of State Universities in Lagos, Ogun, Ondo, Imo, Bendel, Rivers, Benue and Kano and Universities of Technology by Federal Government in the states that had no university before the period.
SAE 8 1.
The introduction of school fees in most states of the federation.
2.
Withdrawal of school authorities from the feeding of students in tertiary institutions and reduction of their accommodation on campus.
3.
School calendar was reverted from (September to September) to (January to December) 30  SAE 9 - The introduction of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) in 1999.
- The growth of private universities in the country.
31 MODULE 1 UNIT TWO TOPIC: PRINCIPLES OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What are Principles of Administration?
3.2 Importance of Principles of Educational Administration 3.3 Fundamental principle 3.3.1 Responsibility 3.3.2 Delegation of Authority 3.3.3 Communication 3.4 Prudential Principle 3.4.1 Economy 3.4.2 Responsibility and authority 3.4.3 Loyalty 3.4.4 Employment 3.5 Humanitarian Principle 3.5.1 Democracy 3.5.2 Justice 3.5.3 Human relation 3.6 Principle of change 3.6.1 Flexibility 3.6.2 Adaptability 3.6.3 Stability 3.7 The Bureaucratic principle 3.7.1 Rules and regulations 3.7.2 Division of labour based on functional specialization 3.7.3 Hierarchy of Authority 3.7.4 Impersonal orientation 3.7.5 Employment and promotion of staff based on technical knowledge 3.7.6 Emphasis on documentation and written documents 4 Conclusion 5 Summary 6 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit you studied the historical development of educational administration in Nigeria from the colonial era to the third republic.
The implementation of educational policies during the period would have based on certain principles.
In this unit, I will discuss the principles of educational administration.
You are going to learn the meaning and importance of principles of administration.
You will also learn the types of educational administration principles such as fundamental 32 principles, prudential principle, humanitarian principle, principle of change and bureaucratic principle.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of studying this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) Define principles of administration.
(cid:216) Explain the importance of principles of administration.
(cid:216) Discuss five principles of educational administration.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What are the Principles of Administration?
Principles of administration could be defined as general guides to possible action in specific situations.
They describe ways by which actions are to be taken while carrying out educational activities.
Principles of administration are closely related to and dependent upon the theories of administration.
The understanding and appropriate use of principles of administration make educational administrator excel in the performance of their functions.
In the next section, you will learn the importance of principles of administration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Can educational administrator function effectively without the use of principles of administration?
Give one major reason for your answer.
3.2 Importance of the Principles of Educational Administration Educational administrators have to study the situations they find themselves with a view to taking appropriate action in order to accomplish educational objectives.
To do this effectively, they have to be guided by the principles of administration.
Olagboye (2004) identified the following importance of principles of educational administration: (cid:216) They give educational administrators or leaders greater insight into the methods used for getting things done through the efforts of other people; (cid:216) They aid educational administrators in the effective performance of the administrative functions of planning, organizing, influencing, controlling and decision making; (cid:216) They provide guidelines which educational leaders might apply in their day-to-day administrative chores; (cid:216) They serve as guides to thinking and practice in administration; (cid:216) They assist educational administrators to avoid using the rule of the thumb in the choice of leadership styles in specific situations; (cid:216) They help in the development of subordinate personnel and in management development generally; (cid:216) They provide the bases for further research in administrative/ management studies that could lead to improvements in administrative techniques and practice.
33 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 In what ways could principles of administration aid the choice of leadership styles, day-to-day activities and improvements in administrative techniques and practice of the educational administrators?
3.3 Fundamental Principle Fundamental principle which is also known as universal principle is applicable to any organization.
It contains three elements namely responsibility, delegation of authority and communication.
3.3.1 Responsibility This principle means that each person occupying a position at any level of the organization must act responsibly at all times.
This will guarantee commitment to the goals and objectives of the organization as both the superordinates and subordinates will perform their duties as expected.
The principle will also ensure accountability as it helps to identify who is responsible for what?
How?
When?
Where?
and to Whom?
3.3.2 Delegation of Authority No single person can perform all the functions necessary to accomplish the goals of an organization.
To this end, this Principle stresses the need to delegate authority to the subordinates based on their talents, skills and capabilities.
This will make administration easy and encourage the use of more competent hands and also facilitate participation and cooperation among members.
Fundamental questions that have to be properly addressed in ensuring effective delegation of authority are: i.
What should be delegated?
ii.
Why should the specified duties be delegated?
iii.
To whom should duties be delegated?
iv.
What are the limits of delegation?
v. What are the means of evaluating the performance of delegated authority?
3.3.3 Communication Communication is the flow of information within the organization.
Every worker needs information regarding the goals and objectives of the organization, its structure as well as his roles so that he can function effectively in the organization.
Administrators must ensure effective communication in the organization to enhance orderliness and attainment of goals.
Communication can take three dimensions namely downward, upward and horizontal.
Downward communication is the transfer of information from the superiors to the subordinates.
Such information could be warnings, orders, instruction, policies, procedures and methods, control standards and so on.
Upward communication is the transfer of information from the subordinates to the superiors.
This could be in form of feedback regarding the message sent by the superiors.
Horizontal communication is the transfer of information between two individuals who are of the same level in the organization.
For example in the school system, heads of departments can communicate among themselves.
34  SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Distinguish between responsibility and delegation of authority as elements of prudential principles.
3.4 Prudential Principle The Prudential principle emphasizes the need for administrators to always be objective and avoid being emotional in handling administrative matters.
The elements of this principle include economy, responsibility and authority, loyalty and employment.
3.4.1 Economy The resources being devoted to education are scarce.
The parlous state of Nigeria economy and the various sectors of the economy competing for the limited national resources, make resources being allocated to education to be more scarce.
The principle of economy mandates educational administrators to be efficient in allocating and utilizing limited resources devoted to education for the purpose of achieving educational objectives.
3.4.2 Responsibility and Authority This principle demands that when responsibility is given to somebody, he must be given authority that is commensurate with such responsibility so that he can perform as expected.
Responsibility without authority is meaningless.
However, when responsibility and authority are delegated, there must be proper control measure to prevent abuse in the use of such responsibility and authority.
3.4.3 Loyalty This Principle emphasizes that every member of the organization must be faithful in performing his duties and relating to other members so that the goals and objectives of the organization can be easily achieved.
It is the responsibility of educational administrators to harness the loyalty of their staff in an atmosphere devoid of frustration and exploitation.
3.4.4 Employment This principle demands that an administrator must ensure that the right man is placed in the right job.
This implies that employment of staff should be based on merits and not on other considerations.
To this end, a good administrator should avoid favouritism and nepotism in selection, appointment, placement and development of staff.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 What is prudential principle?
State the elements of prudential principle.
3.5 Humanitarian Principle This principle is a product of Human Relations Movement.
It stresses the need to see worker first as human being and next as a worker.
The three essential elements of this principle are democracy, justice and human relations.
3.5.1 Democracy This principle states that all those who will be affected by a decision must take part, one way or another, in making such decision.
In the educational system, school 35 administrators must involve parents, teachers and students in making crucial decisions affecting the school system so that it will be easy to achieve the aims and objectives of the school system.
A good administrator must note that in the course of enlisting members(cid:8217) participation in decision making, organizational interest must supersede individual interests.
3.5.2 Justice This principle implies rigidity to established rules and regulations without victimization or repressiveness.
It stresses the need to apply group norms to individuals based on equity, fair play and impartially.
It must be noted that rigid application of rules and regulations may violate moral justice.
As a result of this, a good administrator must use his discretion to grant concessions occasionally, but this must not be allowed to become the rule.
3.5.3 Human Relations This principle can be simply described as (cid:8220)Do unto others as you want them to do to you, see others as you want them to see you(cid:8221).
It involves empathy, sympathy, humility and consideration backed up with genuine cases in administration.
The Human Relations principle is related to the principle of justice and fair play, it implies courtesy, respect, kindness, trust, confidence, sincerity and open-mindedness in dealing with staff.
A good educational administrator must be a human relationist to be able to achieve educational objectives efficiently and effectively.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Illustrate three ways through which the humanitarian principle can assist educational administrators.
3.6 The Principle of Change Change is inevitable; the world itself is not static.
One cannot afford not to change because change is an inevitable prerequisite for development.
The principle of change demands that there must be change when necessary.
However, change must not be too much in order not to create dislocation and instability in the system.
A good educational administrator must be able to determine and implement necessary change without distorting the stability of education.
The elements of this principle are flexibility, adaptability and stability.
3.6.1 Flexibility: This principle implies ability to adjust, or be shaped by uncertainties.
In other words, the system being operated should make a provision for uncertainties.
For a change to materialize, the policy in operation should be flexible.
In the school system, school objectives, policies, programmes, structures and procedures must be flexible to accommodate changes and innovations required for education to respond effectively to the needs and aspirations of the society from time to time.
3.6.2 Adaptability: This principle emphasizes that administrators should be adaptable to change.
The systems being operated should not be such that will be impossible or extremely difficult to adapt to any change which might occur along the line, as a result of new developments.
School administrators should be able to adapt to changes necessitated by the 36 dynamic nature of the school environment in the course of pursuing the goals and objectives of the school system.
3.6.3 Stability: Even though the principle of stability is not against the principles of flexibility and adaptability, it emphasizes the need to conserve the good in the past when effecting changes.
A good educational administrator must note that whenever it is inevitable to make changes in the educational system, certain goals, practices and programmes found useful in the past must be preserved and such changes should be gradual to ensure evolution rather than revolution in educational administration.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Change is inevitable, yet the principle of change emphasizes (cid:8216)stability(cid:8217), without fear of contradiction.
Explain.
3.7 The Bureaucratic Principle Bureaucracy is defined as a pyramidal, hierarchical organizational structure in which all power for making decisions flows from superordinates to subordinates.
Bureaucratic principle was propounded by Max Weber.
The elements of bureaucratic principle include rules and regulations; division of labour based on functional specialization; hierarchy of authority; impersonal orientation; employment and promotion of staff based on technical knowledge; and emphasis on documentation and written documents.
These are examined as follows: 3.7.1 Rules and Regulations Emphasis is placed on a formally established system of rules and regulations which govern official decisions and actions.
Rules and regulations constitute standards against which performance is measured.
The existence of rules and regulations in an organization ensures uniformity and continuity of operations.
In educational administration, rules and regulations provide for continuity of operations regardless of changes in personnel.
3.7.2 Division of Labour based on Functional Specialisation The tasks of an organization are too complex to be performed by a single individual.
To this end, tasks should be divided into activities which are assigned to specific offices, based on areas of specialization, to guarantee efficiency and effectiveness.
This principle enables an organization to employ personnel based on technical qualifications.
In the school system, tasks are divided into several duties performed by specialists.
Hence, we have the school principal, vice principle, teachers, bursar, heads of departments, game masters, agriculture masters and so on, who are specialists in various fields.
3.7.3 Hierarchy of Authority This refers to seniority concept in which authority flows from the superordinates to subordinates.
In other words, there is a firmly ordered system of superordinates and subordination in which the lower offices are supervised by the higher ones.
In the secondary school system, authority flows from the 37 Principal to the Vice Principal, Heads of Departments, Bursars and Teachers respectively.
3.7.4 Impersonal Orientation According to this principle, the working atmosphere of a bureaucracy should be formal and impersonal.
There should be no hatred or passion; no affection or enthusiasm.
Administrators are expected to make decisions on the basis of facts and not feelings.
In other words, an administrator is not expected to reflect his personal interest or protect the interests of anybody in his dealings with official matters.
3.7.5 Employment and Promotion of Staff based on Technical Knowledge This principle emphasizes that employment should be based on technical competence and should constitute a career for officials, while promotion should be based on seniority or achievement or both.
Owing to the fact that individuals with special skills are employed to perform special activities, they must be protected from arbitrary dismissal or denial of promotion on purely personal ground to enhance their loyalty to the organization.
3.7.6 Emphasis on documentation and written documents Everything done in the organization must be documented.
It is necessary to have records, data and documents in an organization to ensure consistency, orderliness and rationality in administrative procedures.
This principle stresses the need to record all events and activities in an organization, and all members are expected to follow recorded rules, regulations and procedures.
Educational administrators should appreciate the limitations of bureaucratic principles in the education sector because their application in ideal form gives room for red-tapism, inefficiency, lack of initiatives and low productivity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 What are the elements of bureaucratic principle?
4.0 CONCLUSION The success of an educational administrator rests on his or her ability to identify and use appropriate principles in specific situations.
However, no single principle of administration can work for all situation but the best concoction of principles facilitate best results.
It is therefore left for educational administrator to have an understanding of principles of administration as well as their appropriateness to specific situations in order to facilitate their best concoction for effective administration.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught you the principles of educational administration.
Specifically, the unit defined principles of administration and explained their importance.
You learnt the following principles of educational administration: fundamental principle, prudential principle, humanitarian principle, principle of change and bureaucratic principle.
The elements of each principle and their relevance 38 to educational administrators were also explained.
In the next unit, you will study leadership in educational administration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
Define principles of administration b.
What are the importance of principles of administration?
2.
What is (cid:8216)fundamental(cid:8217) in Fundamental Principle of Administration?
Discuss the relevance of this principle in Educational Administration.
3.
Critically examine the importance of the following in Educational Administration: a. Humanitarian principle b. Prudential principle c. Principle of change d. Bureaucratic principle 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, I.A.
and Ayodele, J.B. (2001): Introduction to Educational Planning, Administration and Supervision.
Oshodi; Lagos: Yemi Prints and Publishing Services.
Anuna, M.C.
(2004): Dynamics of Organisational Theory in Education.
Enugu: Valen Publishing Co. Nnabuo, P.O.M., Okorie, N.C. and Agabi, O.G.
(2004): Introduction to School Management.
Port Harcourt: Eagle Lithograph Press.
Nwankwo, J.I.
(1982): Educational Administration: Theory and Practice.
India: Vikas Publishing House PVT Ltd. Olagboye, A.A. (2004): Introduction to Educational Management in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Daily Graphics (Nigeria) Limited.
Ogunsanwo, O.A.
(1981): Basic Concepts in Educational Planning and Administration.
External Studies Programmes series.
Ibadan: Department of Adult Education, University of Ibadan.
39 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 The reason is that the understanding and use of principles of administration make educational administrator excel in the performance of his/her functions.
SAE 2 - They assist educational administrators to avoid using the rule of the thumb in the choice of leadership styles in specific situations.
- They provide guideline which educational leaders might apply in their day to day administrative chores.
- They provide the bases for further research in administrative/management studies that could lead to improvements in administrative techniques and practice.
SAE 3 Responsibility means that each person occupying a position of any level of the organization must act responsibly at all times while delegation of authority means transfer of authority to the subordinates based on their talents, skills and capabilities.
SAE 4 Prudential principle emphasizes the need for administrators to always be objective and avoid being emotional in handling administrative matters.
The elements of prudential principle are economy, responsibility and authority, loyalty and employment.
SAE 5 1.
Democracy 2.
Justice 3.
Human relations SAE 6 The principle of stability is not against the principles of flexibility and adaptability; it only emphasizes the need to conserve the good in the past when effecting changes.
SAE 7 1.
Rules and regulations 2.
Division of labour based on functional specialization.
3.
Hierarchy of authority.
40 4.
Impersonal orientation.
5.
Employment and promotion of staff based on technical knowledge.
6.
Emphasis on documentation and written documents.
41 MODULE 1 UNIT THREE TOPIC: LEADERSHIP IN EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The concept of leadership 3.2 Leadership theories 3.2.1 The trait theory 3.2.2 Behavioural theories 3.2.3 Situational theory 3.2.4 The contingency theory 3.2.5 The path-goal theory 3.3 Implications of leadership theories for school administration 3.4 Leadership styles 3.4.1 Democratic leadership style 3.4.2 Autocratic leadership style 3.4.3 Laissez-faire leadership style 3.4.4 Transactional leadership style 3.4.5 Pseudo democratic leadership style 3.5 Implications of leadership styles for school administration 3.6 Functions of school leaders 3.6.1 Professional duties 3.6.2 Administrative duties 3.7 Leadership qualities in schools 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Recall that in the last unit you studied the principles of educational administration.
You learnt that these principles assist educational administrators to avoid the rule of thumb in the choice of leadership styles in specific situations.
In other words, principles of educational administration are guides to educational administrators in their choice of leadership styles.
This unit will present leadership in school administration.
You will study the concept of leadership and leadership theories.
You will also study the implications of leadership theories for school administration.
The unit will also teach you various leadership styles and their implications for school administration.
Other things you will learn in this unit also include the functions of school leaders and leadership qualities in schools.
42 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) explain the concept of leadership (cid:216) identify and discuss various leadership theories (cid:216) enumerate the implications of leadership theories for school administration (cid:216) describe the various leadership styles (cid:216) highlight the implications of leadership styles for school administration (cid:216) explain the functions of school leaders (cid:216) state leadership qualities in schools.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Leadership There are various definitions of leadership in behavioural science.
Halpin (1966) defined leadership as the functional behaviour of a leader in relation with subordinates to facilitate accomplishment of group goals.
Newell (1978) defined leadership as a process through which persons or groups intentionally influence others in the development and attainment of group goals.
According to Adesina (1981), leadership is the ability to get things done with the assistance and cooperation of other people within the institution.
Ibukun (1997) defined leadership as a projected feeling from one individual (the leader) towards others (followers) for the purpose of realizing group objectives.
It must be stressed that any meaningful and useful definition of leadership must contain some elements such as there must be a group to be led, the group must have a set of laid down objectives, there must be conscious attempts to influence the behaviour of others within the group; and there must be willingness of subordinates to carry out the action.
Leadership effectiveness could only manifest where a leader is able to plan, organize, coordinate, direct and control the activities of an organization to achieve the goals and objectives of the organization.
Successful administration of the school system requires an atmosphere of mutual trust, understanding and cooperation between the school head and the subordinates.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify the key elements of any meaningful definition of leadership.
3.2 Leadership Theories In order to facilitate the understanding of leadership as a concept, some of the theories of leadership are examined as follows: 3.2.1 The Trait Theory According to this theory, leaders were born and the only thing that has to be done is to identify and analyze the qualities they possess and train them in the art of leadership.
In other words, leadership emerges in an organization as a result of individual personality traits.
43  It is the assumption of this theory that if a set of traits could be identified, people could be trained to develop these traits.
Some of the traits include: intelligence, appearance, judgment, knowledge, honest, truthfulness, courage, open mindedness, initiatives, age, socio-economic status and so on.
The emphasis of the trait theory is that those that possess these traits tend to be good leaders than those that were not gifted.
Various criticisms have been advanced against this theory such as: there are no general leadership traits; it ignores the needs of subordinates and their contribution to the making of leaders, little attention is paid to such situational factors as tasks and environment; and so on.
3.2.2 Behavioural Theories The short comings of the trait theory led to the emergence of the behavioural theories.
The emphasis is on what a leader does as a determinant of his/her effectiveness.
The concern here is more on leadership effectiveness than personal attributes of a leader.
It is believed that leaders need not be born but could be made and trained to do the right thing.
Various studies on behavioural theory have identified two major leadership behaviours namely initiating structure or job centered behaviour.
The behavioural theories were found deficient on the ground that they failed to incorporate situational variables.
Three different studies under the behavioural theories are discussed as follows: 1.
Ohio State Leadership Studies: Several studies conducted on the impact of leadership styles on job satisfaction and performance by the Bureau of Business Research of the Ohio State University revealed two distinct dimensions of leadership behaviour which are: (i) Initiating Structure: These involve setting goals and deadlines, assigning tasks to employees and know what performance is expected of them.
The leader here is autocratic and tasks-oriented.
(ii) Consideration Dimension: Here the emphasis is on the relationship between the leader and the subordinates which must be characterized by mutual trust, and respect for employee(cid:8217)s ideas, feelings and welfare.
The leader here is people-oriented.
Studies (Halpin and Winer, 1952; Halpin 1966) have shown that a leader supporting consideration dimension has the following characteristics: (a) He is employee oriented.
(b) He supports and assists subordinates.
(c) He involves subordinates in the process of decision making.
(d) He is willing to make change.
(e) He listens to suggestions.
(f) He is friendly and approachable.
(g) He gets subordinates approval before taking decision.
(h) He employs Management By Objective (MBO) in his/her administration.
44 2.
University of Michigan Studies: In the University of Michigan Studies, two distinct leadership behaviours were identified, namely: job-centred leadership and employee- centred leadership.
Job-Centred Leadership: The leader emphasizes rigid work standards, employee(cid:8217)s tasks and methods used to accomplish them.
He closely supervises his/her subordinates(cid:8217) works to ensure that the job is done at all cost.
Employee-Centred Leadership: The leader here is concerned with subordinates personal needs, growth and development.
He delegates decision making and responsibility and as well gives them freedom.
3.
Managerial Grid: The Managerial grid was developed by Blake and Mouton (1964).
It was based on the concepts of production and people.
Two dimensions of leadership behaviour were identified namely the concern for people and concern for production.
The five specific leadership styles identified by the grid are 1,1, 9,1, 1,9, 9,9, and 5,5.
These are shown as follows: ) gh 1,9 9,9 Hi ( e l p o e p r o 5,5 n f r e c n o c w) o 1,1 9,1 L ( (Low) (cid:8211) Concern for Production (cid:8211) (High) Figure 1: The managerial Grid on Leadership style.
1,1 - Impoverished Management Style: Leaders in this grid have low concern for both people and production in the organization.
9,1 - Autocratic Management Style: Leaders in this grid have low concern for people but a high concern for production.
They are task-oriented leaders.
1,9 - Country Club Management Style: The leaders here have high concern for people in the organization but a low concern for production.
They are people-oriented leaders.
45 9,9 - Team Management Style: Leaders in this category have high concern for both the people and production.
They combine high initiating structure and high consideration.
5,5 - Middle of the Road Management Style: Leaders in this category have a balanced concern for both the people and production.
They are transactional leaders.
The behavioural theories were deficient in the sense that they failed to incorporate situational variables.
3.2.3 Situational Theory According to this theory, it is the situation that produces its own kind of leadership.
In other words, leadership is determined by organizational situation.
According to Ibukun (1997), the organizational situations that affect leadership include resources, organizational climate, technology, size, external influence, capital, community relations, performance standard, difficult level of task, authority/power base, life span, and type of organization.
The focus of this theory is that it is the situation in which the leader finds himself/herself that determines his/her actions and behaviours.
No theory is regarded as the best, but the situation determines the best leadership behaviour.
The criticism against the situation theory is that it fails to identify the best management strategy for specific situations.
3.2.4 The Contingency Theory While the situation theory merely indicates the importance and influence of organization situation on leadership behaviour, the contingency theory prescribes which leadership behaviour will yield the best results in a specific situation.
The theory draws the attention of the leaders to the fact that they have to find out the leadership style or behaviour that relates to the highest level of productivity taking into consideration the variety of factors such as task, people and the situation.
For instance, task oriented leadership behaviour may not work in a situation where there are poor staffing, inadequate resources and low morale but rather a people oriented leadership behaviour.
But where the staffing situation is good, resources are available and morale is high, task oriented leadership behaviour could work well.
3.2.5 Path-Goal Theory This theory which is based on expectancy motivation emphasizes the role of the leader in motivating subordinates to act in desired direction that would facilitate the accomplishment of organizational goals.
In line with this theory, House (1971) maintained that the most effective leader helps subordinates achieve both organizational and personal goals through motivation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Enumerate the major points of emphasis in the following leadership theories a.
The trait theory b. Behavioural theories 46 c. Situational theory d. Contingency theory e. Path-Goal theory 3.3 Implications of Leadership Theories for School Administration In this section, the implications of the various leadership theories discussed are highlighted as follows: (1) On the trait theory, the school leader should be aware that his/her administrative competence is not determined by personality variable alone but mainly by the observable capabilities exhibited in his/her behaviour and final output.
The leader should realize that his/her effectiveness will be judged by the job commitment of staff and students(cid:8217) academic performance.
(2) On the behavioural theories which identify two major leadership behaviours (job-centred and people-centred), school leaders should bear it in mind that they should not sacrifice one for the other, rather they should maintain a reasonable balance of action between the two behaviours in the process of achieving the goals and objectives of the school system.
(3) The situational theory of leadership reminds school leaders that the pattern of leadership should change as school situations vary considering the fact that there is no leadership style that is good for all places for all times.
Since school situation in terms of quality of personnel, material adequacy and tone of the learning environment influence the effectiveness of school leaders, the school situation should be made favourable and conducive for high productivity.
(4) The Path Goal Theory of leadership reminds school administrators of the need to motivate staff such that both personal and school goals will be accomplished.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Distinguish between trait theory and behavioural theories in terms of their implications for school administration.
3.4 Leadership Styles There are various leadership styles, some of which are examined as follows: 3.4.1 Democratic Leadership Style This is also known as participative style as it encourages full participation of subordinates in the affairs of organization.
This style is characterized by policy making using consultation, delegation of authority, self expression, initiatives, multi- dimensional communication and so on.
In schools where the heads use democratic style, teachers and students are involved in the determination of school rules and regulations, authority is delegated to staff and group interaction is allowed.
47 3.4.2 Autocratic Leadership Style A leader who uses autocratic style dictates all policies and procedures in the organization with little or no group participation.
Such leader is task oriented and hence imposes task and methods of work on the subordinates who have to carry out directives without questions.
3.4.3 Laissez-Faire Leadership Styles This style is characterized by complete freedom of the group and its members to do what they wish.
The leader who adopts this style is care free and merely supplies materials to subordinates to work with and does not supervise them.
It may be difficult for any organization where this style is adopted to achieve its aims and objectives because there are practically no rules and regulations guiding the activities of members.
3.4.4 Transactional Leadership Style Leaders who adopt this style have concern for both the organizational and personal needs.
At one time, the leader is job oriented and at another time he is welfare oriented.
3.4.5 Pseudo-Democratic Leadership Style Leaders who adopt this style usually claim to use democratic style, but they display autocratic style.
The leaders would ask for suggestions and opinions of members on various issues, but would never make use of them because they have their own format of decisions to follow and members have no alternative than to be obedient.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 In one sentence, describe each of the following leadership styles: a.
Democratic leadership style b. Autocratic leadership style c. Laissez-faire style d. Transactional leadership style e. Pseudo-democratic leadership style 3.5 Implications of Leadership Styles for School Administration 1.
There is no single best leadership style.
2.
School leaders should study their environment properly before adopting the most appropriate leadership style.
3.
Environmental/Situational factors are determinants of leadership effectiveness.
4.
School leaders should not be rigid in their leadership styles but flexible in relation to existing situation.
5.
A combination of concern for job and concern for people appears to yield the best result.
6.
School leaders should be encouraged by government and proprietor of schools to put in their best in the process of managing schools.
7.
School leaders should endeavour to encourage and promote subordinate growth in their style of administration.
48 8.
Whatever leadership style is to be adopted effectiveness should be the criterion for the leader(cid:8217)s choice.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Leadership styles have implications for school administration.
Can you state any 4 of such implications?
3.6 Functions of School Leaders The leadership functions of school heads include planning, organizing, directing, coordinating, controlling and evaluating.
In another dimension, Ibukun (1997) classified the leadership functions of school heads into professional and administrative duties.
3.6.1 Professional Duties: These are duties performed to accomplish the goals and objectives of the school.
They include: 1.
Inspection of School Records: The school heads have to personally inspect school records such as Staff attendance book, Class attendance register, Teachers(cid:8217) Lesson Notes, Log book, Visitors(cid:8217) book etc.
to ensure that they are properly kept.
2.
Curriculum Planning and Development The school heads assist teachers in the area of curriculum planning, initiate the introduction of new subjects to be taught and provide the required resources for effective teaching of various subjects in the school.
This function makes school heads that must have a little knowledge of all the subjects being taught in their schools to be sound educationists.
3.
Programme Planning for the New Session: The school heads have the responsibility of examining the existing academic programmes in their schools and decide whether to expand, reduce or modify them in the following year.
For instance, a school head who has sufficient classroom accommodation, facilities and capital may decide to expand his/her school academic program by introducing Computer Science as additional subject in the new session.
4.
Examination Functions: The School heads are the Chief Examination Officers of their schools.
They have to ensure effective supervision of both internal and external examinations in their schools to prevent examination malpractices.
They have to supply essential materials required for the conduct of examinations particularly the internal ones.
5.
Recruitment and Development of Teachers The school heads have to know their teaching staff strength and the number of teachers needed in their schools.
They have to make request for additional teachers when necessary from the appropriate government agencies.
After the recruitment of 49 teachers to their schools, they have to orientate them and encourage them to develop themselves through seminars, workshop and on-the-job training.
6.
Provision of Facilities It is very important for the school heads to ascertain the facilities required for the effective functioning of their schools and provide them for their staff.
They must find out from the various unit heads their requisition for stationery, instructional materials, library and laboratory facilities, workshop materials and so on, and make provision for them within the limit of the available resources.
7.
Budgeting Functions The school heads have to prepare the annual budget of the school with the aid of their bursars and unit heads for the approval of the Board of Governors and the Ministry of Education.
Such budget usually contains the estimate of revenue and expenditures of the school for the year.
3.6.2 Administrative Duties These are duties performed by the school heads for the purpose of maintaining their school.
These include: i.
Students(cid:8217) Welfare: It is the duty of the school heads to look after the welfare of the students by providing first aid services, toilets, bathrooms in case of boarding schools, sports field and so on.
They must ensure that food brought to their schools for sale to students is well prepared.
ii.
Staff Welfare: The school heads have to cater for the welfare of their staff.
The school heads attendance of staff ceremonies, such as house warming, wedding, naming and burial ceremonies, could motivate the staff for effective performance.
Essential welfare services that the school heads could put in place include staff cooperative society, end of the year party; staff children party and rewards for good performance.
iii.
Regular Meetings with Staff and other Bodies The administrative duties of school heads include holding statutory and special meetings with their staff.
Such meetings will give the school heads the opportunity to pass instructions to the Staff and joint decisions could be taken on issues pertaining to the progress of the schools.
The school heads also have to attend meetings of Parents Teachers Association, Board of Governors, Teaching Service Commission, Ministry of Education and other relevant agencies to discuss issues and make discussion on matters relating to the activities of their schools.
50 iv.
Public Relations Functions: The school heads are the Chief Public Relations Officers of their schools.
They have to relate with members of the Community as well as officials of relevant educational agencies to project good image of their schools.
v. Clerical Functions: The clerical functions being performed by the school heads include writing of letters to the Parents Teachers Association, Board of Governors, Teaching Service Commission, School Management Boards, Public examination bodies and other educational agencies and filling forms on staff, students and activities of the schools.
vi.
Maintenance of School Facilities: It is the responsibility of the school heads to maintain school facilities such as vehicle, furniture and fittings, equipment, machines and buildings so that they can have long life span.
They have to ensure that these facilities are properly used and are in safe condition.
vii.
Staff and Students(cid:8217) Discipline: To ensure the smooth running of the school system, the school heads have to maintain discipline of staff and students by discouraging lateness to school, laziness, negligence of duties, disobedience, examination malpractices, drug abuse and so on among them.
For them to be able to enforce discipline in their schools, the school heads have to be disciplined and show leadership by examples.
Some of the problems being encountered in Nigerian schools are products of both staff and students indiscipline.
To this end, school heads should take the maintenance of discipline in their schools very serious more than before.
For the school heads to perform their leadership functions effectively, the situational factors such as personnel, materials and funds must be favourable and conducive for high productivity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Differentiate between professional and administrative duties of school heads.
Highlight the specific functions under each of them.
3.7 LEADERSHIP QUALITIES IN SCHOOLS Effective leadership in school management also depends on the qualities of school leaders.
In this section, some of the qualities of a good school leader are highlighted as follows: 1.
He/She must be intelligent and knowledgeable 2.
He/She must be disciplined and hardworking 3.
He/She must be professionally trained and competent.
4.
He/She must be honest, straight forward, consistent, approachable and fair in dealing with others.
5.
He/She must have good human relations.
6.
He/She must be interested in students and staff welfare.
7.
He/She must be innovative, dynamic, resourceful and courageous.
51 8.
He/She must be firm but not proud in making judgments and decisions and must be willing to take blames for his/her own mistakes.
9.
He/She must be willing to learn, improve himself and encourage others to learn.
The qualities listed above suggested that a school leader should be a perfect person.
Even though this is not possible, yet a successful school leader is likely to possess some degree of these qualities than the unsuccessful one.
It must be pointed out that good leadership qualities can be developed, learned or acquired by training and education.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 List any five attributes of good leader in the school system.
4.0 CONCLUSION The importance of effective leadership in school administration cannot be overemphasized.
Given good educational plans, good school programmes, adequate facilities and adequate qualified staff.
What is required is good administrative leadership to harness these for the success of the school.
A bad administrative leader may render ineffective the best school programmes, the most adequate resources and most motivated staff and students.
Solutions to the series of problems confronting the school system in Nigeria can only be guaranteed through effective leadership.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learnt leadership in school administration.
The concept of leadership was explained.
You also studied leadership theories and their implications for school administration.
The leadership theories you studied are the trait theory, behavioural theories, situational theory, contingency theory and the path-goal theory.
Moreover, you were taught various leadership styles such as democratic style, autocratic style, laissez-faire style, transactional style and pseudo-democratic style as well as their implications for school administration.
The unit also explained the functions of school leaders and leadership qualities in schools.
In the next unit in module 2, you will study power and authority in school administration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
What is leadership?
b.
Explain five qualities of a good school leader.
2.
Examine five leadership theories and their implications for school administration.
3.
Explain the implications of various leadership styles for school administration.
4.
Discuss the leadership functions of school heads in terms of professional or administrative duties.
52 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adesina, S. (1981): Some Aspects of School Management Ibadan: Board Publications.
Ajayi, I.A.
and Ayodele, J.
(2002): Fundamentals of Educational Management.
Ado- Ekiti: Greenline Publishers.
Blake, R. and J. Mouton (1964): The Managerial Grid Houston: Gulf Pub.
Company.
Halpin, A.W.
(1966): Theory and Research in Education.
Vollier-Macmillian.
Halpin, A.W.
and B.J.
Winer (1957): (cid:8220)A factorial study of the leader behaviour descriptions in Stogdill, R.M.
and A.E.
Coons (eds) Leader Behaviour: Its Description and Management.
Bureau of Business Research, Ohio State University.
House, B.J.
(1971): A Path-Goal Theory Leadership Effectiveness.
Administrative Science Quarterly 16 (3): 321-338.
Ibukun, W.O.
(1997): Educational Management.
Theory and Practice Ado-Ekiti.
Bamigboye and Co. Press (Nig.)
Ltd. Newell, C.A.
(1978): Human Behaviour in Educational Administration.
New Jersey.
Prentice Hall Inc. Nwankwo, J.I.
(1981): Educational Administration: Theory and Practice.
India: Vikas Publishing House PVT Ltd. 53 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE (SAEs) SAE 1 (cid:216) There must be a group to be led.
(cid:216) The group must have a set of laid down objectives.
(cid:216) There must be conscious attempts to influence the behaviour of others within the group.
(cid:216) There must be willingness of subordinates to carry out the action.
SAE 2 a.
Leaders were born and the only thing that has to be done is to identify and analyze the qualities they possess and train them in the art of leadership.
b.
What a leader dies is the determinant of his/her effectiveness.
c. It is the situation that produces its own kind of leadership.
d. The leadership behaviour that will yield the best results in a specific situation.
e. The role of the leader in motivating subordinates to act in desired direction that would facilitate the accomplishment of organizational goals.
SAE 3 On trait theory the school leader should his effectiveness will not be judged by personality traits but by the job commitment of staff and students(cid:8217) academic performance while on behavioural theories, the school leader should not sacrifice the concern for job and the concern for the people for one another but maintain a reasonable balance between them.
SAE 4 a.
It is a participative style that encourages full participation of subordinates in the affairs of organization.
b.
All policies and procedures in the organization is dictated by the leader with little or no group participation c. There is complete freedom of the group and its members to do what they wish.
d. The leader has concern for both the organizational and personal needs.
e. The leader claims to use democratic style but displays autocratic style.
54 SAE 5 1.
There is no single best leadership style.
2.
School leaders should study their environment properly before adopting the most appropriate leadership style.
3.
Environmental/situational factors are determinants of leadership effectiveness.
4.
School leaders should not be rigid but flexible in their leadership styles in relation to existing situation (any other points listed in 3.5).
SAE 6 Professional duties performed to accomplish the goals and objectives of the school while administrative duties performed for the purpose of maintaining the school.
Professional duties (cid:216) Inspection of school records.
(cid:216) Curriculum planning and development.
(cid:216) Programme planning for the new session.
(cid:216) Examination functions (cid:216) Budgeting functions Administrative duties (cid:216) Students(cid:8217) welfare (cid:216) Staff welfare (cid:216) Regular meetings with staff and other bodies (cid:216) Public relations functions (cid:216) Maintenance of school facilities (cid:216) Staff and students(cid:8217) discipline SAE 7 1.
He must be intelligent and knowledgeable.
2.
He must be disciplined and hardworking.
3.
He must be professionally trained and competent.
4.
He must be honest, straight forward, consistent, approachable and fair in dealings with others.
5.
He must have good human relations (any other points listed in 3.7).
55 MODULE 1 UNIT FOUR TOPIC: POWER AND AUTHORITY IN SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is power?
3.2 Sources of power 3.3 Uses of power in the school system 3.4 Authority and responsibility 3.5 Types of authority 3.6 Authority relationships 3.7 The exercise of authority by school administrator 3.8 Differences between power and authority in school administration 3.9 Delegation of authority in school administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION A leader in an organization needs power and authority to influence the subordinates into taking actions toward the accomplishment of organizational goals.
Leadership effectiveness therefore depends on the ability of the leader to achieve the goals of the organization through the appropriate use of power and authority.
You will recall that in the last unit in module 1, you were taught leadership in school administration.
In this unit, you will study power and authority in school administration.
Specifically, you learn what power is, the sources of power and the uses of power in the school system.
This unit will also distinguish between authority and responsibility.
You will also learn the exercise of authority by school administrator, types of authority and authority relationship.
The unit will also present the differences between power and authority in school administration and delegation of authority in school administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) define power (cid:216) discuss the sources of power (cid:216) analyse the uses of power in the school system (cid:216) distinguish between authority and responsibility (cid:216) describe the types of authority (cid:216) classify and explain authority relationship (cid:216) explain the exercise of authority by school administrator (cid:216) differentiate between power and authority in school administration 56 (cid:216) illustrate the fundamental issues in delegation of authority in school administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Power?
Power is the ability to make someone do what he/she would not have done.
It is the ability of an individual to compel another to do something against his will despite any resistance.
It is a naked force which involves coercion in getting things done through others.
Power is characterized by fear of punishment and harm or loss of status on the part of the subordinates.
Power can be acquired in various ways.
Power may be usurped by taking actions that are not backed by authority.
Power may also be derived from knowledge or access to vital information which may be used for or against the organization.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Define power.
3.2 Sources of Power According to French and Raven (1960), there are five sources of power: 1.
Reward power: Here, the strength of power is determined by the ability to give rewards.
A social agent will be able to influence others if he is perceived to possess the ability to give absolute rewards.
2.
Coercive Power: Is the ability of the influencing party to punish the person intended to be influenced if he fails to act in the expected direction.
3.
Legitimate Power: Is the right of the influencing agent to influence others.
In this case, power used has legal basis.
4.
Referent Power: The basis of power here could be through relationship or identification of the person being influenced with the influencing individual.
5.
Expert Power: Refers to a situation where a person being influenced perceives that the influencing agent has expert knowledge which is superior to his in a group and hence complies with instructions issued by him/her.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 List the five sources of power identified by French aid Raven (1960).
3.3 Uses of Power in the School System Power is a necessary element of leadership and a major factor which guides the behaviours of a school administrator.
Power is the force behind authority in school management and where it is lacking, the school administrator may be impotent.
Whenever a school administrator realizes that his/her authority has been challenged or ignored, he/she may use power to restore such authority.
For instance, if students embark on demonstration because of lack of water in the school, the principal may instruct them to end such demonstration.
By giving such instruction, the principal is using the authority attached to his/her position as a school administrator.
But if such 57 instruction is not carried out by the students, the school administrator may use the power at his/her disposal by suspending some of the students from the school.
A teacher may also use power over his/her students by preventing some students from attending his/her lessons on account of the students being rude to him/her.
The secretary to a school administrator may deliberately prevent a visitor from entering the school administrator(cid:8217)s office by using the power at his or her disposal.
A messenger may refuse or be reluctant to give directions or information to a visitor with official business in the school in the course of exercising his/her power.
A head of department or unit in a school may use his/her power by deliberately withholding important information meant for a teacher in his/her department or unit.
It must be emphasized that school administrator must ensure that power is always used to achieve corporate goals rather than individuals(cid:8217) goals in the school system.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What is the major importance of power to a school administrator?
3.4 Authority and Responsibility Authority is the right of leaders to direct the activities of others towards the realization of the objectives of the organization.
It must be stressed that such a right is not absolute.
Authority is a legitimate power which is characterized by subordinates(cid:8217) willingness to obey commands.
In other words, voluntary compliance is inherent in authority.
A leader has authority if he/she has the right to command and expect obedience from the subordinate.
For any organization to survive, authority must be vested in some people.
It is the responsibility of those in position of authority to coordinate the activities of the organization in order to achieve the goals of the organization.
A person in position of authority is answerable to somebody for the use of such authority.
This is referred to as responsibility.
In other words, responsibility is the obligation of a person to whom authority is conferred or delegated.
Responsibility emanates from the relationship between a superordinate and subordinate is responsible to his boss in the performance of his/her duties.
To this end, he is obliged to obey the command of his/her boss.
It must be emphasized that responsibility is shared particularly when authority is delegated as the obligation created by such delegation is shared between the superior and the subordinate.
Whenever a subordinate is under the obligation to perform certain duties on behalf of his/her boss, he/she must be given commensurate authority to be able to perform such duties effectively.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Distinguish between Authority and Responsibility.
3.5 Types of Authority Weber (1961) identified three types of authority namely traditional authority, rational-legal authority and charismatic authority.
1.
Traditional Authority: This refers to the type of authority being conferred on the traditional rulers in line with the customs and traditions of the people.
The subjects under the traditional authority believe that their leader has been chosen 58 to rule and compliance is therefore based on the existing norms, values, beliefs and customs of the group.
The object of authority here is the culture being shared by the incumbent and the followers.
It must be stressed that traditional authority is rooted in the compelling assertion that (cid:8220)this is the way we have always dealt with matters like this(cid:8221) hence, it is conservative in nature as it resists change.
2.
Rational-Legal Authority: This is an authority which rests on enactment and obedience is owed to enacted rules.
The governing body is either elected or appointed.
The person in authority also obeys rules and his right to govern is legitimized by enactment.
As a result of the positions occupied by some people in the organization, they are legally entrusted with certain duties which permit them to influence others for the accomplishment of corporate goals.
3.
Charismatic Authority: This rests on exceptional personal qualities which make the influencing agent stand out as a person to be followed and obeyed.
Such personal qualities include power of speech, possession of special knowledge, charisma and heroism which make a leader to be respected and obeyed.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 What are the three types of authority identified by Weber (1961)?
3.6 Authority Relationship 1.
Line Authority: This connotes (cid:8220)command(cid:8221) relationship.
It is the authority that makes the superordinates expects obedience from subordinates.
The superordinates have the right to direct, reward good behaviour and punish bad behaviour.
Line authority can be delegated.
2.
Staff Authority: The position of authority is advisory in nature.
Staff authority is exercised by staff executives who are specialists that make recommendations to the chief executive on what to do.
The chief executive may not make use of such recommendations in his/her decisions.
3.
Functional Authority: This is the authority conferred on staff executives such as engineers, lawyers, accountants and marketing managers to make decisions and implement them based on clearly defined guidelines.
The incumbent has the authority to direct and prescribe the manner in which a job is to be done but cannot punish or reward.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Make a classification of authority-relationship in school administration.
3.7 The Exercise of Authority by School Administrator A school administrator should know the strengths and limits of his/her authority and know how to make the discretional use of it.
When exercising authority, the school administrator does not need to convince or persuade his/her teachers but only obtain their obedience voluntarily.
To be effective in exercising his/her authority, the school administrator should engage in discussions and consultations to find out the opinions of various members of staff in the school, in the process of decision made.
59 The school administrator will find it easy to exercise his/her authority in executing such decisions.
Effective use of authority by the school administrator also demands effective communication, cordial relationship, provision of facilities, staff motivation and delegation of duties to competent staff among others.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 Give the hints to effective exercise of authority by school administrator.
3.8 Differences between Power and Authority in School Administration 1.
Power involves the use of coercion in the attainment of school objectives while authority involves voluntary compliance with school rules without coercion.
2.
Power can be derived through force but authority can be derived through open competitive election or appointment from a legal constituted body.
3.
Commands from the constituted authority must always be obeyed but it is not often the case with power as the subordinate might consider it too harsh.
4.
Person in position of authority in the school is often ready to dialogue, share opinion and information with subordinates, but an administrator exercising power may not dialogue and be reluctant to share opinion with subordinates.
5.
Authority in the school system involves mutual understanding and cooperation in the discharge of task, duties and responsibilities, but power ensures that directives are carried out by force regardless of the individual(cid:8217)s rights and willingness to do so.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 8 Differentiate between power and authority in terms of commands and relationship between the boss and the subordinates.
3.9 Delegation of Authority in School Administration The school administrator cannot perform all the duties in the school; hence there is the need to delegate authority to some staff in order to perform certain duties on his behalf.
Delegation of authority is the process by which leader give authority to subordinates so that they can share in the delegator(cid:8217)s duties.
Without a planned distribution of authority to subordinates, a leader(cid:8217)s work schedule becomes unmanageable.
In order to ensure effective delegation of authority in school administration, the following questions must be answered.
1.
What should be delegated?
Before delegating, a school administrator needs self-appraisal regarding his own personal strength, weaknesses, preferences and attitudes.
To this end, only the duties that can reasonably be done by others should be delegated.
However, a school administration should note that some duties should not be delegated for strategic reasons and duties should be delegated to competent hands.
It must be emphasized that routine activities should be delegated.
2.
Why do we delegate?
For the purpose of reducing the burden of work of the school administrator, there must be delegation of authority.
When there are too many 60 duties for the school administrator to perform, he may not be effective.
It must be noted that it is necessary to delegate in order to develop the subordinates through experience.
Delegating is an instrument for changing organizational structure.
3.
To whom should authority be delegated?
School administrator should delegate authority to competent staff.
The talents, skills, abilities, interests and capabilities of the staff should be considered before delegating authority to them.
It is also important to note that the staff should not be saddled with too many responsibilities in the course of delegating authority to them.
4.
What are the limits of delegation?
The scope of the delegated authority should clearly be defined by the school administrator so that the staff to whom authority is delegated will know their bounds.
The scope of authority should be adequate but not more than what is required for effective performance of the duties assigned.
5.
How do we evaluate the delegated authority?
There is need for the school administrator to embark on periodic review of the performance of staff to whom authority is delegated in order to ascertain the extent to which the duties assigned had been successfully carried out.
Moreover, evaluation of the delegated authority will ensure that the staff conform with the school administrator(cid:8217)s intentions regarding the delegated authority.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 9 What are the fundamental questions that must be answered in order to ensure effective delegation of authority in school administration.
4.0 CONCLUSION Successful administration of the school system depends on the extent to which the school administrator is able to use his/her power and authority to accomplish the objectives of the school.
Power is the force behind authority in school administration.
Where authority is lacking, power is the potent instrument for restoring such authority.
Since the school administrator cannot perform all duties alone, delegation of authority to the subordinates is essential for the success of the school system.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit explained the meaning and sources of power, the difference between authority and responsibility, and the types of authority.
You learnt authority relationship and how school administrator exercise authority.
The unit also distinguished between power and authority in school administration.
You also learnt delegation of authority in school administration.
In the next unit, you will be taught communication in the school system.
61 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is power?
Describe the various sources of power.
2a.
Distinguish between authority and responsibility b.
The use of power is inevitable in the school system.
Discuss.
3.
Explain the differences between power and authority in school administration.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Aderounmu, O.; Jiboyewa, D. and Ejiogu, A.
(1988): Organizational Behaviour in Nigerian Schools.
Lagos: Kola Okanlawon Publishers.
Ajayi, I.A.
(2007): Issues in School Management.
Ikeja, Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
French, J. and Ravens, B.
(1960): (cid:8220)The Bases of Social Power(cid:8221) in Cartwright and Zander (eds.)
Group Dynamics.
Illinois: Evanston.
Nwachukwu, C. C. (1988): Management: Theory and Practice.
Onitsha: Africana- FEP Publishers Limited.
Weber, Max (1961): (cid:8220)The Three Types of Legitimate Rule(cid:8221) in Etzioni, A.
(ed.)
Complex Organizations: A Sociological Reader.
Holt: Rinehart and Winston.
62 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 Power is the ability to make someone do what he/she would not have done.
SAE 2 1.
Reward power 2.
Coercive power 3.
Legitimate power 4.
Referent power 5.
Expert power SAE 3 Whenever a school administrator realizes what his/her authority has been challenged or ignored, he may use power to restore such authority.
SAE 4 Authority is the right of leaders to direct the activities of others towards the realization of the objectives of the organization while responsibility refers to the obligation of a person in position of authority to be answerable to somebody for the use of such authority.
SAE 5 1.
Traditional authority 2.
Rational-legal authority 3.
Charismatic authority SAE 6 1.
Line authority 2.
Staff authority 3.
Functional authority SAE 7 (cid:216) School administrator should know the strengths and limits of his/her authority and know how to make the discretional use of it.
(cid:216) He/she does not need to convince or persuade his/her teachers but only obtain their obedience voluntarily.
(cid:216) He should engage in discussions and consultations with members of staff.
63 (cid:216) He/she should communicate effectively, maintains cordial relationship and motivates the staff.
SAE 8 Commands from constituted authority must always be obeyed but it is not often the case with power as the subordinate might consider it too harsh.
Person in position of authority is often ready to dialogue, share opinion and information with subordinates, but an administrator exercising power may not dialogue and be reluctant to share opinion with subordinates.
SAE 9 1.
What should be delegated?
2.
Why do we delegate?
3.
To whom should authority be delegated?
4.
What are the limits of delegation?
5.
How do we evaluate the delegated authority?
64 MODULE 2 UNIT ONE TOPIC: COMMUNICATION IN THE SCHOOL SYSTEM 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of communication 3.2 The communication process 3.3 Dimension of communication 3.4 Effective communication in school administration 3.5 Barriers to effective communication in school administration 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, I discussed power and authority in school administration.
Recall that under sub-topic 3.7, I stated that effective use of authority by the school administrator demands effective communication, provision of facilities, staff motivation and delegation of duties to competent staff among others.
This unit will present communication in the school system.
You will learn the meaning, process and dimension of communication.
You will also study how to ensure effective communication and the barriers to effective communication in school administration.
2.0 OBJECTIVES When you have diligently study this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) Define communication (cid:216) Describe the process of communication (cid:216) Explain the dimension of communication (cid:216) Illustrate how to ensure effective communication in school administration (cid:216) Discuss the barriers to effective communication in school administration 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Communication Communication has been defined in various ways by different people.
Greenbaum (1984) defined Communication as a process of transmitting or passing information from superior to subordinates.
This definition makes Communication one way affairs, whereas, information could be transmitted by the subordinates to the superiors.
According to Nwachukwu (1988), Communication is the process by which meanings are perceived and understanding reached among human beings whether in terms of written or spoken words, silence, use of eyes, smiling or frowning, head shaking in approval, disapproval, gestures, facial expressions, body posturing etc.
This definition is robust as it covers various methods of communication.
65  Peretomode (1991) defined Communication as the transfer of information, feelings or messages from a source to a receiver.
This definition is silent about whether such information; feelings or messages are understood by the receiver.
Where they are not understood, communication has not taken place.
The deficiency of this definition is addressed by Katz and Kahn (1978), who defined communication as the transfer of information from the sender to the receiver with the information being understood by the receiver.
Any useful and meaningful definition of communication must contain the sender, transmission of information, the receiver and the understanding of the information by the receiver.
Communication can be intra-personal or interpersonal.
It is intra-personal when it takes place within oneself and it is interpersonal when it takes place between two or more persons.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 State the ingredients of a useful and meaningful definition of communication 3.2 The Communication Process Various steps are involved in the communication process, these are explained as follows: (1) Source: The source of communication is the person who sends out the message.
The source may be an individual, group of persons or an organization.
(2) Message: This refers to the encoded information being sent to the receiver.
A message consists of symbols such as signs, signals, written and spoken words and so on.
The sender has to encode the information properly by selecting the appropriate words, expressions or symbols that will be understood by the receiver.
(3) Channel: This is the medium through which the message is transmitted to the receiver.
There are various channels of communication such as newspaper, radio, television, telephone, letters, bulletin, posters, loudspeakers, periodicals, handbooks etc.
(4) Receiver: This refers to the person to whom the message is sent.
The receiver has to decode the message sent by interpreting and giving meaning to it before responding appropriately.
Communication will only be effective when the interpretation of the message by the receiver tallies with the intended meaning.
(5) Effects: These are the changes that occur in the behaviour of the receiver after he has received the message.
His reaction must be in line with the expected behaviour before communication can be effective.
According to Ogunsanwo (1991), communication effects may take three forms: (a) bring about change in receiver(cid:8217)s knowledge; (b) bring about change in receiver(cid:8217)s attitude; (c) bring about change in receiver(cid:8217)s overt behaviour.
(6) Feedback: This is the action that indicates whether or not the message was properly transmitted.
The reaction of the receiver to the message sent gives the sender a feedback as to whether the intended meaning of the message was 66 understood or not.
Where the perceived meaning of the message by the receiver is the same with the intended meaning, communication will be effective.
SELF ASSESSMENT 2 List the stages of communication process.
3.3 Dimension of Communication Communication can be downward, upward and horizontal.
i.
Downward Communication (cid:8211) the transfer of information from the superiors to the subordinates.
Such information could be warnings, orders, instructions, policies, procedures and methods, control standards and so on.
ii.
Upward Communication (cid:8211) the transfer of information from the subordinates to the superiors.
This could provide means for the superiors to ascertain if the information transmitted to the subordinates has been received, understood and accepted.
iii.
Horizontal Communication (cid:8211) the transfer of information between two individuals who are of the same level in the organization.
For instance, in the school system, heads of departments can communicate among themselves.
Such communication is referred to as horizontal communication.
SELF ASSESSMENT 3 Differentiate between downward and upward communication.
3.4 Effective Communication in School Administration Ibukun (1997) identified the following principles as essential for effective communication in school administration: (1) Clear organization structure.
Each staff must know his unit, immediate boss, superordinates and subordinates.
(2) The objectives of the school must be made known to members of staff (3) Roles and duties of staff must be clearly spelt out and documented for easy reference and communication.
(4) Lines of communication must be explicit and known to staff.
However, the chain of communication should not be necessarily long.
(5) Expectation and performance standards should be known to members of staff from the initial stages or at the beginning of session.
(6) Dialogue should be viewed as faster and perhaps more effective strategy of resolving conflict rather than documentation.
(7) Staff meeting should be regarded as venues for defusing conflict situations.
Such meetings should be open enough to allow divergent views and feelings.
(8) Sub-groups in organizations must be channeled to productive activities through interaction, recognition and confidence.
(9) Communication to staff should carry clear and unambiguous messages.
This reduces misinterpretation of intentions and rumour mongering.
(10) An open-door policy and reduced formality in contacting the chief executive of an institution creates confidence in staff, ensures support for management and elicits commitment.
67 (11) It appears from experience that members of staff prefer verbal communication to written types.
Often, written communication from top is taken as queries or regulations which may be breached on the pain of punishment.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 State any five principles of effective communication in school administration.
3.5 Barriers to Effective Communication in School Administration Effective communication in school administration may be impeded due to various problems.
Some of these problems are discussed as follows.
1.
Poor communication planning: There is need to think and plan the purpose of a message before it is communicated.
To this end, the reasons for a message intended to be sent must be considered in advance while appropriate symbols, channel and the time to send such information must also be pre-determined.
Where all these are not done, it means there is poor communication planning.
The message being transmitted in such dispensation may not achieve its purpose as a result of inappropriateness of symbols, channel and time of communication.
2.
Filtering: This occurs when information is sieved by the sender such that only the favourable aspect of it is transmitted.
If a school administrator is fond of reprimanding employees for small mistakes, this will encourage filtering.
The employees will form the habit of sieving information in order to please the superior as only the favourable aspect of the required information will be transmitted.
Filtering is one of the major problems of delegated authority as the subordinates usually manipulate information to give the impression that they are living up to expectations in their responsibilities.
To this end, truth is sacrificed at the altar of pretence.
3.
Communication overload: This refers to a situation in which an individual is informed about many things requiring his reaction at the same time.
Similarly, overload can also occur when an individual is required to react to information received from various units of organization at a particular time.
When overload occurs, an individual may react in a number of ways.
They may treat some information as if they never existed.
They may also sieve some information by reacting to only the ones that are favourable to them.
Other reactions may include misinterpretation of information, delay in reacting to information and output escaping from the required tasks.
4.
Language and distortion: When message is presented in ambiguous language, it is misunderstood or misinterpreted.
To this end, the intended meaning of the message will be at variance with its interpreted meaning by the receiver.
Wrong use of semantics usually lead to confusion on the exact intentions of the sender of a message.
Message is distorted as a result of wrong use of language or semantics.
In this regard, communication will not be effective because its purpose will not be achieved.
5.
Vagueness of message: A message becomes vague when there are unclarified assumptions regarding what is expected of the receiver of such message.
Failure to clearly present expectations from the receiver of a message in the 68 communication process, will create a gap between the required expectation and interpretation of the receiver of such message.
The sender of a message should not assume that the receiver knows what to do on such message.
He/she must state in clear terms what the receiver of a message is expected to do.
6.
Wrong routing: This occurs when information is not sent to the right people who are expected to benefit from them.
For instance, if information meant for students in a school are sent to the teachers in the school, such information will have no meaning to the teachers.
They will ignore such information because they are not concerned.
7.
Wrong timing: When information is not supplied at the right time, there will be a gap and such gap may be filled by rumours, half truths and gossip.
Information will not be useful to the receiver if it is not sent at the appropriate time.
Belated information is as good as no information.
For example, information on how students should go about their registration for a semester should not be transmitted to them at the end of the semester.
Rather, such information should be provided for the students during the beginning of the semester.
Other barriers to effective communication include faulty translation of message by the receiver, feeling of personal insecurity, making decisions by majority vote rather than seeking consensus among others.
School administrators must prevent these barriers in the process of communication so that they can communicate effectively.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Which of the following is not a barrier to effective communication in school administration?
a.
Poor communication planning b. Filtering c. Downward communication d. Decision making by majority vote rather than seeking consensus.
4.0 CONCLUSION Like any other organizations, the school cannot achieve its objectives without effective communication.
It is therefore necessary for school administrators to communicate effectively in order to facilitate understanding, cooperation, unity of purpose and commitment among staff, students, parents and other stakeholders.
To do this they must use the appropriate symbols, language, channel and time in communicating to people.
They must prevent occurrences that could retard effective communication.
These will enhance the attainment of the objectives of the school system.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit examined various definitions of communication with the observation that communication can only be useful and meaningful if the receiver understands the information transmitted.
The various steps involved in the communication process were also discussed.
You also learnt the dimension of communication which could be downward, upward or horizontal.
The unit also explained how to ensure effective 69 communication and the barriers to effective communication in school administration.
In the next unit, you will study time management in school administration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is communication?
Discuss the various steps involved in communication process.
2a.
Distinguish between intra-personal and interpersonal communication.
b.
Discuss the dimension of communication with reference to the school as an organisation 3.
Explain any five impediments to effective communication in the school system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Anuna, M. C. (2004): Dynamics of Organisational Theories in Education.
Enugu: Valen Publishing Co. Ibukun, W. O.
(1997): Educational Management: Theory and Practice, Ado-Ekiti: Bamgboye & Co. Press (Nig.)
Ltd. Katz, D. and R. Kahn (1978): The Social Psychology of Organizations.
(2nd Ed.)
New York: John Wiley and Sons Inc. Nwachukwu, C. C. (1988): C. C. (1998): Management: Theory and practice.
Onitsha: Africana-FEP Publishers Ltd. Obi, E. (2004): Issues in Educational Administration.
Enugu: Empathy International.
Ogunsanwo, O.
A.
(1991): Basic concepts in Educational Planning and.
Administration.
Ibadan: External studies program.
Department of Adult Education, University of Ibadan.
70 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 It must contain the sender, transmission of information, the receiver and the understanding of the information by the receiver.
SAE 2 Source, message, channel, receiver, effects and feed back.
SAE 3 Downward communication is the transfer of information from the superiors to the subordinates while upward communication is the transfer of information from the subordinates to the superior.
SAE 4 1.
Clear organization structure.
2.
The objectives of the school must be made known to members of staff.
3.
Roles and duties of staff must be clearly spelt out and documented for easy reverence and communication.
4.
Lines of communication must be explicit and known to members and shout not be necessarily long.
5.
Expectation and performance standards should be known to members of staff from the initial stages or at the beginning of session (any other points listed in 3.4).
SAE 5 c-downward communication 71 MODULE 2 UNIT TWO TOPIC: TIME MANAGEMENT IN SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Time Management?
3.2 Why Time Management?
3.3 Strategies for time management in the school system 3.4 Factors influencing the time management of school administrators 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Recall that in the last unit you learnt communication in the school system.
You were told that school administrator should make use of the appropriate symbols, channels and time in communicating to people and that wrong timing of information is an impediment to effective communication.
In this unit, you are going to learn time management in school administration.
The unit will explain what time management is and the reasons for time management.
You will also learn the strategies for time management in the school system and the factors which influence the time management of school administrators.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) define time management (cid:216) explain the reasons for time management (cid:216) discuss the strategies for time management in the school system (cid:216) describe the factors which influence the time management of school administrators 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Time Management?
There is time for every activity in the school.
Activities of staff and students are guided by the school time table.
The school administrator who coordinates the activities of staff and students must be able to manage his time in order to accomplish the aims and objectives of the school.
There are instances where some school administrators complain of lack of time to do certain things which they would have done.
A good school administrator must make the effective use of his time so that he will have time for all he plans to do.
Time is a precious resource which must be well managed along with other resources to achieve the goals of the school.
Time management is the effective and efficient utilization of a manager(cid:8217)s or an administrator(cid:8217)s corporate time to achieve organizational or personal goals.
According 72 to Obi (2003), time management involves identifying tasks to be performed, planning and scheduling organizational activities, prioritizing such activities, allocating time to the tasks according to their degree of importance in enhancing productivity, minimizing interruptions and frivolities and reducing routine tasks in such a way that truly important task could be given due attention.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the key elements in the definition of time management.
3.2 Why Time Management?
A time lost or wasted cannot be recalled for use again.
It therefore becomes necessary for managers to manage their time.
The following are some of the reasons for time management: i.
It reduces misunderstanding and confusion.
ii.
There will be time and opportunity for carrying out the essential duties.
iii.
It creates sense of direction, unity of purpose and commitment.
iv.
It reduces conflicts in schedules, activities and interpersonal relations.
v. It enhances efficiency in the use of time and other resources.
vi.
It facilitates delegation of duties to staff.
vii.
It allows for effective coordination of people(cid:8217)s activities.
viii.
It enhances self-realization through reduction in time wastage and creation of more time to attend to private matters.
ix.
It increases the productivity of staff.
x.
It makes it easy for staff to meet deadlines.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 State any five reasons for time management.
3.3 Strategies for Time Management in the School System School administrators must use a number of strategies to ensure that their time is properly managed such that resource efficiency and school effectiveness can be guaranteed.
These strategies include: i.
Setting up priorities: School administrators should identify the goals of their school and determine the major functions required to accomplish such goals.
The goals and the functions must be arranged in order of priorities.
Such arrangement will give an idea of the school administrators(cid:8217) priorities for their schools.
The priorities must be borne in mind by the administrators at all times in the course of using their time for effecting the priorities set up and the school administrators must involve the staff, students, parents and other persons deem necessary during the execution.
Time must be allocated to each of the steps to be taken in achieving the priorities on daily, weekly, monthly, termly and yearly basis.
The time allocation must be done in such a way that it would fit into the programmes and prior commitments of the concerned people.
This calls for participatory management in the school affairs.
The involvement of staff, students and other necessary people in decision making and 73 implementation regarding the priorities of the school enhances efficient utilization of time and school success.
ii.
Time Scheduling: There is the need for school administrators to have daily weekly charts which will show in details what they intend to achieve every day and every week.
In the course of doing this, provision must be made for emergencies.
Some school administrators may consider the preparation of time charts as time consuming and a waste of time, but it should be noted that it takes time to save time.
For effective schedule of time, school administrators must understand how their time is spent in a day or week.
To this end, they have to prepare personal time analysis charts which will show the various activities they spend their time on, for a week or more.
An example of time analysis sheet is shown in figure 2: The time analysis charts will show the times in the day and the days in the week in which specific activities come up.
This will assist the school administrators to study the use of their time and on the basis of this prepare a more useful personal time tables for their activities during the day and each week.
Such personal time-tables will show their daily and weekly duties according to time.
This will facilitate better management of the school administrators(cid:8217) time.
Shown below is an example of personal time schedule or time-table format: m m m a a n m m m m a a a 0 0 0 p p p p 30 00 00 :0 :0 :0n 00 00 00 30 : : : 0m 1m 2o : : : : 7 8 9 1 1 1o 1 2 3 3 Meetings with staff Scheduling Work for school Planning Financial Matters Visiting Classrooms Inspections Interviews with Parents Interviews with Students Interviews with MOG/SSB Teaching and Demonstration Miscellaneous Figure 2: Personal Time Analysis Chart for the school executive (Adapted from Nwankwo J. I.
And Lulsegged A.M. (1985:25) 74 Personal Time Schedule Activity Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri From(cid:8230)to...
Comment am am am am am pm pm pm pm pm (cid:8230)to... (cid:8230)to... (cid:8230)to... (cid:8230)to... (cid:8230)to... (cid:8230)to... (cid:8230)to... (cid:8230)to... (cid:8230)to...
Fig.
3: Personal Time Table Format for the Daily Activities of the Chief Executive for the Week (Adapted from Nwankwo, J. I. and Lulsegged, A.M. 1985, p.26) iii.
Avoid or Reduce Time Wasters: A close monitoring of how a school administrator uses his time on daily basis may reveal certain activities that are time wasters.
A time waster is something that occurs in the day that is not necessary to the day or an activity that are time wasters.
A time waster is something that occurs in the day that is not necessary to the day or an activity consumes more than necessary time.
A time waster prevents a school administrator from achieving some goals.
It is therefore important for a school administrator to monitor how much time he spends on various activities and identify some activities that are time wasters with a view to eliminating or reducing them so that he would have more time for the day(cid:8217)s work.
For instance, if a school administrator discovers that he wastes much time on talking on phone and receiving visitors, he has to reduce the length of time being spent on phone calls and regulate the time being used to attend to visitors in order to have enough time for other important activities scheduled for the day.
Moreover, as a way of avoiding time waster, a school administrator is not expected to perform some duties which he had already delegated to competent hands who are always around to perform such duties.
iv.
Avoid Procrastination: School administrators should avoid procrastination so that the priorities of the school can be met.
It is not uncommon to find some school administrators to make the following statements: (cid:216) One more day won(cid:8217)t make any difference; I will just put that off until tomorrow; (cid:216) It won(cid:8217)t matter if I am few minutes late, no one else will be on time; (cid:216) I work best under pressure; (cid:216) The day is still young, there is still more time to do the job.
(cid:216) Such administrators have most likely been dealing with procrastination.
Procrastination is the avoidance of doing a task which needs to be accomplished.
Procrastination may occur as a result of poor utilization of time, lack of concentration, fear and anxiety, personal problems, 75 negative belief, etc.
These problems must be addressed in order to overcome procrastination.
In order to avoid procrastination, a school administrator must perform his duties according to schedule; he must always meet the deadlines; he must as much as possible avoid working under pressure; he must not postpone till tomorrow what can be done today; and must be willing to delegate some duties to his subordinates.
v. Delegation: It would be wrong for any school administrator to feel that he can solely perform all the administrative functions attached to his office without involving others.
To this end, there is need for delegation.
Delegation is a process by which administrators such as principals, headteachers, vice- chancellors, etc.
transfer part of their authority to their subordinates for the performance of certain tasks and responsibilities (Obi, 2003).
Delegation of authority saves the school administrator(cid:8217)s time that would have been used in performing the duties that are delegated to his subordinates.
In delegation of authority, the following questions must be properly addressed(cid:8221) (cid:216) What should be delegated?
(cid:216) Why should the specified duties be delegated?
(cid:216) To whom should duties be delegated?
(cid:216) What are the limits of delegation?
(cid:216) What are the means of evaluating the performance of delegated authority?
To ensure better management of time, a good school administrator should take note of the following: i.
Routine activities should be delegated.
ii.
Duties are delegated in order to reduce his burden of work.
iii.
Duties should be delegated to competent hands.
iv.
The subordinates to whom duties are delegated should be made to know the limit of their authority in the performance of such duties.
v. There should be periodic review of performance of the subordinates to whom duties are delegated to ensure the successful performance of such duties.
vi.
Time Saving: School administrator must deliberately take some actions for the purpose of saving his time.
According to Obi (2003), the following are some of the ways the school administrator can use to save time: (cid:216) Reducing the number of times meetings are held in the school; (cid:216) Using memoranda, notice boards and bulletins to disseminate information instead of meetings; (cid:216) Careful delegation of duty to only the competent staff; (cid:216) Avoiding procrastination; (cid:216) Insisting that unofficial tasks should be done during unofficial hours.
Chernow and Chernow (1976) have advocated the following Time Saver Checklist to enable the school executive improve the use of his time: 1.
I carry blank 3(cid:8221)x5(cid:8221) index cards in my pocket to jot down notes and ideas.
2.
I keep my long-term goals in mind even while doing the smallest task.
3.
I always plan first thing in the morning and set priorities for the day.
76 4.
I keep a list of specific items to be done each day, arrange them in priority order, and then do my best to get the important ones done as soon as possible.
5.
I ask myself (cid:8220)would anything terrible happen if I did not do this item?
(cid:8221) If the answer is no, I do not do it.
6.
If I seem to procrastinate, I ask myself, (cid:8220)What am I avoiding?
And then try to confront that thing head on.
7.
I focus my efforts on items that will have the best long term benefits.
8.
I do much of my thinking on paper.
9.
I try to do my creative work in the morning and use the afternoon for meetings, if necessary.
10.
I set deadlines for myself and others.
11.
I have someone who screens my mail and phone calls and handle all routine items.
12.
I generate as little paperwork as possible and throw away anything I possibly can.
13.
I recognize that inevitably, some of my time will be spent on activities outside my control and I do not fret about it.
14.
I am continually asking myself (cid:8220)what is the best use of my time right now?
(cid:8221) While recommending that the school administrator should follow these steps, it must be noted that they may not work out all the time.
Nevertheless, the school administrator must always try his best in meeting targets as scheduled using various strategies.
vii.
Avoid being a workaholic: A school administrator becomes a workaholic when he engages in poor planning of his time such that he is so busy in the school trying to do much but end up achieving very little.
A workaholic administrator always has a disorderly work desk and becomes panic over every emergency.
A school administrator must always plan his day and his work, he must set his priorities and effect them in such a way that deadlines are met.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 List seven strategies for time management in the school system.
3.4 Factors Influencing the Time Management of School Administrators There are some factors which influence time management practices of school administrators.
These factors according to Obi (2003) include lack of specialized skill in time management, emergencies and size factor.
1.
Lack of specialized skill in time management: Some school administrators are not professionally trained; hence they are not efficient in time management.
It therefore becomes necessary for school administrators to be trained in time manage their time well in the course of achieving the aims and objectives of their schools.
2.
Emergencies: There are certain events which come up at the unexpected time.
Such events constitute emergencies.
Emergencies include fire disaster, flood disaster, death of a student or a staff, students(cid:8217) riots, civil unrests, etc.
In 77 several cases, school activities are disrupted by emergencies.
School administrators must make provision for emergencies in their plans and also learn how to cope with emergencies when they occur so that normal school activities can continue thereafter.
3.
Size Factor: The size of a school may influence the use of time by the school administrator.
It appears that in large schools, more time is spent by the school administrator in attending to problems relating to interpersonal relations and students(cid:8217) problems than in small schools.
The use of committee system in decision making can assist school administrators in large schools more in time management.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Identify three factors which influence time management of school administrators.
4.0 CONCLUSION Any school administrator, who is unable to manage his /her corporate time well, is bound to fail in the task of achieving the objectives of the school.
Since a time lost or wasted cannot be recalled for use again, it is expedient for school administrators to use various strategies in managing their time.
They should also take cognizance of some intervening factors which could inhibit the management of their corporate time with a view to controlling them in order to ensure effective school administration.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught you time management in school administration.
You learnt that time management is the effective and efficient utilization of a manager(cid:8217)s or an administrator(cid:8217)s corporate time to achieve organizational or personal goals.
The unit also identified the reasons for time management.
You also learnt the strategies for time management in the school system.
The strategies include setting up priorities, time scheduling, avoiding or reducing time wasters and procrastination, delegation, time saving and avoiding being a workaholic.
The unit also explained the factors which influence the time management of school administrators such as lack of specialized skill in time management, emergencies and size factor.
In the next unit, you will learn budget preparation and administration in the school system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
Define time management b.
What are the factors which influence time management of school administrators.
2.
Why time management?
3.
Discuss any five strategies for time management in the school system.
78  7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, I.A.
(2007): Issues in School Management.
Ikeja, Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Ajayi, I.A.
and Osiki, P.M. (2003): Procrastination among the undergraduates in a Nigerian University: Implications for time management.
International Business Management.
2(4):126-131.
Chernow, Fred B. and Chernow Carol (1976): School of Administrator(cid:8217)s Guide to Managing People.
New York: West Nyack, Parker Pub.
Co. Inc. Nwankwo, J. I. and Lulsegged, A. M. (1985): Effective Management for Executives: A Practical Manual for Managers.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Limited.
Obi Emenike (2001): Educational Planning in Contemporary Nigeria.
Enugu: Computer Edge Publishers.
79 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 (cid:216) effective and efficient utilization (cid:216) manager(cid:8217)s or administrator(cid:8217)s such activities.
(cid:216) Achievement of organization or personal goals SAE 2 1.
It reduces misunderstanding and confusion.
2.
There will be time and opportunity for carrying out the essential duties.
3.
It creates sense of direction, unity of purpose and commitment.
4.
It reduces conflicts in schedules, activities and interpersonal relations.
5.
It enhances efficiency in the use of time and other resources (any other points in 3.2) SAE 3 1.
Setting up priorities 2.
Time scheduling 3.
Avoid or reduce time wasters 4.
Avoid procrastination 5.
Delegation 6.
Time saving 7.
Avoid a workaholic SAE 4 1.
Lack of specialized skill in time management.
2.
Emergencies.
3.
Size factor 80 MODULE 2 UNIT THREE TOPIC: BUDGET PREPARATION AND ADMINISTRATION IN THE SCHOOL SYSTEM 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of school budget 3.2 Importance of school budget 3.3 The preparation of a school budget 3.4 Methods of budgeting 3.5 Approval and administration of school budget 3.6 Supervision and evaluation of school budget 3.7 Problems of school budget preparation and implementation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION Remember that in the last unit, you learnt time management in school administration.
The unit explained various strategies which school administrators can use to manage their corporate time in order to achieve the objectives of the school system.
It must be emphasized that in addition to time management, there is need for a financial plan through which programmes designed for the achievement of the objectives of the school can be implemented.
Such financial plan is usually referred to as a budget.
In this unit, you will learn budget preparation and administration in the school system.
Specifically, the unit will teach you the meaning and importance of school budget, the preparation of a school budget and methods of budgeting.
You will also learn the approval and administration of school budget, supervision and evaluation of school budget and the problems of school budget preparation and implementation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After you must have diligently studied this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) define school budget (cid:216) discuss the importance of school budget (cid:216) describe the preparation of a school budget (cid:216) illustrate the various methods of budgeting (cid:216) explain the approval and administration of school budget (cid:216) distinguish between supervision and evaluation of school budget (cid:216) analyse the various problems of school budget preparation and implementation.
81 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of School Budget According to Musaazi (1982), school budget is a financial plan through which educational objectives are being implemented and translated into reality.
Edem (1987) defined school budget as the statement which describes how various educational objectives outlined for the year or another stated period are to be financed.
Similarly Clabaugh (1988) defined school budget as a financial blue print for the operation of the schools for the fiscal year.
The various definitions show that school budget is concerned with procedures of funding a school system to accomplish its pre-determined objectives over a period of time.
It is an established financial standard meant to guide the activities of a school administrator towards the attainment of the aims and objectives of the school system in the fiscal year.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Which of the following is the most appropriate description of a school budget?
a. financial rules b. financial record c. financial plan d. financial policy 3.2 Importance of School Budget The role of school budget in school administration in indispensable.
It is an instrument of planning and control in the school system.
Budget serves as an instrument of planning because it specifies financial procedures through which the goals and objectives of the school system can be achieved.
Programmes and policies designed to achieve the objectives of the school system are implemented through the operation of the school budget.
It serves as an instrument of control because it is an established standard against which the performance of the school budget, it is easy to ascertain the extent to which the school has achieved its aims and objectives through implementation of various programmes budgeted for in a year.
Problems connected with the inability of the school to implement some of the programmes budgeted for are identified for appropriate actions.
School budget encourages team work among the staff as they work together to achieve common goals and objectives.
It coordinates the activities of the school by giving financial direction to the various activities being carried out for the purpose of achieving the aims and objectives of the school system.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Outline any four importance of school budget.
3.3 The Preparation of a School Budget In a secondary school, it is the responsibility of the school principal to prepare the school budget, even though he may delegate the duty to his bursar.
Budget preparation is not a one-man job and it is not a job solely for the bursary department of a school.
All part of the school organization must be involved in the preparation of school budget.
The principal has to collect information regarding the programmes and 82 financial needs of sectional heads of departments so that they can be incorporated into the draft of school budget.
If the school is large, a budget committee may be put in place to review various demands and ensure that such demand are in line with the school objectives.
The participation of staff in budget preparation enhances better financial planning and this will as well motivate them.
A school principal should not make the preparation of school budget one man affairs so that such budget can incorporate the various needs of the various sections of the school system.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Identify the major actors in budgeting preparation in the secondary school.
3.4 Methods of Budgeting There are various methods of budgeting, some of which are discussed as follows: 1 Line Item Budgeting This is a traditional method of budgeting in which specific items of revenue and expenditures are listed on line by line basis.
In this type of budgeting, revenue and expenditure plans are prepared in tabular forms showing the detailed items for the current year and one or two year(s) preceding the year in which the budget is made.
Line item budgeting allows each department to continue with the implementation of existing programmes because is based on certain increase or decrease in the amounts granted for the previous year(s).
This method of budgeting is predominant in Nigeria secondary school system.
Ajayi (1998) found that 90 percent of secondary school principals in Ekiti State used Line- Item budgeting.
It must be stressed that while this method of budgeting has the merit of making budget preparation and auditing easy, and guides against misappropriation of funds, it suffers from the demerits that it is lengthy in preparation and does not relate to specific projects or objectives.
2 Programme Budgeting In this method of budgeting, provisions are made for the programmes to be executed.
The budget will be made according to the functions, programmes and activities of each department in the school.
To this end, a school budget will be classified into various departments for instance we may have language department(cid:8217)s expenditure, science departments expenditure and so on.
The purpose of this budgeting method is to show how funds are being spent on each programme of the school.
The main advantage of programme budgeting is that it reduces the goals and objectives of the school system into specific operations and the method to accomplish them is determined.
However, its problem is that it requires a sophisticated information system and a programme may take several years to be completed.
83 3 Performance Budgeting This method of budgeting emphasizes the performances of the work to be done.
There are ways of measuring the achievement of each programme.
It is possible to ascertain performance based on each unit of work.
For instance, in construction of a laboratory block in a school, the budget would not only show the amount to be spent on the whole block, but also the amounts to be spent on foundation, setting of blocks, roofing, plastering and so on.
The advantage of this budgeting is that it is very informative and it makes the control of school fund easier.
Its problem is that it requires elaborate account, data processing and a lot of paper work.
4 Zero-Base Budgeting Zero-base budgeting unlike the line-item budgeting does not take cognizance of the previous year budget.
It puts each programme under review every year and its cost are computed from the scratch as if the programme never existed.
This method of budgeting involves taking a fresh look at programmes and activities each year without considering the previous year budget.
Zero-base budgeting enables school administrator to allocate resources to programmes based on priority.
Nevertheless it is very expensive to implement and could make some school administrators exaggerate the benefits of pert projects in order to have them funded.
5 Planning, Programming and Budgeting System (PPBS) This new approach to budgeting is concerned with identification of organizational goals in measurable terms and selecting the best programmes for achieving such goals.
This method of budgeting enables an organization to eliminate costly programmes that can waste resources and also provide a means of making the cost-benefit analysis of each programme in relation to the pre- determined objectives.
Planning Programming and Budgeting System helps a school administrator to identify and define the goals and objectives of the school, on the basis of which appropriate programmes are designed to achieve such goals and objectives.
However, the problem of this budgeting system is that it tends to be too sophisticated for developing countries where there is lack of reliable statistical data and shortage of experts.
Furthermore, the problem of defining and establishing priorities of objectives of the school system may be encountered as a result of value judgment which may not give room for objectivity.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 List five methods of budgeting.
3.5 Approval and Administration of School Budget In a secondary school, after the school budget has been prepared, the principal has to present it before the Board of Governor for their perusal and approval.
Before the Board of Governors meeting on the budget, a draft copy is sent in advance to each member to allow all the members to study the budget and come up with their 84 observations during presentation.
During the presentation of the budget to the Board of Governors, members will deliberate on the budget and make any changes they consider necessary before giving their approval.
After the budget has been approved by the Board of Governors, the draft is sent to the planning division of the Ministry of Education for ratification.
The Ministry of Education could make amendment on the draft budget before its ratification but such amendment has to be communicated to the principal.
The moment the budget is ratified by the Ministry of Education, it becomes operational.
It is the responsibility of the school principal to administer the budget by ensuring that records are kept on financial activities carried out in implementation of the programmes contained in the budget.
The principal makes use of vote book to make sure that expenditures are based on the amount budgeted.
The vote book will show expenditure up to date and the balance.
Even though, the preparation of the vote book may be delegated to the bursar, the principal as the chief accounting officer of the school, has to monitor closely the operation of the vote book, to ensure financial discipline.
The school principal must always ensure that expenditures do not exceed the amount budgeted.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).. has to give approval to the budget of a secondary school after it has been prepared by the principal.
a.
Ministry of Education b.
Parents Teachers Association c. Board of Governors d. Board of Internal Revenue 3.6 Supervision and Evaluation of School Budget In a secondary school, it is the joint responsibility of the school principal and the government to supervise and control the school budget.
The principal has to authorize every payment and ensure that it is properly receipted.
On no account should money be paid out without the approval of the principal.
It is the responsibility of the school principal to check income and expenditure books, school receipts, vouchers and other financial records occasionally to ensure that they are properly kept.
This is necessary in order to account clerk.
Accounting officers from the Ministry of Education play auditing role regarding the operation of the school budget.
They examine the financial records of the school in order to ascertain their accuracy and effectiveness.
Their findings are made known to their superiors in the Ministry of Education for appropriate actions.
The evaluation report on the operation of the school budget can be used to ascertain the degree of its consistency and accuracy by comparing such report with those of the previous years.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Identify the major actors in the supervision and implementation of school budget.
85 3.7 Problems of School Budget Preparation and Implementation There are various problems being encountered in preparation and implementation of school budget, some of which are examined as follows: 1 Inflation Inflation is a persistent fall in the purchasing power of money.
It refers to a situation whereby too much money buy fewer goods.
It makes the preparation and implementation of school budget cumbersome particularly when an accurate estimate of the rate of inflation over the budget period can not be made.
As a result of inflation, some of the projects budget for may not be implemented due to rising cost of materials.
This will make the preparation of the budget faulty and its implementation difficult.
2 Heavy Dependence on Government Grants The bulk of public school(cid:8217)s revenue usually come from the government while little amount of money is generated from other sources.
Government gives grants for both recurrent and capital expenditures.
Whenever such grants is not forthcoming as budgeted for, the implementation of school budget is adversely affected.
In Nigeria, government grants to school is unpredictable, this had reduced budget preparation in school to a mere paper work meant to fulfill all righteousness.
3 Unstable Political Environment Political instability in a Country gives room for unstable policies of government and poor economy.
Consequently, the public funding of schools are adversely affected, and budget preparation and implementation will be difficult.
4 Lack of induction for school heads Not all the school heads have the basic knowledge of budget preparation.
To this end, some school heads delegate this function to their bursars or other staff some of whom are not trained for such job.
This gives room for unrealistic budgets.
5 Inaccurate Keeping of Records In order to make accurate financial estimates of school programmes, there must be accurate records of past projects.
In some schools, these records are not properly kept and this makes it difficult for school heads to make accurate financial estimate of school programmes.
Inaccurate estimate of school programmes makes budget implementation difficult.
6 Greed on the part of school heads Where school heads are insincere and greedy, there may be misappropriation and embezzlement of funds.
This will jeopardize the attainment of objectives of the school system as contained in the school budget.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 State any three external problems being encountered in preparation and implementation of school budget.
86 4.0 CONCLUSION The goals and objectives of the school system cannot be achieved without school budget.
This is because the policies and programmes designed to achieve such goals and objectives cannot be implemented in the absence of budget.
It is therefore necessary for school administrators to prepare, administer and supervise school budget effectively so that the success of the school system can be guaranteed.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught you budget preparation and administration in the school system.
The unit saw school budget as an established financial standard meant to guide the activities of a school administrator towards the attainment of the aims and objectives of the school system in the fiscal year.
In the unit, you also learnt the importance and preparation of a school budget as well as the various methods of budgeting.
Such methods include line item budgeting, programme budgeting, performance budgeting, zero-base budgeting and Planning Programming and Budgeting System (PPBS).
The unit also explained the approval and administration of school budget and the supervision and evaluation of school budget.
You were also taught various problems of school budget preparation.
The next unit will teach you motivation in school administration.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
What is school budget?
b.
Explain five importance of a school budget 2.
Discuss five methods of budgeting 3a.
Distinguish between supervision and evaluation of school budget.
b. Analyse any four problems of school budget preparation and implementation.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, I.A.
(1998): Analysis of Secondary School Budget Preparation and Administration in Ekiti State.
Nigerian Journal of Development Issues: Socio, Political and Economic Development.
2(1) 23-34 Ajayi, I.A.
and Ayodele, J.B. (2001): Introduction to Educational Planning Administration and Supervision.
Oshodi, Lagos: Yemi Prints and Publishing Services.
Clabaugh, R.E.
(1998): The Preparation and Administration of the Budget in Adesina, S. and Fagbamiye, E.O.
(eds.)
Educational Administration.
Ibadan: University Press Ltd. Edem, D.A.
(1987): Introduction to Educational Administration.
Ibadan: Spectrum Books Ltd. 87 Musaazi, J.C.S.
(1982): The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
London: Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 88 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 C (cid:8211) financial plan SAE 2 1.
It serves as an instrument of planning and control in the school system.
2.
It encourages team work among the staff as they work together to achieve common goals and objectives.
3.
It coordinates the activities of the school by giving financial direction.
4.
It helps to identify problems connected with the inability of the school to implement some of the programmes it budgets for.
SAE 3 School principal, bursar, heads of departments SAE 4 1.
Line item budgeting 2.
Programme budgeting 3.
Performance budgeting 4.
Zero-base budgeting 5.
Planning, Programming and Budgeting System (PPBS) SAE 5 Board of Governors SAE 6 The principal and accounting officers from the Ministry of Education SAE 7 1.
Inflation 2.
Heavy dependence on government grants 3.
Unstable political environment.
89 MODULE 2 UNIT FOUR TOPIC: MOTIVATION IN SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of motivation 3.2 The underlying principles of motivation 3.3 Theories of motivation 3.3.1 Maslow(cid:8217)s theory 3.3.2 Herzberg two-factor theory 3.3.3 Vroom(cid:8217)s expectancy theory 3.3.4 Carrot and stick model 3.3.5 McGregor(cid:8217)s theories X and Y 3.4 Strategies for staff motivation in the school system 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The previous unit taught you budget preparation and administration in the school system.
It concluded that the goals and objectives of the school system cannot be achieved without school budget.
However, you should note that the staff who are vested with the responsibility of implementing policies and programmes designed to achieve such aims and objectives in line with the school budget, must be motivated in order to achieve the desired results.
Therefore, this unit will teach you motivation in school administration.
You will learn the meaning and the underlying principle of motivation.
You will also be taught the theories of motivation and strategies for staff motivation in the school system.
2.0 OBJECTIVES On completion of this unit, you will be able to: (cid:216) Explain the term (cid:8216)motivation(cid:8217).
(cid:216) State the underlying principles of motivation.
(cid:216) Discuss the various theories of motivation.
(cid:216) Analyse various strategies for staff motivation in the school system 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Motivation Motivation is a force or drive or urge that makes one to do what one is aroused to do.
It is an energizer or driving force of man(cid:8217)s action.
Motivation helps to describe the needs, drives, wishes, desires and other associated forces which propel the individual towards set goals.
90  The process of motivation starts with a perceived need which creates tension in the individual, such individual will move in a certain direction in order to achieve the desired objective which reduces the tension, i.e.
Need Goal Tension Behaviour Reduction of oriented Motivatin tension (satisfaction need) g SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify four key words in the definition of motivation.
3.2 The Underlying Principles of Motivation 1.
One man(cid:8217)s meat is another man(cid:8217)s poison.
What motivates Mr. A may not motivate Mr. B.
2.
The complexity of man.
He has a variety of needs and he is difficult to satisfy.
3.
A satisfied need no longer motivates 4.
To ensure high level of motivation, there must be some degree of freedom in the place of work.
5.
Human needs exist in hierarchy as categorized into five steps by Maslow.
However, there are theories that indicate that human needs are not satisfied in hierarchical order.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Which of the principles of motivation emphasize individual differences and the importance of work environment?
3.3 Theories of Motivation There are various theories of motivation, some of which are considered as follows: 3.3.1 Maslow(cid:8217)s Theory According to Maslow(cid:8217)s theory of motivation, human needs can be classified in a hierarchical order starting from the basic needs to the higher order needs.
Maslow maintained that when a lower need is satisfied, a higher need becomes activated and as higher need is satisfied, the lower need is no longer a motivator.
According to Maslow, human needs can be classified into five, namely, the physiological needs, safety needs, social needs, esteem needs, and self actualization needs.
Physiological needs: These needs consist of food, clothing and shelter which are considered basic for the survival of human beings.
These needs can be satisfied with money where they are satisfied, they become motivators.
At this stage, every kobo means much to the employee in an organization.
Other needs become important as soon as physiological needs are satisfied.
91  Safety needs: When the physiological needs must have been satisfied, the safety needs become important to human beings.
These needs consist of job security, protection from danger, illness and economic disaster, freedom from fear, etc.
As soon as these needs are satisfied, they give way for the social needs.
Social needs: They consist of belongingness, association, acceptance, friendship and love.
In an attempt to satisfy these needs, individual member in an organization belong to small clubs of informal groups, unions and so on.
Esteem needs: These needs consist of recognition, self-respect, accomplishment, confidence, power and prestige.
They do not become motivator unless other lower level needs have been satisfied.
Self-actualization needs: These are also known as fulfillment needs.
They are the topmost needs in Maslow(cid:8217)s Need Hierarchy Model.
According to Maslow (cid:8220)What a man can be, he must be(cid:8221).
A man is actualized when he feels he has achieved his full potentials.
Human beings are ambitious and would attempt to become whatever they feel they can become.
In other words, everybody has the belief that the potentials are there for them to rise to any level.
3.3.2 Herberg two-factor theory Herzberg (1968) identified two-factor theory which he named the Dissatisfiers/Hygiene and the Satisfiers/Motivators.
Dissatisfiers/hygiene factors (maintenance factors) These factors consist of: (cid:216) Relationship with supervisor (cid:216) Working condition (cid:216) Relationship with peers (cid:216) Personal life (cid:216) Compensation (money) These factors according to Herzberg are dissatisfiers and not motivators because their existence does not motivate but their absence leads to dissatisfaction.
Herzberg and his associates observed that an improvement in the hygiene factors through good company, politics and administration, good supervision, good working condition, good interpersonal relations and good remuneration would prevent workers from being dissatisfied with their jobs.
Herzberg felt that the hygiene factors were important as (cid:8220)house keeping chores(cid:8221) that must be done as their absence would not allow motivators to work.
Disatisfiers/Hygiene Factors (Maintenance Factors): These factors consist of: i.
Achievement ii.
Working condition iii.
Relationship with peers iv.
Personal life 92 v. Compensation (money) These factors according to Herzberg are dissatisfiers and not motivators because their existence does not motivate but their absence leads to dissatisfaction.
Herzberg and his associates observed that an improvement in the hygiene factors through good company, politics and administration, good supervision, good working condition, good interpersonal relations and good remuneration would prevent workers from being dissatisfied with their jobs.
Herzberg felt that the hygiene factors were important as (cid:8220)house keeping chores(cid:8221) that must be done as their absence would not allow motivators to work.
Satisfiers/Motivators: According to Herzberg, the motivators or satisfiers consist of: i.
Achievement ii.
Recognition iii.
Responsibility iv.
Advancement v. Work itself The existence of these factors will bring about a feeling of satisfaction or not satisfaction but not dissatisfaction.
3.3.3 Vroom(cid:8217)s Expectancy Theory This theory was propounded by Victor Vroom.
It states that what an individual expects to get out of the efforts put into the output of something will determine the strength or efforts put into it.
Components of the Theory i. Expectancy: This means the expectation of the individual that an exhibited behaviour would be followed by a specific outcome.
For instance, if a worker feels that he works hard in a particular year, he will be promoted, he will put more effort into his job.
ii.
The valence: This means the strength or the amount of efforts put into the achievement of an outcome.
iii.
The outcome: This is the combination of both inwardly and outwardly expressed behaviour.
Therefore, to sum up motivation according to Vroom: M = E x V = Outcome It must be noted that the relationship between expectancy (E) and Valence (V) is positive, the higher the E, the higher the V; the lower the E, the lower the V. To this end, both the Expectancy (E) and Valence (V) must be raised high in order to motivate individuals.
Nevertheless, the caution here is the outcome, if Expectancy and Valence are high, the Outcome must be kept high so that individual will be motivated.
For instance, a worker expects that after a stipulated time, he would be promoted, he now puts more efforts to earn his promotion, but if at the expected time, the promotion is not forthcoming, this will now reduce his efforts.
3.3.4 Carrot and Stick Model: This model emphasized rewards and punishment approach in motivating individuals in an organization.
According to this model, incentives like praises and penalties like 93 sanctions can be used to influence the behaviour of individuals, while praises could serve as positive reinforcers, penalties could serve as negative reinforcers.
To apply this model, individual workers or staff in the school could be praised, commended and be given higher responsibilities in order to motivate them as these could reinforce them positively on their jobs.
On the other hand, when the staff in the school are not performing on their jobs, sanctions and punishment such as threat of sack, demotion, suspension and withdrawal of privileges could be used as checks particularly if applied in the right dose, to reinforce them negatively in order to perform on their jobs.
3.3.5 McGregor(cid:8217)s Theories X and Y McGregor (1960) proposed two theories namely the X and theory Y which aimed at providing a framework for the management of people in order to accomplish organizational goals.
In these theories, basic assumptions were made, the understanding of which is important in managing human beings.
Theory X The basic assumptions of theory X are: 1.
Work, if not downright distasteful, is an onerous chore to be performed in order to survive.
2.
The average human being has an inherent dislike of work, and will avoid it if he can.
3.
Because of this human characteristic dislike of work, most people must be coerced, controlled, directed or threatened with punishment to get them to put forth adequate effort toward the achievement of organizational objectives.
4.
The average human being prefers to be directed, wishes to avoid responsibility, has relative little ambition, wants security above all.
Managers who subscribe to Theory X are often autocratic and task-oriented in their approach.
Such managers usually believe that a worker has a special dislike for work and unless you force him, he will not work.
To this end, he has to be threatened with loss of employment (security need) in order to make him do his work.
The emphasis here is on negative reinforcement as a means of motivation.
Nevertheless, McGregor believed that the continuing use of Theory X in management prevents the managers from discovering and utilizing the best potentials of the average worker.
School administrators who believe in theory X will drive and compel teachers to teach, promise them rapid promotion and improved conditions of service in order to inspire them to work hard.
Teachers who do not perform well on the job will be threatened with punishment.
Teachers are not adequately involved in decision making and all the activities of the school will be strictly controlled by the school administrator and staff and students are thoroughly supervised.
Theory Y The basic assumptions of Theory Y are: 1.
The expenditure of physical energy and mental effort in work is as natural as play or rest.
94 2.
External control and the threat of punishment are not only means for bringing about effort towards organization(cid:8217)s objectives.
Man will exercise self-direction and self-control in the service of objectives to which he is committed.
3.
Commitment to objectives is a function of the rewards associated with their achievement.
4.
The average human being learns, under proper conditions, not only to accept but seek responsibility.
5.
The capacity to exercise a relatively high degree of imagination, ingenuity and creativity in the solution of organizational problems is widely, not narrowly disturbed in the population.
6.
Under the conditions of modern life, the intellectual potentialities of the average human being are only partially utilized.
Managers who subscribe to theory Y usually believe that people will work naturally, exercise self direction, self discipline and self control in certain circumstances, and have potentials for further development, as long they are rewarded in one way or the other.
Theory Y emphasizes the need for job enrichment and job satisfaction.
School administrator who operates under the assumptions of theory Y will provide leadership and motivate staff.
Such administrator usually runs open administration which makes the school environment conducive for staff to do their jobs.
Teachers and other non-teaching staff are involved in decision making and there are opportunities for innovations, self direction, self discipline and self control for the staff.
Theories X and Y can be successfully used by school administrators by adhering to the suggested administrative policies by Watson (1966) which are summarized as follows: Theory X S/N Assumptions about People S/N Administrative Policies (Workers) 1.
Naturally lazy, avoid work 1.
Drive (cid:8220)motivate(cid:8221) and coerce 2.
Dependent 2.
Direct them 3.
Have fixed or set ways of doing 3.
Encourage routine procedures in things work 4.
Generally irresponsible 4.
Check up, control 5.
Resistant or hostile to authority and 5.
Be prepared to fight back, be on leadership guard 6.
Unimaginable 6.
Prescribe 7.
Short sighted 7.
Plan for them Theory Y S/N Assumptions about People S/N Administrative Policies (Workers) 1.
Naturally active and enterprising 1.
Provide leadership and motivation 2.
Independent 2.
Use self-direction 3.
Grow on the work 3.
Expose them to change and innovation 95 4.
Like to take up responsibilities 4.
Trust them 5.
Identify with you, have loyalty 5.
Give them cooperation and support 6.
Creative 6.
Encourage creativity, excellence, etc.
7.
Capable of broad vision and long 7.
Plan and decide with them view SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 State five theories of motivation.
3.4 Strategies for Staff Motivation in the School System A number of strategies could be used by school administrators to motivate staff in order to enhance high level of productivity in the school system.
These strategies are identified taking cognizance of the various types of needs identified in some of the theories of motivation.
1.
Salaries and other fringe benefits: The salaries of teachers and other non- teaching staff must be paid regularly in order to satisfy their physiological needs.
Other fringe benefits such as furniture allowance, leave bonus and meal subsidy should also be paid to them on regular basis.
It is also very important to take the staff into confidence on matters relating to their salaries and payments schedules.
It must be emphasized that irregular payment of salaries and fringe benefits to teachers dampens their morale as their basic needs suffer.
This may adversely affect their job performance.
2.
Safety environment: The physical, social and psychological environments of the school must be safe for the staff so that they can be motivated.
To ensure physical safety, schools should not be sited in hazardous locations near industries, railway stations, market centres and poorly accessible areas.
The staff should not be made to work inside dilapidated buildings and in a weedy environment.
In order to guarantee the social safety of the staff, the school environment should be free from frequent violence, acrimony and hostility.
To ensure psychological safety in the school, the job security of the staff must be guaranteed.
Frequent threat of sack, and frequent transfer of staff should be discouraged in order to enhance stable psychological environment.
3.
Friendship and association: School administrators should be friendly to their staff and love them.
The authority-staff relations in the school should be cordial.
Staff should be encouraged to associate freely with one another.
They should be allowed to form clubs, societies and associations.
These will facilitate conducive social environment for staff motivation.
The school environment should be free from hatred, victimization and oppression.
4.
Advancement and promotions: Staff are motivated when there are opportunities for advancement on the job through promotions at the appropriate time.
To this end, staff who are due for promotion and have met the laid down criteria for such promotion should be promoted.
Indolent staff should be denied promotion in order to make them sit up and work harder for the next available 96 opportunity.
This could serve as a negative reinforcement for such staff.
It must be emphasized that the criteria for promotion must be made known to staff and such criteria must be followed objectively in promotion exercise.
It is important that each member of staff should have a document containing the conditions of service in the school system.
Such document should contain the criteria for staff promotion.
School administrators must ensure that various positions of authority in the school have name labels pasted in the doors to various offices for the purpose of recognition for the office holders.
5.
Participation in decision-making: The involvement of staff in decision- making process in the school system is a means of motivating them.
When staff participate in decision making, they feel important as stakeholders in the system and are motivated to work hard.
School administrator should enlist the participation of his staff in decision making, by making them members of various committees in the school.
However, the competency, interest, ability and areas of specialization of the staff should be considered in enlisting them as members of committees so that they can perform efficiently and effectively.
It is essential for school administrator to accommodate divergent opinions of staff in the process of decision-making so that they can have the feeling that they are actually involved in decision-making.
6.
Responsibility and authority: Staff holding positions in the school system should be given both responsibilities and commensurate authority to perform their functions.
Responsibility without authority is meaningless.
Many assistant school heads and heads of departments have not been able to perform as expected on their duty posts because their superior officers had not given them commensurate authority to discharge their duties.
When staff are given responsibility and commensurate authority, they are motivated to perform their duties but when they lack authority to carry out their responsibilities they become disenchanted.
7.
Provision of resources: For staff to perform their duties, resources such as textbooks, chalk, stationeries, instructional materials, laboratory facilities, equipment, furniture and fittings must be adequately provided in the school.
When these resources are inadequate, staff are not motivated to work.
Staff are motivated when adequate resources are made available to them to do their work.
It is not appropriate to blame the staff for poor performance on the job when resources to work with are inadequate.
8.
Creating conducive work environment: The school environment should be made peaceful by promoting peace, cooperation and unity among the staff.
This will motivate the staff for high productivity.
Staff are not motivated in a school environment characterized by rancour, rumour, mongering, discord and hostility.
Moreover, the school environment should be made attractive through well cut lawns, beautiful flowers and building structures to make the staff proud and happy to work in the school.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 How can staff in the school system be motivated through the following: a.
Salaries and other fringe benefits 97 b.
Responsibility and authority c. Provision of resources.
4.0 CONCLUSION When staff in the school are motivated, they are more committed in working towards the attainment of the aims and objectives of the school system.
It is therefore necessary for school administrators to motivate their staff for enhanced productivity.
In order to do this successfully, they must understand the concept, principles and theories of motivation in relation to the school system.
Moreover, they should be able to use various strategies of motivation effectively in the administration of the school system.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you were taught motivation in school administration.
You learnt that motivation is a force, drive or urge that makes one to do what he/she is aroused to do.
You were also taught the underlying principles and theories of motivation.
The theories taught include Maslow theory, Herzberg two-factor theory, Vroom(cid:8217)s expectancy theory, Carrot and Stick model and McGregor(cid:8217)s theories X and Y.
You also learnt various strategies for motivation in the school system.
The next unit will discuss school-community relations.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is motivation?
Explain briefly the underlying principles of motivation in relation to the school system.
2.
Examine the following theories of motivation and their implications for school administration: a. Maslow(cid:8217)s theory b. Herzberg two-factor theory c. Vroom(cid:8217)s expectancy theory d. Carrot and Stick model e. McGregor(cid:8217)s theories X and Y 3.
A number of strategies could be used by school administrators to motivate staff in order to enhance high level of productivity in the school system.
Discuss.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, I.A.
(2007): Issues in School Management.
Ikeja, Lagos: Bolabay Publications.
Herzberg, F. (1968): One More Time How Do You Motivate Employees.
Harvard Business Review.
Ibukun, W. O.
(1997): Educational Management: Theory and Practice.
Ado-Ekiti: Bamgboye and Co. Press (Nig.)
Ltd. McGregor, D. (1960): The Human Side of Enterprise.
New York: McGraw Hill.
98  Nwankwo, J. I.
(1982): Educational Administration: Theory and Practice.
India: VIKAS Publishing House PVT Ltd. Watson, G. (1966): Social Psychology: Issues and Insights.
Philadelphia: J.
B. Linpincott Co. 99 ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE (SAEs) SAE 1 Force, drive, urge and arousal.
SAE 2 One man(cid:8217)s meal is another man(cid:8217)s poison and to ensure high level of motivation, there must be some degree of freedom in the place of work.
SAE 3 1.
Maslow(cid:8217)s theory 2.
Herzberg two-factor theory 3.
Vroom(cid:8217)s expectancy theory 4.
Carrot and stick model 5.
McGregor(cid:8217)s theories X and Y SAE 4 a.
Regular payment of salaries and fringe benefits.
b.
Staff holding positions should be given both responsibilities and commensurate authority to perform their functions.
c. Resources such as textbooks, chalk, stationeries, instructional materials, laboratory facilities, equipment, furniture and fittings must be adequately provided in schools.
100MODULE 2 UNIT FIVE TOPIC: SCHOOL-COMMUNITY RELATIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of school 3.2 Concept of community 3.3 School-community relations 3.4 The roles of the school to the community 3.5 The roles of the community to the school 3.6 Factors influencing school-community relations 3.7 The school administrator(cid:8217)s roles in school-community relations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The last unit discussed motivation in school administration.
You learnt that it is necessary to motivate staff in order to enhance their commitment towards the achievement of the aims and objectives of the school system.
It must be emphasized that the efforts of staff in achieving such aims and objectives must be corroborated with the efforts of the community.
This is more so because school is an agent of community development.
Therefore, this unit will teach you school-community relations.
Specifically, the unit will examine the concepts of school and community, the school-community relations and the roles of the school to the community.
You will also learn the roles of the community to the school, the factors influencing school-community relations and the school administrator(cid:8217)s roles in school-community relations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) define the terms (cid:8216)school(cid:8217) and (cid:8216)community(cid:8217) (cid:216) describe school-community relations (cid:216) discuss the roles of the school to the community (cid:216) explain the roles of the community to the school (cid:216) analyse the factors which influence school-community relations (cid:216) discuss the school administrator(cid:8217)s roles in school-community relations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of School School is a social institution that transmits the culture of the society from one generation to another.
It is an agent of socialization.
According to Ottaway and Smith (1980), a school is a social unit formally established by members of the society for the 101purpose of developing the younger members of the society.
Olaniyi (2000) defined school as a formal agency of education established by members of the macro- community, society, to mould the habits, interests, attitudes and feelings of children and transmit the societal norms, culture, value and tradition from one generation to another.
A school is a formally established institution where the knowledge, attitudes and skills required for both personal and societal development are acquired.
School is a place where people learn about themselves, other people and the society at large.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 School is an institution which transmits the (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)..(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).., (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)., (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).. and (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).. from one generation to another.
3.2 Concept of Community According to Mussazi (1982), community is a group of people living in the same place with common values, history, bound together by multiple economic, social, religious and kingship-ties.
Bray (1987) defined community as a group of people who share social, economic and cultural interests.
People who share the same interest live together in a community and interact with one another.
Newmann and Oliver (1967) identified two types of communities namely the rural community and urban community.
The rural community is a close unit which comprises of members who have strong ties and live a subsistence life, while the urban community comprises of large number of people who have less in common with each other with weak ties living in an industrial environment and are influenced by many institutions in their socio-political and economic activities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Distinguish between rural and urban communities.
3.3 School-Community Relations A school-community relation is a mutual interaction between the school and community in which both assist each other to achieve their respective goals.
Bortner (1972) defined school-community relationship as a planned activity and media through which the school seeks to learn about the community and interpret, when necessary, the purpose, programmes, problems and needs of the school; and involve the community in planning and evaluating school policies and progress.
A school community relation is a two-way interaction of give-and-take between the school and the community.
The school receives its inputs from the community and sends its outputs back to the community.
The input from the community includes educational objectives and curriculum, students, teaching and non-teaching personnel, funds and facilities.
The inputs are processed into outputs in the school through teaching, assignments, exercises, research studies, guidance and counseling, etc.
The output which consists of cultured, disciplined and productive individuals are sent back to the community to serve it in various capacities.
Where the 102outputs fall short of expectations, the investment made by the community in the school will not be worthwhile.
From the foregoing, the school and the community are interdependent and interrelated.
For the relationship between them to be meaningful, worthwhile and productive, they must be willing to assist each other to achieve their respective goals in atmosphere of love, mutual trust and cooperation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 School community relations is a (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230) interaction of (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230) between the school and the community.
3.4 The Roles of the School to the Community The school performs various functions to serve the interest of the community.
Some of these functions include: 1.
Provision of education: The school educates the children of the community through the transmission of the knowledge, attitudes and skills required for the development of both individuals and the community as a whole.
The community is assisted by the school to train and socialize its children to become good citizens in future.
Subjects taught in the school in most cases address the needs and problems of the community in order to make the children useful in the development of the community.
2.
Preservation of culture: Children are taught the norms, values, beliefs, customs and traditions of the community.
Through this, the culture of the community is promoted, preserved and transmitted from one generation to another.
The school also assists the community to remove misconceptions about certain aspects of its culture through research and teaching.
3.
Provision of facilities for community use: The community makes use of the school facilities in some of its activities.
The facilities being provided by the school for the community use include school field for games, sports, community rallies, religious and other social activities; school buses for social outings, classrooms and school halls for adult education classes, meetings and social receptions, and school farms for agricultural demonstration.
Both the school and the community must strictly adhere to the established rules and regulations regarding the community use of physical facilities in order to enhance healthy relationship.
4.
Employment opportunities: The school provides employment opportunities for members of the community.
Community members are employed as teachers, administrative staff, gardeners, drivers, day and night guards, etc.
in the school.
Through such employment such employment, the economic activities of the community are boosted as those members are economically empowered to increase the volume of trading activities in the community.
5.
Community development projects: Members of the school participate in community development projects such as construction of bridges, bus stops and local markets, road construction, provision of wells and youth services.
In some instances, students are engaged as labour by the community in support of its own labour in the execution of some of these projects.
1036.
Manpower supply: The school assists in training manpower for the various sectors of the economy.
The accountants, engineers, lawyers, architects, teachers, medical doctors, etc.
who are required by the community for its growth and development are trained by the school.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Identify any five roles of the school to the community.
3.5 The Roles of the Community to the School The community also performs various functions to assist the school in achieving its objectives.
Some of these functions include: 1.
Provision of funds: The community generates funds for the development of the school in various ways.
The parents pay levy on their wards in the school under the platform of the Parents Teachers Association (PTA).
In addition to this, some parents may donate cash to the school to assist it in its development.
Old Students(cid:8217) Association, religious bodies and philanthropists also assist in the funding of the school through cash donation, launching, endowment funds and execution of capital projects.
2.
Awards of scholarships: Community members give scholarships to students in the school.
Such scholarships may be given to brilliant students or specifically to brilliant indigent students.
Religious groups, philanthropists, clubs etc in the community may institute various scholarship award schemes to assist the children of the community who are in primary and secondary schools as well as in tertiary institutions.
The scholarship awards usually assist the beneficiaries in payment of school levies, school fees and purchase of textbooks.
3.
Accommodation: The community usually provides accommodation for the staff and the students.
Many community schools do not have staff quarters where they could accommodate their staff, in such cases, staff rent houses at reduced cost in the community and some community members accommodate school staff free of charge.
Students may also rent rooms near the school in the community to ease transportation problem.
4.
Provision of land for school(cid:8217)s use: The community provides land for school site at reduced cost.
At times such land could be given freely for school location.
Schools which do not have land for gardening and farming are also assisted by community members who make their land available for these purposes on request by the schools.
5.
Provision of facilities: Physical facilities are provided by the community for use by the school.
Such physical facilities include halls, clinics, hospital, libraries, wells etc.
Members of the school can make use of the community(cid:8217)s hall for teaching, learning and social gatherings while the clinics and hospitals can provide health services to the members of the school.
A community library can assist the students in the pursuit of academic excellence while the community wells can be a source of water supply to the school.
6.
School plant maintenance: Community artisans such as bricklayers, carpenters, welders, electricians, mechanics etc.
are involved in the maintenance of school physical facilities such as buildings, furniture, electrical 104fittings, machines, vehicle, generating sets etc.
Repairs and renovations of school buildings are carried out by bricklayers, carpenters, plumbers, welders and painters.
The carpenters carry out the repairs of the school furniture while the repairs and servicing of school vehicles are carried out by the mechanics.
The electricians carry out the repairs and the rectification of electrical fittings and gadgets in the school.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 State any five ways in which the community can assist the school of achieve its objectives.
3.6 Factors Influencing School-Community Relations There are various factors which influence school-community relations.
It is necessary for the school administrator to be familiar with these factors so that he will be able to facilitate cordial relationship between the school and the community.
Some of these factors include: 1.
Communication: The community members stand a better chance of assisting the school when they are well informed about what is going on in the school from time to time.
This can only be made possible through an effective communication network with the community.
It is necessary for the school administrator to integrate the members of the community into the school system by informing them about the events, progress and problems of the school.
The school administrator must communicate effectively with the Parents Teachers Association, Board of Governors, Old Students(cid:8217) Association, educational agencies and other stakeholders in the community from time to time as the need arises.
Poor communication network with the community will alienate the community members from the school and will create unhealthy school-community relations.
2.
Behaviour of the school personnel: The way the school administrator and his staff behave to members of the community goes a long way in determining the disposition of the community to the school.
If the school administrator and his staff are approachable, respectful and fair in their dealings with members of the community, healthy school-community relations will be enhanced, but if they behave otherwise, the relationship between the community and the school will be strained.
This can make the community members to be hostile or confrontational in their dealings with the school.
It therefore becomes necessary for the school administrator and his staff to project good image of the school through good behaviour in their relationship with members of the community.
3.
Leadership style: School-community relation is influenced by the leadership style of the school administrator.
If the school administrator is democratic in his style of administration, he will maintain good human relations with members of the community and consult them in the decision making process in the school.
The democratic style will facilitate healthy community relations.
If the school administrator is autocratic, he does not respect the opinion of others and he take decisions solely without consulting others.
Autocratic style of 105leadership will not promote smooth relationship between the school and the community as the school administrator and members of the community will relate in an atmosphere of suspicion.
A school administrator who uses Laissez- faire style of leadership is care-free and shows no concern for the staff, students and community members(cid:8217) efforts in the attainment of school goals.
Such school administrator is not likely to enjoy the cooperation of the community because he will be seen as unserious person.
4.
School location: How the community relates with a school is influenced by the location of the school.
There are certain factors which influence the location of a school.
These include topography, accessibility, safety and convenience, attractiveness, opportunity for expansion, etc.
Where these factors are favourable to the school, in terms of its location, school-community relations will be enhanced.
For example, if a school is located close to the community, parents are likely to visit such school regularly than where such school is located faraway from the community.
Moreover a school located in a good terrain, attractive and safe environment will enjoy more patronage by the community members than a school whose location is not favoured by these factors.
5.
Local politics: The relationship between the school and the community may be influence by the local politics of the community in the appointment of school head.
In some cases, the community may prefer an indigene as the school head because of the belief that an indigene will protect the interests of the community better than non-indigene.
Where the community succeeds in having an indigene as a head in the school, its members are likely to cooperate more with such school head than where this demand is not met.
6.
School facilities: The community needs school facilities such as hall, classrooms and playground for some of its activities such as meetings, rallies, extra mural classes, ceremonies, etc.
Where these facilities are made available by the school administrator for the community use, there will be healthy relationship between the school and the community, but where these facilities are not accessible to the community, the school-community relations is not likely to be cordial.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Which of the following factors will not directly influence school-community relations?
a.
Motivation b. Communication c. Leadership style d. School location 3.7 The School Administrator(cid:8217)s Roles in School-Community Relations Healthy school-community relations is crucial to the attainment of the school goals.
It therefore becomes necessary for a school administrator to ensure that the school relates with the community in such a way that there will be love, mutual trust, 106cooperation and development of both parties.
To this end, it is suggested that the school administrator should take the following measures.
1.
Accessibility to members of the community: The school administrator must be accessible to members of the community such as parents, youths, elders, chiefs, religious leaders, members of old students association and other visitors from the community.
To this end, the school administrator must be nice, humble, approachable and empathic in his relationship with members of the community.
This will facilitate healthy school-community relations.
2.
Involvement of community members in school activities: The school does not exist in vacuum.
It is a micro-community existing within a macro-community.
It therefore becomes necessary for both the school and community to be partners in progress in their activities.
School administrator must involve members of the community in school social activities.
This can be done through the invitation of parents, old students, religious leaders and other dignitaries from the community to inter-house sports, Christmas carol, founders day, valedictory service and other important social activities of the school.
Such invitation will promote cordial relationship between the school and the community.
3.
Establishment of functional parents teachers association: Functional Parents Teachers Association (PTA) facilitates good relationship between the school and the community.
It is the responsibility of the school administrator to make the PTA functional.
The PTA should not be seen as a body only meant to generate funds for the school.
There are other important responsibilities of the PTA to the school.
The parents should be involved in various aspects of the school administration such as conflict resolution, maintenance of discipline, promotion of academic excellence, school plant maintenance, staff motivation, etc.
Olaniyi (2000) suggested that the school has to take the following steps in order to make the PTA functional: i.
Keep accurate record of all activities of the school especially financial records; ii.
Avoid misappropriation of school funds; iii.
Respect the basic responsibility of parents for their children; iv.
Keep parents and the community at large informed about the progress and problems of the school on time and in a simple and clear languages; v. Keep parents informed adequately about the progress and problems of their children; vi.
Avoid professional misconduct-which may destroy school-community relations; vii.
Maintain regular and effective PTA meetings and conferences; viii.
Provide constant information for the society about various activities of the school that can be beneficial to the parents and community members generally; ix.
Allow parents to visit school and see their children at work; x.
Create open-house programme where all parents can visit the school together and interact with their children in the classroom and outdoor activities.
107 4.
Avoiding partisan politics: The school administrator must ensure that he and his staff are not involved in the local politics of the community in order not to create bad blood between the school and the community.
While they should be friendly to the community politicians, they should avoid partisan politics.
Under no circumstances should the school administrator or any of his staff be seen by the community members as an agent of a political party planted in the school to achieve certain political goals.
5.
Staff motivation: The motivation of school staff for high productivity is a means of facilitating healthy school-community relations.
When staff are motivated, they are committed to their jobs and will live up to the expectation of the community.
If the school staff are not motivated on the job, they are likely to have low morale and become disenchanted with their jobs.
In such a situation, indiscipline, drug abuse, examination malpractices, poor academic performance, drop out, etc.
are likely to be rampant among the students.
These will make the members of the community to lose interest in the school.
Therefore, to enhance cordial relationship between the school and the community through improved productivity, the school administrator should motivate his staff through prompt payment of salaries, regular promotion of staff, safety environment, staff relations, staff professional development, provision of resources and creation of conducive working environment.
6.
Making the school facilities available for the community use: The school administrator must make the school facilities available for the community use.
The community engages in various activities such as meetings, rallies, extra mural classes, ceremonies, games and sports, etc.
in which it may need school facilities such as school hall, classrooms, playground, etc.
If the school administrator is favourably disposed to releasing these facilities to the community for use, a healthy relationship is promoted between the school and the community.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 Mention any five roles of school administrator in school-community relations.
4.0 CONCLUSION The school and the community are like siamesse twin who must relate to one another for sustainable growth and development.
As the school assists the community to achieve its objectives, the community also assists the school to achieve its objectives.
The two-way interaction must be cordial, supportive and productive in order to enhance the overall development of both institutions.
To this end, school administrator must ensure healthy school-community relations characterized by love, mutual trust, cooperation and progress.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have studied the concepts of school and community, the school-community relations and the roles of the school to the community.
You were also taught the roles of the community to the school and the factors influencing 108school-community relations.
You also learnt the roles which school administrator played in school-community relations.
In the next module, you will learn some contemporary issues in Nigerian educational system.
The first unit of the module will teach you examination malpractice in Nigerian school system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
Define school-community relations b.
Discuss the roles of the school to the community 2.
In what ways can the community assist the school to achieve its aims and objectives?
3.
Analyse the factors which influence school-community relations.
4.
Explain the school administrator(cid:8217)s roles in school-community relations.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adepoju, T.L.
(2004): Educational Management: A Basic Text.
Lagos: Prospects Publications.
Ajayi, I.A.
(2007): Issues in School Management.
Ikeja, Lagos: Balobay Publications.
Bortner, D. M. (1972): Public Relations for Schools.
Cambridge: Schenkman Publishers Co. Bray, Mark (1987): New Resources for Education Community Management and Financing of Schools in Less Developed Countries.
London: Commonwealth Secretariat.
Mussazi, J. C.S.
(1982): The Theory and Practice of Educational Administration.
London: The Macmillan Press Ltd. Newmann, F.N.
and Oliver, D.W. (1967): Education and Community(cid:8221).
Harvard Education Review; 37(1).
Winter.
Olaniyi, W.O.
(2000): School Community Relations in the 21st Century in Fadipe J.O.
and Oluchukwu, E.E.
(ed.).
Educational Planning and Administration in Nigeria in the 21st Century.
Ibadan: National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration.
Ottaway, A. K. C. and Smith, W. O. L. (1980): Educational and Society.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Limited.
109ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 Societal norms, culture, value and tradition SAE 2 Rural community is a close unit which comprises of members who have strong ties and live a subsistence life while the urban community comprised of large number of people who have less in common with each other with weak ties living in an industrial environment and are influenced by many institutions in their socio-political and economic activities.
SAE 3 Two-way, give and take SAE 4 1.
Provision of education 2.
Preservation of culture 3.
Provision of facilities for community use 4.
Employment opportunities 5.
Community development projects SAE 5 1.
Provision of funds 2.
Awards of scholarships 3.
Accommodation 4.
Provision of land for school(cid:8217)s use 5.
Provision of facilities SAE 6 a (cid:8211) motivation SAE 7 1.
Accessibility to members of the community 2.
Involvement of community members in school activities 3.
Establishment of functional parents teachers association 4.
Avoiding partisan politics 5.
Staff motivation 110MODULE 3 UNIT ONE TOPIC: EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE IN NIGERIAN EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is examination malpractice?
3.2 The Trend of examination malpractice in Nigeria 3.3 Forms of examination malpractice 3.4 Agents of examination malpractice 3.5 Causes of examination malpractice 3.6 Effects of examination malpractice 3.7 Solutions to examination malpractice 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt school-community relations.
The unit emphasized the importance of school-community relations in the attainment of the goals and objectives of both the school and the community.
This unit will teach you examination malpractice in Nigerian educational system.
Specifically, you will learn what examination malpractice is, the trend of examination malpractice in Nigeria and forms of examination malpractice.
You will also learn the causes and effects of examination malpractice as well as the solutions to examination malpractice.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After you must have studied this unit, you should be ale to: (cid:216) Define examination malpractice.
(cid:216) Narrate the trend of examination malpractice in Nigerian educational system.
(cid:216) Describe the various forms of examination malpractice.
(cid:216) Identify the agents of examination malpractice.
(cid:216) Examine the various causes of examination malpractice.
(cid:216) Discuss the various effects of examination malpractice.
(cid:216) Suggest solutions to examination malpractice.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Examination Malpractice?
Examination malpractice has been defined in various ways by different authors.
According to Olumero (1992), examination malpractice is any examination not 111conducted in accordance with specified norms set up by the examining institutions.
Oluyeba and Daramola (1992) also defined examination malpractice as any irregular behaviour exhibited by candidates or anybody charged with the conduct of examination in or outside the examination hall before, during or after such an examination.
Mgbekem (2004) defined examination malpractice as an organized cheating practice adopted by candidates of an examination, who have no confidence in themselves to pass the examination, but have confidence in fraud.
From the various definitions given, examination malpractice simply means all forms of misconduct associated with the conduct of an examination which could take place before, during and after such examination.
Examination malpractice is a cankerworm that has eaten deep into the fabrics of Nigerian educational system.
It is more disturbing to note that those who suppose to wage war against this monster are aiding and abetting it.
It is no longer news that school proprietors, administrators, parents, teachers, law enforcement agents and personnel of examination bodies are involved in examination malpractice.
It is almost a routine for students to cheat in both internal and external examinations.
Examination malpractice permeates all the levels of education in Nigeria, from nursery school to tertiary institutions.
It is also pathetic to note that the credibility of the certificates being awarded by various educational institutions is threatened by examination malpractice.
The international community no longer have confidence in our certificates.
Employers of labour in the country conduct series of aptitude tests to ascertain the ability of graduates to defend their certificates and their suitability for jobs.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Examination malpractice refers to all forms of misconduct which could take place (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).., (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).. and (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230) the examination.
3.2 THE TREND OF EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE IN NIGERIA Examination malpractice was first recorded in Nigeria in 1914 when there was a leakage of Cambridge school certificate examination.
Incidences of leakage were also recorded in 1963, 1967, 1977 and 1981 (Mgbekem, 2004).
In 1984, the Federal Government promulgated decree no.
20, which stipulated twenty-one years imprisonment for offenders, as a punishment to serve as deterrent to other potential offenders.
Despite the punitive measure put in place by the government, the rate of examination malpractice continued to increase.
In 1994, the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) cancelled the results of 21,466 candidates out of 383,865 who sat for the Universities Matriculation Examination (UME) on account of examination malpractice (Guardian, February 17, 1994).
By 1997, the figure of cancelled results by JAMB as a result of examination malpractice had increased (Okotoni, 2008).
In 1998, there was a decline in the figure as those caught in the ugly act drastically reduced to less than 10,000.
In 1999, the Federal Government came up with the Examination Malpractice Act no 33 which 112stipulated cancellation of results, heavy fine as much as N100,000, to a jail term up to 21 years as penalties for examination malpractice.
As a result of what appeared to be relaxation on the part of the government on the prosecution of those caught in examination malpractice, there was increase in the number of those who engaged in it.
In 2002, JAMB announced the cancellation of the results of 46,448 candidates for examination malpractice out of 975,060 candidates that sat for the UME.
Similarly, Ojerinde (2004) indicated that there was increase in the percentage of cancelled results by the National Examination Council (NECO) on account of examination malpractice between 2000 and 2003.
While it was 4.61 percent in 2000, it increased to 5.61 percent, 13.28 percent and 19.66 percent in 2001, 2002 and 2003 respectively.
In 2005, WAEC cancelled about 5 papers, which had been written due to alleged mass examination malpractices.
In 2007 November/December result released by WAEC, 35,484 candidates out of 378,018 had their results withheld based on various reports of alleged involvement in examination malpractices.
In NECO results released on September 9, 2009, 32,423 cases of malpractices were recorded with Enugu topping the list with over 3,500 cases followed by Akwa Ibom, Rivers, Benue and Osun States (Nigerian Tribune of 10th September, 2009).
Today, it is disheartening to note that examination malpractice is assuming a dangerous dimension in Nigerian educational system despite the various efforts aim at curing it.
Students and their collaborators have developed sophisticated methods of cheating before, during and after examinations.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is the recurring decimal in the trend of examination malpractice in Nigeria?
3.3 FORMS OF EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE Examination malpractice takes various forms.
Ajayi and Ayodele (2002), Mgbekem (2004) Okotoni (2008) identified various forms of examination malpractice.
These include bringing in of foreign or unauthorized materials into the examination hall; collusion; impersonation; examination leakage; certificate racketeering or forgery, aiding and abetting; smuggling of answer scripts, inscription; assistance from examination stakeholders; and electronically assisted malpractices.
Others include irregular activities inside and outside the examination halls, stampede method, the ultimate bus-stop method and re-writing examination privately after the official examination.
Some of these forms are explained as follows: 1.
Bringing in of foreign or unauthorized materials: Some students are fond of bringing into examination halls foreign and unauthorized materials in order to cheat.
Such materials include notes, jotters, textbooks, microchips and other prepared materials containing answers to examination questions.
In several cases, some students bring sophisticated and scientific calculators, four figure tables, and organizers into examination halls to gain undue advantages.
1132.
Collusion: Students may collude with themselves and the invigilators to cheat during examination.
Collusion may take different forms.
Students may give assistance to one another during examination by dictating answers, exchanging answer scripts or receiving prepared answers from colleagues outside the examination hall.
Invigilators may also be bribed to allow students to cheat in the examination hall without being molested or apprehended.
3.
Examination leakage: Examination questions may leak through the examiners, custodians of examination questions, printers of examination questions and those who have access to the examiners.
There are reported cases of WAEC and NECO officials(cid:8217) involvement in leakages of examination questions.
In some cases, lecturers in tertiary institutions leak questions to students in exchange for financial material and sexual gratifications.
The junior officers in educational institutions such as messengers, typists, cleaners, office assistants, gatemen are also involved in examination leakages.
Bank officials who are the custodians of some public examination questions have also been alleged of examination leakages.
4.
Smuggling of answer scripts: Students may smuggle prepared answers scripts into the examination hall if they have the fore knowledge of examination questions or if they speculate the likely examination questions.
In another dimension, some students smuggle out question papers from the examination hall as soon as the examination commences for collaborators who assist them to answer the questions and later smuggle in the prepared answers before the end of the examination.
5.
Alteration of marks by examiners: Some examiners alter students(cid:8217) marks or grades to give them undue advantages.
Such examiners may do this for financial, material and sexual gratifications.
There are reported cases of some lecturers in tertiary institutions who had their appointment terminated as a result of alteration of students(cid:8217) marks or grades.
In some cases, lecturers altered cumulative grades or class of degrees of students.
6.
Electronically assisted malpractice: Some students take the undue advantage of modern technology to cheat during examinations.
Students are fond of using electronic gadgets such as micro computers, small compact disc and GSM mobile phones to cheat during examinations.
There are instances when answers to objective questions are texted by collaborators to GSM mobile phones of students in the examination halls.
This is rampant in public examinations conducted by WAEC, NECO and JAMB.
7.
Impersonation: This refers to a situation in which one person stands in for another to write examination for him/her fraudulently.
The writer of the examination only pretends to be the real candidate for the examination.
Impersonation may take different forms.
The impersonator may pose a bona- fide candidate to write an examination.
The impersonator could also register for similar subjects with the candidate and ensure that they write the examination in the same hall and there after exchange answer scripts before submitted them.
Candidates may also enter for the same examination in several parts of the locality for the purpose of impersonation.
In recent time impersonation is not 114only rampant in public examinations conducted by WAEC, NECO and JAMB, it is gaining more ground in tertiary institutions.
8.
Assistance from examination stakeholders: As earlier pointed out in this unit, it is no longer news that examination stakeholders are involved in examination malpractice.
These include parents, teachers, supervisors, touts, printers and staff of examination bodies, security agents, school proprietors, and school administrators, among others.
Apart from the fact that some parents hire mercenaries to write examinations for their children, some of them buy examination question papers for their children.
Some highly desperate parents buy certificates for their children.
In some cases supervisors collude with school principals or proprietors by allowing teachers to come to the examination halls to assist the students.
Teachers are also involved in examination leakages, alteration of marks and falsification of grades.
Printers touts, and staff of examination bodies are also involved in setting examination questions to desperate proprietors, school administrators, parents and students.
9.
Stampede method: This occurs when a candidate suddenly raises false alarm in the examination hall in order to distract attention of the invigilators and create opportunities for cheating.
This is rampant in tertiary institutions.
10.
The ultimate bus-top method: This involves attempts by the students to influence examiners through monetary or material gifts, unusual favours and sexual gratification in order to gain undue advantages in examinations.
Some examiners allow themselves to be influenced by the students in order to satisfy their appetite for corrupt practices.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Mention any five forms of examination malpractice.
3.4 AGENTS OF EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE Various agents are usually involved in examination malpractice.
These agents participate one way or the other in various forms of examination malpractice which you have studied in the preceding section.
The agents of examination malpractice are listed as follows: 1 Parents 2 Teachers/Examiners 3 Officials of examination bodies 4 Custodians of examination papers 5 Examination officials like supervisors and invigilators 6 School principals 7 School proprietors 8 Students 9 Touts 10 Security agents 115SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 State two different ways each through which parents and teachers could be agents of examination malpractice.
3.5 CAUSES OF EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE There are numerous causes of examination malpractice.
In this section, some of the causes are examined as follows: 1 Too much emphasis on certificates: Much emphasis is placed on certificates as a condition for employment, election and appointment into political offices in Nigeria at the expense of skills and relevant experiences.
This has made the acquisition of certificates a do or die affair.
To this end, people are too desperate to obtain certificates at all costs and by any means.
Hence, examination malpractice remains the viable option as shortcut to obtain certificates in order to meet the societal demand regarding employment, appointment and election into positions.
2 Poverty and lust for money: As a result of poverty and lust for money, people who are custodians of examination questions, examiners, invigilators and other collaborators are lured into obtaining money from candidates as bribes to engage in examination malpractice.
Many of the agents of examination malpractice engage in the ugly act as a result of hardship arising from poverty and the desire to get money at all cost.
Explaining the connection between poverty and bribery, Ajibola (2006) maintained that the poverty level in the country had injected almost all civil servants with virus called bribery.
Every sector of the nation is now polluted with bribery and corruption.
3 Laziness of students: Many students are lazy, hence, they do not have good reading culture.
They are only conscious of the need to read when examination is approaching.
The efforts they put into reading are not adequate to make them pass their subjects during the examination.
To this end, they engage in examination malpractice in order to pass at all cost.
4 Influence of peer groups: some students engage in examination malpractice because of bad peer influence.
Inadequate parental care has made some students to join bad companies that influence them to engage in fraudulent practices such as drug abuse, cultism and examination malpractice among others.
When students find it more comfortable to make friends with their colleagues who are found of engaging in examination malpractice, they are often lured into such ugly act.
5 General decadence and high moral laxity: Nigerian society is morally bankrupt.
Societal values such as honesty, integrity and dignity are no longer cherished by many people.
If the society from which children draw their moral standards is corrupt what do we expect from such children?
Malpractice in various forms has become a way of life in Nigeria.
It is no longer news that we have election malpractice, employment malpractice, religious malpractice, matrimonial malpractice among others in Nigeria.
Students who engage in examination malpractice see it as part of those things required for success in the society.
1166 Inadequate and poor facilities in schools: Education appears to be grossly under funded in Nigeria, the country is still far away from the UNESCO recommendation of minimum of 26 percent budgetary allocation to education.
Many schools lack adequate and good facilities.
It is common to find schools with inadequate classrooms.
There are dilapidated buildings in many schools.
Well equipped libraries and laboratories are scare in schools.
In some schools, students are taught under tree shades, overcrowded classrooms is prominent in many schools and the required instructional materials for effective teaching are rarely found in schools.
All these do not make the school environment conducive for learning.
The harsh learning environment makes many students indulge in examination malpractice as a means of patching up their inadequacies so that they can pass in their examinations.
7 Fear of failure: Many students are involved in examination malpractice because of fear of failure particularly when expectations from them are very high.
Students who are academically deficient and at the same want to impress their parents, guardians or sponsors that they are doing well in their academic endeavour are likely to nurse the fear of failure in examinations.
Such situation can make them to be prone to cheating during examinations.
8 Laxity in the prosecution of offenders: Despite the existence of Examination Malpractice Act no.
33 of 1999 which stipulated punitive measures against the offenders, examination malpractice continues to rear its ugly head unabated.
Many culprits still go scot-free without being prosecuted.
This is so because the legal process involved in the prosecution of offenders is tenuous.
To this end, judgment is delayed and justice is denied.
The fact that most offenders go scot- free does not make the examination malpractice act effective in curing the scourge.
9 Parental factor: Many parents are desperate in ensuring that their children and wards pass their examinations at all cost.
Such parents in several cases buy examination papers at exorbitant prices for their children and wards.
Some parents pay through their noses to enroll their children and wards in special centres where examination malpractice is a pre-requisite for good academic performance.
There are parents who collaborate with some school principals and proprietors to aid cheating in public examinations so that their children and ward can pass.
In some cases, parents go to the extent of buying scores or certificates for their children and wards.
10 High examination fees: In recent time, there has been increase in fees for external examinations.
This has made many students to be desperate in passing examinations at all cost.
Students(cid:8217) inability to afford future increment in examination fees lured them lured them into fraudulent practices in order to pass at once.
11 Teacher Factor: Some teachers are lazy, hence, they do not teach their students what they require to pass both internal and external examinations thus exposing the students to fraudulent practices.
Some teachers are not competent to teach the subjects they are teaching either because of non-specialisation in such subjects or inadequate training.
This usually results in poor preparation of 117the students for examinations.
In such situation, students are prone to examinations malpractice as a means of catching up.
In some cases, teachers collude with their students to cheat in examinations in exchange for financial, material and sexual gratifications.
Such collusion may also be a means to cover up the deficiencies of the teachers in instructional delivery in terms of syllabus coverage for external examinations.
There are also reported cases of teachers who alter students(cid:8217) scores and grades for selfish interests.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 Identify three causes of examination malpractice that could be attributed to the students.
3.6 EFFECTS OF EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE Examination malpractice has various negative effects on the society, some of which are examined as follows: 1 Destruction of academic image: Examination malpractice lowers the quality of education as those involved in the fraudulent practice will not be able to defend their certificates.
It puts into question the academic image, reputation and credibility of a nation.
A nation whose educational system is characterized by fraud and dishonesty cannot achieve any meaningful development.
2 Economic waste: When papers are cancelled in public examinations as a result of fraudulent practices, a lot of resources in terms of human, material, time and money will be wasted to reset such papers and conduct the examinations.
The wasted resources would have been channeled to productive ventures that would have impacted positively on the economy of the nation.
3 Psychological trauma on innocent students: When results are cancelled or withheld due to examination malpractice in public examinations, innocent students are usually affected psychologically.
There are instances where the results of innocent students are cancelled consecutively in two or more sittings because of mass cheating in their examination centres.
Such students are usually psychologically depressed and destabilized as their future is put into jeopardy.
4 Inefficiency: Certificates obtained through fraudulent means promote total inefficiency in the economy.
In several cases, the affected graduates are not employable and suitable for jobs in their acclaimed areas of specialization.
Where such candidates are eventually employed, they are often found wanting on their jobs with the attendant effect of low productivity in the economy.
5 Corruption: Examination malpractice encourages corruption.
Apart from the fact that supervisors and invigilators are bribed, school authorities facilitate cheating and over look offences in some cases.
Moreover, some teachers sell question papers and alter students(cid:8217) marks, the officials of examination bodies and custodians of examination questions are involved in leakages.
These corrupt practices are inimical to the development of the educational system and the society.
118In another dimension, graduates who obtain certificates through fraudulent means eventually become crusaders of bribery and corruption in the society.
They see fraud as a way of life and believe so much in short cuts to success.
Wherever they find themselves, they engage in one form of malpractice or the other in their activities.
6 Moral decadence: Examination malpractice destroys societal values such as honesty, integrity and dignity which education is meant to inculcate.
This situation is becoming worse as many members of the society now see examination malpractice as normal behaviour required to ensure good academic performance.
This is promoting moral laxity in the society.
7 Disgrace to a country: A country where examination malpractice is predominant, is not respected in the comity of nations.
The international community usually cast aspersion on the certificates being awarded in such country.
In some cases such certificates are not accepted for admission into tertiary institutions and employment in foreign countries.
8 Poor study habits: Many students no longer see the need to study hard in order to pass their examinations because of the prevalence of examination malpractice in the educational system.
It is easier for them to cheat during examinations than burning the midnight oil to study for such examinations.
Many students cheat without being caught and even when some are apprehended, the go scot-free.
These encourage them to indulge in fraudulent practices during their examinations SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 How can examination malpractice aid total inefficiency in the economy?
3.7 SOLUTIONS TO EXAMINATION MALPRACTICE The grave consequences of examination malpractice make it necessary for stakeholders to collaborate efforts in finding solutions to the problem.
Taking cognizance of the various causes of examination malpractice in the preceding section, the following are the suggested solutions to examination malpractice.
1 Less emphasis on certificates: There should be less emphasis on certificates as a condition for employment, election and appointment into political offices.
More emphasis should be on acquisition of practical skills and integrity of the prospective job seekers and those seeking mandate and appointment into political offices.
2 Poverty alleviation: Government should be more aggressive in pursuing policies and programmes that will drastically alleviate poverty among the people.
This will reduce corruption and the lust for money that facilitates examination malpractice.
3 Students should be hard working: Students should study hard y developing good study habits which will engender adequate preparation for examinations.
119They should devote more time to their studies and engage in group discussion for effective learning and cross-fertilisation of ideas.
4 Students should avoid bad influence: Students should not keep bad companies so that they are not hired into examination malpractice.
They should associate with people of integrity who will positively influence their value systems and behaviours.
5 Promotion of moral values: There is need to promote the moral values of the society such as honesty, integrity and dignity of labour among the youths.
This will help them abhor evils, indecency and immoral behaviours.
The inclusion of moral education and religious teachings in school curricula will be very useful in this regard.
It is high time the society cherished its moral values and inculcated them in the youths.
6 Provision of adequate facilities in schools: To ensure effective teaching- learning process in schools, adequate facilities should be provided such facilities include classrooms, furniture and fittings, recreational facilities, instructional materials, library and laboratory facilities, workshop equipment, utilities among others.
Adequate facilities should be provided through increased funding of education by the governments, parents, private individuals, voluntary and corporate organizations, and philanthropists.
7 Students should not nurse fear of failure: Students should work hard to live up to expectations rather than nursing fear of failure.
Through hardwork, students will be adequately prepared for their examinations and this will minimize the rate at which they cheat during examinations.
8 Effective prosecution of offenders: All efforts must be made to ensure that culprits of examination malpractice do not go scot-free by prosecuting them.
Prosecution of the culprits must be carried into logical conclusion.
There is need to revisit the Examination Malpractice Act no.
33 of 1999 by making it less tenuous, more comprehensive and realistic in terms of the legal process required for prosecution.
This will aid effective prosecution of offenders.
9 Change in the attitudinal orientation of parents: Parents should cherish societal values such as honesty, hard work, integrity and dignity rather than being involved in corrupt and fraudulent practices as means of achieving academic success of their children and wards.
It is high time parents realized that the greatest harm they can do to their children and wards is to aid them obtain certificates through fraudulent means.
10 Avoid astronomical increase in examination fees: Examination bodies should not increase their examination fees astronomically for the purpose of ensuring affordability by the candidates.
This will reduce the rate at which candidates are desperate to pass such examinations at all cost.
If candidates know that any future increment in examination fees will be affordable, this will reduce the temptation of using fraudulent means to pass at once.
11 The teacher solutions: Teachers should be hard working by teaching their students what they require to pass their examinations.
They should be well motivated and supervised by their employers to ensure effective instructional delivery.
Moreover, they should be adequately trained and allowed to teach subjects in their areas of specialization.
Teachers should also desist from 120colluding or collaborating with students, parents, supervisors and school authorities to aid examination malpractice.
As role models, they should show leadership by examples.
They should know that examination malpractice destroy a nation and as nation builders, they should uphold the ethnics of the teaching profession.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 Suggest any five solutions to examination malpractice taking into cognizance its causes, which were discussed in this unit.
4.0 CONCLUSION Nigerian educational system cannot thrive under the prevalence of examination malpractice.
The multi-dimensional nature of the causes, forms, perpetrators and effects of the scourge calls for holistic approach in its solutions.
To this end, parents, students, teachers, school authorities, examination bodies, governments and the society must collaborate efforts in fighting the menace to a standstill.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught you the meaning of examination malpractice, the trend of examination malpractice as well as the agents of examination malpractice.
You also learnt the forms, causes and effects of examination malpractice.
The unit also taught you various solutions to examination malpractice.
In the next unit, you will learn cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
What is examination malpractice?
b.
Describe various forms of examination malpractice.
2a.
Identify any five agents of examination malpractice b.
Critically examine any five reasons for examination malpractice in Nigeria.
3.
Discuss the various effects of examination malpractice and state five solutions to the problem.
1217.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Ajayi, I.A.
and Ayodele, J.B. (2002): History and development of education.
Ado Ekiti: PETOA, Educational Publishers.
Mgbekem, S.J.A.
(2004): Management of University Education in Nigeria.
Calabar: Baye Communications.
Nigerian Tribune (2009):September 10, 2009 Ojerinde, D. (2004): (cid:8220)Examination Malpractice in our educational system: The NECO experience(cid:8221).
Faculty of Education Lecturer Series, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife.
Okotoni, C.A.
(2008): The Challenges of Examination Malpractices in Nigeria.
IJOTRE II (2): 106-114.
Ololobou, C.O.
(2007): Citizenship Education: A panacea for eliminating corruption in tertiary educational institutions.
Multidisciplinary Journal of Research Development.
8(4):99-105.
Olumero, S.O.
(1992) Crisis of examination misconduct in Nigeria(cid:8217)s secondary and tertiary institutions.
Typologists, techniques and students collaborators.
A paper presented at the National Workshop on examination malpractice, University of Benin, November.
Oluyeba, N.F.
and Daramola, A.
(1992): Incidences and detections of examination malpractices in Nigeria public examinations.
A paper presented at the National Workshop on examination, malpractice, University of Benin, November.
122ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 Before, during, after SAE 2 Cancellation of results SAE 3 1.
Bringing in of foreign or unauthorized materials 2.
Collusion 3.
Examination leakage 4.
Smuggling of answer scripts 5.
Electronically assisted malpractice (any other points in 3.3) SAE 4 Parents may hire mercenaries to write examination for their children, some may buy examination question papers for them.
Teachers may alter the marks of students; they may also come to the examination halls to give undue assistant to the students.
SAE 5 1.
Laziness of students 2.
Fear of failure 3.
Peer influence SAE 6 The affected graduates are not employable and suitable for jobs in their acclaimed areas of specialization and if they are employed, they are of ten found wanting on their jobs with the attendant effect of low productivity in the economy.
SAE 7 1.
Less emphasis on certificates 2.
Poverty alleviation 3.
Students should avoid bad influence 4.
Promotion of moral values 123MODULE 3 UNIT TWO TOPIC: CULTISM IN NIGERIAN TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The concept of cultism 3.2 Origin of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institution 3.3 Characteristics associated with secret cults 3.4 Membership of cultism in tertiary institutions 3.5 Initiation of members into secret cults in tertiary institutions 3.6 Activities of cult members in Nigerian tertiary institutions 3.7 Causes of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions 3.7.1 Home factors 3.7.2 Student factors 3.7.3 Institutional factors 3.7.4 Societal factors 3.8 Effects of cultism 3.9 Solutions to cultism 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the previous unit, you were taught examination malpractices in Nigeria educational system as one of the contemporary issues in educational administration.
This unit will teach you another contemporary issue; cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
Specifically, you will learn the concept of cultism, origin of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions, characteristics of secret cult members and membership of cultism in tertiary institutions.
The unit will also teach you the initiation and activities of cult members, the causes and effects of cultism as well as the solutions to cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES When you have diligently studied this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) define secret cult (cid:216) describe the origin of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions (cid:216) state the characteristics of cult members (cid:216) mention the categories of student membership of secret cults in tertiary institutions (cid:216) identify the activities of cult members in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
(cid:216) explain the causes of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions (cid:216) state the effects of cultism (cid:216) discuss the solutions to cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions 124 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Cultism According to Webster Dictionary of Language, secret cult is a system of religious worship and administration of or devotion to a person or thing, especially, as a form of intellectual snobbery.
Ogunbameru (1997) defined secret cult as any form of organization whose activities are not only exclusively kept away from the knowledge of others but such activities are carried out at odd hours of the day and they often clash with the accepted norms and values of everyday life.
Ajayi and Ayodele (2002) also defined secret cult as a mysterious organization whose activities are kept secret out of public knowledge or consumption.
According to section 329 (1) of the 1989 constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, secret cult is any association, group or body of persons whether registered or not: (a) that uses secret signs, oaths, rites or symbols which is formed to promote a cause, the purpose or part of the group which is to foster the interest of its members and to aid one another under any circumstances without due regard to merit, fair play or justice to the detriment of the legitimate interest of those who are not members; (b) the membership of which is incompatible with the functions of dignity of any public office under this constitution and whose members are sworn to observe oaths of secrecy; and (c) the activities of which are not known to the public at large, the names of whose members are kept secret and whose meetings and other activities are held in secret.
Secret cult is a fraternal association of people whose aim is to achieve a set objective for the interest of members.
Such association is diabolical, nefarious and clandestine in design and in outlook.
In Nigerian tertiary institutions, secret cult is characterized by unwholesome behaviours such as extortion, arson, drug abuse, and clashes with innocent students, killing and maiming of fellow students, examination malpractice, riots, rape and nocturnal meeting.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is secret in secret cult?
3.2 Origin of Cultism In Nigerian Tertiary Institutions The origin of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions could be traced to 1952 when Mr. Wole Soyinka (now professor) found the pyrates confraternity at the University College Ibadan.
The objectives of the organization were: 1 To fight against un-acceptable conventions of dress, etiquette and behaviour; 2 To fight for humanistic ideals which review the soul life on campus and establish discipline, orderliness etc in youngsters; and 3 To fight against corruption and tribalism.
Secret cults in 1950(cid:8217)s were peaceful and gentlemen and they organized dinner parties for themselves.
In 1980s and 1990s, secret cults in Nigerian tertiary institutions were no longer decent and peaceful.
They became wild, dangerous destructive and 125hostile.
Membership of secret cult has spread widely across Universities, Polytechnics, Colleges of Education and secondary schools.
The presence of secret cult in some primary schools has been reported.
Today more than eighty secret societies are found in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
Only very few of these societies have their membership comprising of womenfolk.
According to Adetunberu (2006) the following is a list of many of the cults known to exist in educational institutions in Nigeria: 1.
The Pyrate Confraternity (The National Association of sea Dogs).
2.
The Buccaneers (Sea Lords) 3.
The Black Axe 4.
The Black Cats 5.
The Maphites 6.
The Vickings 7.
The Mgba Mgba Brothers 8.
The Temple of Eden 9.
Trojan Horse fraternity 10.
Eiye confraternity 11.
The Jurists 12.
Gentle men(cid:8217)s club 13.
The fame 14.
The Amazon (for women only) 15.
KKK (ku klux klan) 16.
Royal Queens 17.
The Mafia 18.
The Neo-Black Movement 19.
The Executioners 20.
The Black Berret 21.
Dreaded Friends of Friends 22.
The National Association of Adventurers 23.
The Black Scorpion 24.
The Eagle club 25.
The Termites 26.
The Fraternity of Friends 27.
The Red Sea Horse 28.
National Association of Air Lords 29.
The Night Cadet 30.
Black Brassier (for women only) 31.
The Daughter of Jezebel (for women only) 32.
Sonmen 33.
The Ninjas 34.
Khamikhaze (or SS i.e.
Suicide Squad) 35.
Swatsitikas 36.
Blood Line 37.
Stones and Rebels 38.
God-father 39.
The Air Lords 12640.
Red Devil 41.
The Blood suckers 42.
The Musketeers 43.
Burkina Faso Revolution 44.
Osiri 45.
The Revolution 46.
The Scorpion 47.
Seven colours 48.
Mafioso 49.
The Green Berret 50.
Black Nights 51.
Black Cobra 52.
The Dragons 53.
Mgbangba 54.
Supreme Eiye confraternity 55.
Panama Pyrates 56.
Barracudas (cid:8220)Triple K(cid:8221) 57.
The Ibaka 58.
The Dove 59.
The Woodpecker 60.
Walrus 61.
Black Heart 62.
The Pink Ladies 63.
Ozo 64.
Himalayas 65.
The Blood Spot 66.
Frigates 67.
The Eagles 68.
Ostrich 69.
The Owl 70.
The Black Nationalist 71.
Canary 72.
Black Movement 73.
Magba Magba Brothers 18 74.
Eden Confraternity 75.
The Oslo Confraternity 76.
The Swastika 77.
The Stores and Rebels 78.
The Seven Stars 79.
The Vy Queens 80.
The Vampires 81.
The Degan 82.
The Devil 127SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 When was cultism introduced in Nigerian tertiary institutions?
a.
1958 b.
1948 c. 1952 d. 1960 3.3 Characteristics Associated with Secret Cults 1.
They usually operate at night.
2.
They always engage in violent and anti-social activities.
3.
They terrorise and instill fear in non-members.
4.
They protect offending members against sanctions.
5.
They are mostly nocturnal in activities.
6.
They are usually armed with dangerous instruments 7.
They speak in coded language understandable by their members only.
8.
They move in groups.
9.
They are very repulsive in mode of dressing.
10.
They greet themselves with handshake signs, body movements and whistling which members only understand.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What is criminal in the characteristics of cult members?
3.4 Membership of Cultism in Tertiary Institutions According to Ajayi and Ayodele (2002) membership of secret cults in tertiary institutions is usually drawn from the following categories of students: a.
Those who take cue from their parents(cid:8217) membership of secret cults.
b.
Those who have been rusticated but refused to leave campus.
c. Those who have not been admitted but attend lectures illegally.
d. Those who have been asked to withdraw on account of poor academic performance and are ashamed to go home.
e. Those who are from broken homes.
f. Those who are from affluent homes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Those who have been rusticated but refused to leave campus could be (cid:8230)(cid:8230).
of secret cults.
3.5 Initiation of Members into Secret Cults in Tertiary Institutions Rituals are performed during initiation ceremony and introduction of new members into cult practices.
Members are asked to make a vow with the use of their blood to keep secrets, secret.
They will also vow to be their brother(cid:8217)s keepers and respect the laws of the cults.
The initiation process is usually brutal, inhuman and animalistic.
In some cases the initiation process lead to the death of those being initiated.
New converts have to abide by rules and regulations and failure to do so usually result in serious brawl among them that may lead to killing of one another.
128SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).. are performed during initiation ceremony and introduction of new member into cult practices.
3.6 Activities of Cult Members in Nigerian Tertiary Institutions Cultists in Nigerian tertiary institutions engage in a number of anti-social and criminal activities which impede the peace and tranquility of the institutions and the society.
According to Ajayi (2006) cult members in Nigerian tertiary institutions engage in the following activities: 1 Nocturnal initiation ceremonies which usually involve the making of oath of brotherhood.
2 Organisation of opposition against any kind of oppression, both real and imagined 3 The use of fire-arms, firework, to intimidate and frustrate both friends and foes(cid:8221) 4 Involvement in black magic 5 Use and abuse of drugs 6 Murder and ritual killings 7 Pure deception based on intimidation 8 Examination malpractices 9 Maiming and causing grievous hurts on victims 10 Extortion of money, food items and answers to examination questions 11 Criminal rape and violent assault of female students 12 Constituting nuisance to innocent citizens on campus 13 Creating an un-easy atmosphere for the authorities and or management teams of higher institutions of learning.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Mention three anti-social activities of cultists in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
3.7 Causes of Cultism in Nigerian Tertiary Institutions Cult activities are prevalent in Nigerian tertiary institutions as a result of various reasons which could be attributed to the parents, students, institutions and the society.
Some of these reasons are examined as follows: 3.7.1 Home Factors 1.
Collapse of the family institution: The family is the primary agent of socialization where social beliefs and behavioural expectations are inculcated in the child.
It is the first contact point of a child with the society.
It is an agent that transmits the culture of the society to the child.
Whatever happens in the family during the socialization process will greatly influence the personality of the child and his relationship with other members of the society.
Most homes today are facing a lot of problems which negatively affect the socialization of the child.
Such problems include parental negligence, lack of moral training, frequent quarrels and arguments, separation among others.
To this end, many children from such homes grow up to be hostile, aggressive, violent and 129wayward.
Some of these children usually join secret cults in tertiary institutions.
2.
Pampering effect: Some children are much loved by their parents to the extent that they are pampered.
Whenever these children do any wrong thing, they are not scolded, rather they are allowed to go free.
Such children usually grow up to imbibe criminal oriented behaviour which make them to join cult groups in tertiary institutions.
Pampered children always feel at home engaging in social vices believing that their parents are always there to protect them against sanctions.
3.
Parents membership of secret cults: Parents who are members of secret cults usually initiate their children into such organizations prior to the time they are admitted into tertiary institutions.
When such children gain admission into tertiary institutions they become prominent members of secret cults.
4.
The influence of other family members who are cultists: Aunties, uncles or cousins who are members of cults usually initiate members of their lineage, sometimes against the will of such initiates.
Some students are members of secret cults in tertiary institutions because they had earlier been initiated into the societies by their uncles, aunties or cousins.
5.
Home playmates members of secret cults: It is common to find home playmates who initiated their friends, some times by giving them cult infested food or fruits.
After eating such food or fruits the consciousness of the initiates were opened to cult activities such as nocturnal meetings, blood-sucking, killing innocent people among others.
Some members of secret cults in tertiary institutions were initiated by their home playmates.
3.7.2 Student Factors 1.
Peer group influence: Peer group as an agent of socialization influences the behaviours of their members positively and negatively.
Some students join secret cults as a result of peer influence.
Cultists in tertiary institutions usually influence their friends to join them.
They may force or lure them to join secret cults.
There are instances where students from good homes become cultists on campus as a result of peer influence.
2.
Creation of fears: Some students join campus cults in order to create fear in the minds of their colleagues.
This will allow them to get away with whatever evil they perpetrate on campus.
Any attempt to curb their activities many result in violence that will disrupt the academic calendar for the session.
Both the students and the school authorities are always at their mercy because they can unleash terror at any time of the day killing or maiming fellow students or staff.
3.
Undue protection: Some students join campus cults because of undue protection enjoyed by members.
Campus cultists work vehemently to protect the interest of their members not minding what it takes to do so.
They always shield members from being punished for offences committed.
They also seek preferential treatment for their members and could be violent in an attempt to protect the interest of their members.
4.
Terrorism: The terror that campus cults unleash on innocent students who are not members make some students to join them.
Some students who have the 130desire to terrorise and exploit female students or their male counterparts usually see the membership of campus cults as the means of fulfilling such desire.
Hence, they join secret cults on campus.
In some cases life is usually lost as a result rivalry between cultists and innocent students over girl friends.
The beautiful female students on campus are always at the mercy of the cultists because it is dangerous for them to refuse love advances made by cultists.
There are reported cases of rape of female students by campus cultists.
5.
The not-do-well students: This category of students includes those who are academically poor, those who are rusticated or expelled and those who have no time for the rigour of academic activities.
These students usually find solace in membership of secret cults on campus.
They cause riots on campus so that the institution will close down.
They use every opportunity to destabilize the institution whenever examination period is very close so that such examination can be postponed.
Where they do not succeed in causing the postponement of examination, they may engage in violent attack of rival group members during the period of the examination such that the examination will be disrupted and cancelled.
6.
The unsuspecting students: There are some unsuspecting students who for mere craziness would like to join secret cults on campus without minding the consequences.
These students become members of campus cults for the fun of it, believing that there is nothing bad in joining the multitude to sin.
They feel that if others are joining secret cults, they too can be part of them.
When they later realize the dangers inherent in the membership of campus cults, they regret being members and will attempt to withdraw their membership.
They find it extremely difficult to withdraw from the cults because of threats from permanent members who can maim or kill them so that they do not divulge the secrets of their organizations.
3.7.3 Institutional Factors 1.
Influence of school administrators: Some students are encouraged to join secret cults on campus by some school administrators.
Such administrators do so in order to satisfy their whims and caprices.
They use the students(cid:8217) cultists as spies and thugs to achieve their selfish interest.
School administrators who have skeleton in their cupboards and want to cover-up may recruit members into campus cults to unleash terror on perceived opposition members.
2.
Lack of facilities for recreation: Many students join secret cults as a result of lack of recreational facilities on campus.
Such facilities include sport pitches, gymnasium, swimming pool, relaxation arena among others.
These facilities would have given the students the opportunity to dissipate energy and tension rather than joining secret societies on campus.
When there are no recreational facilities to occupy the leisure period of students on campus, many of them find solace in membership of secret cults.
3.
Increase in students(cid:8217) population: In recent time, the population of students in the tertiary institutions has increased tremendously amid inadequate and poor facilities.
This results in overcrowded lecture rooms, ineffective teaching, poor monitoring of students by their lecturers, examination malpractice among 131others.
The harsh learning environment of the tertiary institutions aids cultism among the students.
4.
Poor authority-students relationship: The authorities of some tertiary institutions do not have good relationship with the students.
In some cases, students(cid:8217) unions are not allowed to function and the authorities are very autocratic in their relationship with students.
In such situation, many students who consider the authorities too powerful join secret cults in order to protect their interests.
3.7.4 Societal Factors 1.
Moral decadence: The society is corrupt.
Moral values are no longer cherished by many people.
There is high rate of crime and the society is already polluted with social vices.
Some people in high places are members of secret cults.
Our youths observe and initiate what is happening in the society.
To this end, many of them do not see anything bad in cultism, hence, they join secret cults in the tertiary institutions.
2.
Foreign influence: The behaviours of many youths are influenced by foreign media.
They watch horror films which show scenes of cult violence esoteric practices and aggressive behaviours.
Their attempt to imitate what they watch in such films makes their membership of secret cults imminent.
Youths cultivate culture of violence and occultic practices through the foreign media.
This promotes cultism in our tertiary institutions.
3.
Love of power to control others: The struggle for power in the society and the use of violence to control others promotes cultism in our tertiary institutions.
The love for power to control others makes many politicians to play the politics of do or die.
This is characterized by mass rigging of election, arson and murder.
Violence is becoming a popular means of conflict resolution in our society.
The imitation of these social vices by our youths makes them join secret cults on campus.
4.
Culture of violence: The incursion of military into politics has promoted the culture of violence in Nigeria.
The military regime has led to the increasing rate of armed robbery, gangsterism, terrorism, area boy syndrome, inter-community clashes, ethnic militia activities etc in the country.
All these aid cultism in our tertiary institutions.
5.
Encouragement of cultism by the government: People in government encourage cultism by creating the impression that they are above the law.
The rule of law is no longer popular.
People in government break laws with impurity and without any consequence.
Some of them are cultists, they commit crime and go scot-free.
This encourages many students to join secret cults in our tertiary institutions.
132SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7 State four major categories of the causes of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
3.8 Effects of Cultism The effects of cultism in tertiary institutions on the society are numerous.
Some of these effects are listed as follows: 1.
It ruins the life of the affected students.
Some are killed in cultist violence and some become insane as a result of smoking Indian herbs and using hard drugs.
2.
It promotes social vices in the society such as violence, rape, arson, murder, drug abuse, examination malpractice and other anti-social behaviours.
3.
It destroys public peace and order through violence that usually lead to destruction of life and properly.
4.
Culprits of cultism who are expelled from tertiary institutions become nuisance to the society.
Many of them are involved in violent attacks in various institutions.
Some become political thugs, miscreants and ethnic militia wreaking havoc on members of the society.
5.
It breeds insecurity on various campuses through violence, rape, killing and maiming of innocent students.
6.
It affects the products of institutions where its activities are prevalent as many of them stand the risks of not gaining admission for further studies and getting jobs on time.
7.
It leads to premature death of innocent students, staff and other members of the society who become victims of cult violence.
8.
Academic calendars of various institutions are disrupted as a result of cult activities which usually lead to their closure.
There are instances where some institutions are closed for more than two months as a result of cult violence.
9.
It lowers the quality of higher education through frequent interruption in the academic calendars of tertiary institutions.
10.
It makes some tertiary institutions ungovernable through constant violence and bloodshed.
11.
It breeds new generation of decadent and degenerated Nigerians who are clogs in the wheel of the country(cid:8217)s progress.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 8 Identify three effects of cultism on the students.
3.9 Solutions to Cultism in Nigerian Tertiary Institutions In view of the identified causes of cultism in Nigeria tertiary institutions in the preceding section, the following solutions are suggested: i.
Parents should train their children by inculcating in them the moral values of the society and give them right education predicated on the fear of God.
They should also maintain peace and harmony at home so that the home environment will not be hostile to their children.
ii.
Parents should avoid pampering their children and should scold them whenever they do wrong things.
133iii.
Parents should desist from being members of secret cults so that their children will not develop interest in cultism.
iv.
Parents should monitor the activities of their children and prevent them from undue influence by aunties, uncles or cousins who are cultists.
v. Parents should teach their children the way of God and inculcate in them the habit of constant prayers so that they are not initiated into cultism by their home playmates.
vi.
Students should avoid bad companies that can lure them into cultism.
Parents should also monitor their children and wards on campus to ensure that they do not make friends with bad people who could initiate them into cults.
vii.
Students should abhor evils and be law abiding, they should take exception to violence and anything that could disturb the peaceful co-existence of members of the academic community and the society.
viii.
Students should not seek any undue protection from cult groups, rather they should seek protection from God whose mercy will always make them triumph over evils.
ix.
Students should detest all acts of terrorism and exploitation that could make them join secret cults.
They should be peace lovers and respect the rights of others.
x.
Students should be hardworking to meet the challenges of the academic world.
They should develop good study habits that will make them succeed in their academic endeavours.
xi.
On no account should students follow the multitude to sin in joining secret cults.
They should be mindful of the grave consequences of cultism.
xii.
School administrators should be honest and transparent in their duties.
They should protect corporate interest rather than selfish interest in the administration of their institutions.
They should not aid or abet cult activities on campus.
xiii.
School authorities should provide recreational facilities such as sport pitches, gymnasium, swimming pool, and relaxation arena among others, on campus in order to occupy the leisure periods of the students.
This will prevent many students from finding solace in membership of secret cults.
xiv.
The population of students in tertiary institutions should be controlled through strict compliance with their carrying capacity as stipulated by various quality assurance agencies.
School administrators should avoid explosion of students(cid:8217) population and its attendant effects.
xv.
The management staff of various tertiary institutions should always maintain cordial authority students relationship.
They should adequately involve the students in institutional governance through constructive students unionism.
xvi.
The society should promote its moral values such as honesty, peace, harmony, integrity, hard work, and dignity of labour, patriotism among others.
This should be done through the involvement of various agents of socialization such as the homes, schools, religious institutions, peer groups, media and corporate organizations.
xvii.
The government should ensure that all films being imported to the country are censored to ensure that horror films which contain scenes of violence, esoteric 134practices and aggressive behaviours are prohibited.
Similar thing should be done regarding local films.
These will reduce the rate at which our youths imbibe the culture of violence and occultic practices through the films they watch.
xviii.
The struggle for power to control others in the society should not be through violent and fraudulent means.
Politicians seeking power should always follow the laid down rules without recourse to rigging, violence, arson and murder so that our youths are not involved in or imitate activities that could make them prone to cultism.
xix.
The society should wage war against the culture of violence through good governance, effective crime prevention and control and aggressive media campaign.
xx.
People in government should discourage the youths(cid:8217) involvement in cultism.
Cultists should not be allowed to occupy positions in government.
The rule of law must be upheld by the government and people in government must be responsible, responsive and accountable in their various activities.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 9 What are the solutions to the societal related causes of cultism in Nigeria tertiary institutions?
4.0 CONCLUSION Cultism is cankerous to the growth and development of tertiary education in Nigeria.
Its prevalence in the tertiary institutions is attributed to the homes, the students, the institutions, the governments and the society at large.
The grave consequences of cultism call for collaborative effects of all stakeholders of tertiary education in its eradication.
This will create conducive environment for qualitative higher education in the country.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
Specifically, the unit has taught you the concept of cultism, the origin of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions, the characteristics of secret cult members, and membership of cultism in tertiary institutions.
You also learnt the initiation and activities of cult members in the tertiary institutions.
You were also taught the causes of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions from the perspectives of the homes, the students, the institutions and the society.
The unit also explained the effects of cultism and solutions to the prevalence of cultism in our tertiary institutions.
The next unit will teach you student crisis in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
What is a secret cult?
b.
Briefly explain four criminal activities of campus cultists.
2a.
State any five characteristics of secret cult members b.
Identify five sources of membership of cultism in tertiary institutions.
135 3.
Explain eight causes of cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions, two causes each from the homes, the students, the institutions and the society.
4a.
State any five effects of cultism b.
Discuss five ways through which parents could assist in curbing cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adegboyega, J.A.
(2006): Environmental factors influencing the development of cultism in Nigerian institutions of higher learning in Owoseni, A.A.; Ajayi, W.B.
; Ajiboye, S. and Omoyajowo, B.O.
(eds.).
A book of readings on cultism and its attendant effects on Nigerian institutions of higher learning.
Ikere Ekiti: College of Education, Ikere Ekiti.
Adetunberu, J.O.
(2006): Cultism: The challenge to quality education in Nigeria in Owoseni, A.A.; Ajayi, W.B.
; Ajiboye, S. and Omoyajowo, B.O.
(eds.).
A book of readings on cultism and its attendant effects on Nigerian institutions of higher learning.
Ikere Ekiti: College of Education, Ikere Ekiti.
Ajayi, I.A.
and Ayodele, J.B. (2002): History and development of education.
Ado Ekiti: PETOA Educational Publishers.
Ajayi, W.B.
(2006): Secret cults in Nigeria higher institutions of learning and the implications in Owoseni, A.A.; Ajayi, W.B.
; Ajiboye, S. and Omoyajowo, B.O.
(eds.).
A book of readings on cultism and its attendant effects on Nigerian institutions of higher learning.
Ikere Ekiti: College of Education, Ikere Ekiti.
Atunramu, A.
(2006): The practice of cultism in Nigerian institutions of higher learning in Owoseni, A.A.; Ajayi, W.B.
; Ajiboye, S. and Omoyajowo, B.O.
(eds.).
A book of readings on cultism and its attendant effects on Nigerian institutions of higher learning.
Ikere Ekiti: College of Education, Ikere Ekiti.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (1989): The 1989 constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria: Federal Ministry of Information.
Mgbekem, S.J.A.
(2004): Management of university education in Nigeria.
Calabar: University of Calabar Press.
Ogunbameru, O.A.
(1997): The sociology of campus secret cults in Ogunbameru O.A.
(ed).
Readings on campus secret cults.
Ile Ife: Obafemi Awolowo University, Press Ltd. 136Olabimtan, V.; Akinsola, O. and Adetola, S.(eds) (2004): Unmasking the monsters!
(cid:8230) The chronicle of campus cultism in Nigeria.
Akure: African Centre for Research and Development.
Oni, A.A. (2006): Effective Management of cult related crises in Nigerian higher education in Babalola, J.B.; Ayeni, A.O.
; Adedeji, S.O.
; Suleiman, A.A. and Arikewuyo (eds).
Educational Management.
Thoughts and Practice.
Ibadan: Codat Publications.
137ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 Its activities are kept secret out of public knowledge or consumption.
SAE 2 C (cid:8211) 1952 SAE 3 They are usually armed with dangerous instruments.
SAE 4 Members SAE 5 Rituals SAE 6 1.
Use and abuse of drugs 2.
Examination malpractices 3.
Constituting nuisance to innocent citizens on campus SAE 7 1.
Home factors 2.
Student factors 3.
Institutional factors 4.
Societal factors SAE 8 1.
It runs the life of the affected students.
2.
Culprits of cultism who are expelled from tertiary institutions become nuisance to the society.
3.
Products of institutions where its activities are prevalent stand the risks of not gaining admission for further studies and getting jobs on time SAE 9 1.
The society should promote its moral values 2.
Government should censor foreign films to ensure that horror films are prohibited 3.
The struggle for power to control others in the society should not be through violent and fraudulent means 4.
The society should wage war against the culture of violence 5.
People in government should discourage youth(cid:8217)s involvement in cultism.
138MODULE 3 UNIT THREE TOPIC: MANAGEMENT OF STUDENTS(cid:8217) CRISES IN NIGERIAN TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Meaning of students(cid:8217) crisis 3.2 Types of crisis 3.3 Historical overview of students crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions 3.4 Causes of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions 3.5 Effects of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions 3.6 Strategies for managing students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit you were taught cultism in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
You will recall that one of the effects of cultism is that it breeds insecurity on various campuses through violence, rape, killing and maiming of innocent students.
In this unit, you will learn students(cid:8217) crisis in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
You will be taught the meaning of students(cid:8217) crisis, types of crisis and historical overview of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
You will also learn the causes and effects of students(cid:8217) crises and the strategies for managing students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
2.0 OBJECTIVES When you have studied this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) Define students(cid:8217) crisis (cid:216) Explain types of crisis (cid:216) Present the historical overview of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions (cid:216) Discuss the causes and effects of students(cid:8217) crises in the tertiary institutions.
(cid:216) Discuss the strategies for managing students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Meaning of Students(cid:8217) Crisis According to the Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary, crisis is a state of great danger or anxiety about the future; a state of difficulty or uncertainty when problems must be solved; a situation that calls for urgent intervention.
Fajana (1990) posited that crisis is the art of violence resulting from dissatisfaction or a situation of 139disagreement between two parties.
It is the state of disharmony that is brought about by differences of impulses, desires, or tendencies.
Crisis occurs when there is tension or when people intend to revolt against social ills or irregularities in an organization.
Students(cid:8217) crisis is a conglomeration of negative reactions of students to a social change, in forms of rebellion, protest, unrest, violence, rampage, riot etc in order to express their dissatisfaction.
It is students(cid:8217) engagement in disruptive behaviour and physical violence, which interferes with teaching-learning process, upsets the normal running of the school system and disrupts public peace.
Students(cid:8217) crisis is characterized by wanton destruction of property, looting of property, confrontation with the police, killing of students among others.
Students(cid:8217) crisis is rampant in Nigerian tertiary institutions and its attendant effects are impediments to the development of tertiary education in the country.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Identify any five forms of negative reactions, which can be used to define students(cid:8217) crisis.
3.2 Types of Crisis Hodge and Anthony (1991) identified four types of crisis namely intra-personal crisis, inter-personal crisis, intra-group crisis and inter-group crisis.
There are explained as follows: i. Intra-personal crisis: This refers to crisis within an individual.
It could occur as a result of competing and conflicting needs and roles of an individual.
Other causes of intra-personal crisis include frustrations, role ambiguity and the incompatibility of organizational and personal values and ideology.
ii.
Inter-personal crisis: This is a crisis between two or more individuals in an organization.
It may occur as a result of personality differences, power struggles and competition.
For example the vice-chancellor and the registrar may have inter-personal crisis and if it is not properly managed, it can impede the accomplishment of the institution goals.
iii.
Intra-group crisis: This is a crisis within a group of individuals with common goals.
It could occur as a result of role conflict and personality differences.
For example intra group crisis may occur between executive members of academic staff union or students(cid:8217) union executive, or members of non-academic staff union in the tertiary institutions.
iv.
Inter-group crisis: This is a crisis between two or more groups in an organization.
For example students union and the university management may be involved in inter-group crisis.
Such crisis may occur as a result of conflict of interests, misinformation and power struggle.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 According to Hodge and Anthony (1991), the following are the types of crisis: i.
(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).
ii.
(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).
iii.
(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).
iv.
(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230).
140 3.3 Historical Overview of Students(cid:8217) Crises in Nigerian Tertiary Institutions The first students(cid:8217) crisis in Nigeria was recorded in 1943 when the Nigerian Union of Students agitated for the liberation of Nigeria from British rule.
In 1944, Nigerian students protested against the colonial government, which ordered them to vacate the premises of Kings College, Lagos.
The premises were to be used as military base for West African Frontier Force who was to fight the Second World War.
Despite the protest, the colonial government forced the students out of the College and they were located to Obalende.
In 1962, Nigeria recorded the first organized students(cid:8217) crisis when the students of University of Ibadan demonstrated against the infamous Anglo-Nigeria pact.
The pact was meant to guarantee British military assistance to Nigeria, but the students believed that the pact was a deliberate attempt to re-colonize Nigeria under the guise of military assistance.
The students(cid:8217) demonstration was initially peaceful but turned violent when the law enforcement agents provoked the students.
In 1971, Nigeria recorded its first ever tragedy on students(cid:8217) crisis when the students of University of Ibadan embarked on demonstration against the authority of the institution on poor administration of the students feeding.
The students confronted anti-riot policemen invited by the institution to take control of the situation.
In the process, Comrade Kunle Adepeju, a part-two agriculture student was shot and killed.
In 1978, there was mass protest by students of Nigerian universities against increment in school fees.
A student of the University of Lagos, Akintunde Ojo lost his life during the protest.
There was another students(cid:8217) protest at University of Ife in 1981 as a result of the killing of a student, Bukola Arogundade for ritual purpose.
Four students lost their lives during the protest.
In 1987, the student of University of Nigeria, Nsukka protested against the authority of the institution because of the rustication of the General Secretary and the President of the students(cid:8217) union.
During the protest properties were looted and some students were charged to court.
The banning of male students from entering female halls led to students(cid:8217) protest at Ahmadu Bello University in 1989.
The intervention of the police in the protest led to the death of some students.
Moreover, there was mass protest by students of tertiary institutions against increase in fuel prices and the structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) of the Federal Government in 1989.
This led to the closure of some universities in the country such as University of Ibadan, University of Ife and University of Nigeria, Nsukka for some months.
In 1994, there was mass protest by students of tertiary institutions against the military governments annulment of the June 12, 1993 election acclaimed to be won by the Late Chief Moshood Abiola.
In a similar vein, Aluede, Jimoh, Agwinede and Omoregie (2005) also presented the incidents of students(cid:8217) unrest in Nigeria between 1981 and 2003 as follows: 141Table 1: Incidents of student unrest in Nigeria Year Institutions Stated causes of unrest Consequences 1981 Ahmadu Bello Religion and against vice- Student died and University, Zaria chancellor over alleged rice vice-chancellor deal dismissed 1984 Many Nigerian Proposed introduction of Many universities in tertiary institutions tuition fees and the scrapping Nigeria were closed of catering services down for months 1986 Many universities in High handedness of the vice- Most University in Nigeria chancellor of Ahmadu Bello Nigeria were closed University Zaria down for months.
While several students were expelled.
1988 Many Nigerian Removal of subsidy from Many schools were Universities petroleum and allied products closed for a period of six months 1989 Several schools in Introduction of Structural Improved conditions many parts of Nigeria Adjustment Programme of service for (SAP) by the military workers, closure of government.
several institutions for about six months.
Many students lost their lives during the protest as a result of open shooting by police and army 1992 Many universities in Deregulation of Nigerian Several students died Nigeria currency and mounting workers conditions of hardship service were improved while several schools were closed for months.
1998 Ambrose Alli Cult activities Violence leading to University Ekpoma, the death of many Nigeria students.
2003 Many universities in Increase in prices of Peaceful in some Nigeria petroleum products campuses, violent in others.
142 The presentation made so far has not exhausted the occurrence of students(cid:8217) crisis in Nigeria tertiary institutions.
Nevertheless, it has presented the picture of its prevalence in the tertiary institutions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 In the historical overview of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions, identify four national issues, which triggered crises.
3.4 Causes of Students(cid:8217) Crises in Nigerian Tertiary Institutions There are several causes of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
Some of these causes are examined as follows: 1 Poor facilities on campus: As a result of poor inadequate funding of tertiary education in the country, tertiary institutions experience acute shortage of facilities.
These include classrooms, hostels, laboratories, library facilities, equipment, and recreational facilities among others.
The shortage of these facilities makes the students to be frustrated, miserable and dissatisfied with the authorities of their institutions for their failure to provide essential facilities that enhance teaching and learning.
Their dissatisfaction may be expressed through peaceful or violent demonstrations.
2 Curriculum problem: The curriculum of tertiary institutions in Nigeria is usually prepared by the authorities of the institutions and some designated national commissions.
The curricula in some cases do not reflect the needs of our society.
Apart from the fact that students are neglected in the area of curriculum reform, the inadequate contribution of the society to curriculum reform programmes causes problems that may trigger students(cid:8217) unrest.
Such problems include loss of societal values, unemployment and unstable educational policies among others.
3 Communication gap between the authorities of tertiary institutions and the students: When students are not adequately informed about decisions concerning their welfare on campuses, such decisions may be considered unwarranted.
This could make them resist the implementation of such decisions through demonstration or riot.
The failure of the authorities of tertiary institutions to communicate regularly with the students usually generates students(cid:8217) crisis one way or the other.
4 The influence of bad politicians: Some bad politicians use students and area boys to achieve their selfish interests.
They sponsor students(cid:8217) riots either to destabilize the government or score political points.
At times such devilish act is hatched under the banner of pro-democracy groups.
Members of the opposition parties or political opponents are harassed and intimidated by some politicians through sponsored students riots.
5 Secret cults: The prevalence of secret cult on campuses is one of the major causes of students(cid:8217) crisis.
Campus cultists usually unleash terror to disrupt peace and harmony of the academic community.
They fuel violent demonstration on campuses during which they freely attack their perceived 143opponents.
They disrupt examinations, rape female students, kill fellow students, destroy school property and make the institutions ungovernable.
Secret cults are the perpetrators of many students(cid:8217) crises in the tertiary institutions.
6 Religious intolerance and fanaticism: Some students who are religious fanatics engage in aggressive preaching of their religion to the detest of their listeners.
Any slight opposition to their activities is met with violence.
This usually results in escalated crisis both within and outside the campus as the opposing religious groups vent anger on one another.
In the past, some tertiary institutions were engulfed in religions riots masterminded by their students.
7 Economic crisis: The parlous state of Nigerian economy is making life difficult for the students.
The economy is characterized by high rate of unemployment, high rate of poverty, infrastructural decay, inadequate funding of education among others.
The situation is becoming worse as a result of the global economic melt down.
The multiplier effects of the poor economic situation of the country create tension among the students.
This usually result in students(cid:8217) crisis particularly when the authorities of the tertiary institutions do not take cognizance of the economic situation when increasing their service charges or levies.
In another dimension, tertiary institutions students usually protest against harsh economic policies and programmes of the government.
You will recall that in the preceding session it was reported that students protested against the Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) of the Federal Government in 1989.
8 Non participation of students in decision making processes: The authorities of some tertiary institutions do not allow their students to participate in decision making processes particularly on issues concerning students(cid:8217) welfare.
This usually creates acrimony between the two parties.
Students will always react negatively to decisions for which they are owed satisfactory explanation by the authorities, importantly when they are deliberately alienated in the processes of making decisions concerning their welfare.
9 Academic stress: The poor resource situations in the tertiary institutions cause academic stress for the students.
Students are academically stressed as a result of overcrowded lecture rooms, overcrowded libraries, laboratories and workshops and overcrowded hostels.
These put intense pressures on the students in meeting the challenges of their academic endeavours.
Such pressures when they are becoming unbearable usually precipitate students(cid:8217) crisis in the tertiary institutions.
10 Change in the value systems of students: The value systems of students in tertiary institutions are generational at variance with those of adults who are in change of administration in these institutions.
Students make demands that cannot easily be satisfied by the socio-economic climate of the larger society.
Unlike in the past when the students(cid:8217) value systems centred on personal development and service to others, their value systems now centre on orientation for security, success at all cost, massive acquisition of wealth and attainment of enviable status in the society by any means.
These trigger student unrest in the tertiary institutions.
144SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Mention any five causes of students(cid:8217) crisis in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
3.5 Effects of Students(cid:8217) Crises in Nigerian Tertiary Institutions Students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions have both positive and negative effects.
Nevertheless the negative effects override the positive effects.
Some of these effects are explained as follows: 1 Loss of life and property: During students(cid:8217) crises, there is usually violent destruction of life and property.
Students destroy buildings of their institutions, private vehicles, public vehicles and other property during riot.
In some cases students will be killed particularly if police are invited to quell the riot.
Such invitation normally results in open confrontation between the police and the students thereby leading to causalities among the students.
The historical overview of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions in the preceding section has shown that some students were killed during students(cid:8217) protests.
2 Closure of institutions: Students unrest usually leads to closure of tertiary institutions.
This is considered as immediate measure for putting students(cid:8217) protests into halt.
When the closure of institutions is announced, every student is expected to vacate the campuses within a stipulated time not exceeding twenty four hours.
This will prevent them from converging again to continue their protests.
Any student found in the vicinity of the campuses after the expiration of the stipulated time is severely dealt with by the law enforcement agents.
Most of the mass protest of students in Nigeria usually ends up with the closure of campuses for certain period of time during which appropriate measures for restoring peace on campuses will be taken.
3 Disruption of academic calendars: When campuses are closed down after students(cid:8217) protests, the academic calendars of the affected institutions are disrupted.
Lecture and examination periods are extended beyond the conventional periods and students stay longer than necessary in the institutions before completing their academic programmes.
The academic calendars of tertiary institutions in Nigeria are no longer predictable as a result of students(cid:8217) unrest and industrial action by the staff.
4 Penalty for erring students: After students(cid:8217) protests, investigations are conducted with a view to finding the remote and immediate causes of such protests and making recommendations to forestall their occurrence in future.
During such investigations, the principal actors or perpetrators of the protests are identified for proper sanctions to serve as deterrents to others.
The identified erring students are either rusticated or expelled depending on the level of their involvement in the protests.
Innocent students may be punished if they are maliciously implicate during such investigations.
5 Moral values are eroded: Students(cid:8217) crisis erodes the moral values of the society which are meant to be inculcated in the students by the tertiary institutions.
The prevalence of students(cid:8217) crisis in the institutions implies that the moral values of the society such as loyalty, obedience to laws, self restraints, tolerance, integrity and hard work among others which are taught by the institutions have been ignored by the students.
1456 Raping and assault of female students: During students(cid:8217) riots, there are instances where female students are raped and assaulted by the perpetrators of the crisis.
Cultists and gangsters usually use the opportunity of students(cid:8217) crisis to attack and rape female students.
7 Instability of institutional administration: Frequent students crisis make the leadership of the institutions look incompetent in institutional administration.
Instances abound where students(cid:8217) crisis led to change in the leadership of some institutions.
Such change could be necessitated by poor management of students(cid:8217) crisis or corrupt/fraudulent practices by the leaders which triggered students(cid:8217) crisis in their institutions.
The attendant effects of students(cid:8217) crisis such as change in the leadership of institutions, constant closure of institutions disruption of academic calendars and destruction of the institutions(cid:8217) property.
Usually lead to instability of institutional administration.
8 Improvement in the quality of decisions made by the tertiary institutions: Attempts to forestall students(cid:8217) crisis usually lead to improvement in the quality of decisions made by the tertiary institutions.
The prevalence of students(cid:8217) crisis makes it necessary for the leaders of institutions to be more conscious of the implications of decisions they make particularly on issues concerning students(cid:8217) welfare.
In order to prevent crisis, students are now allowed to participate more in the administration of their institutions.
Every tertiary institution has students(cid:8217) Affairs Unit which coordinates the participation of students in its administration.
9 Improvement in students(cid:8217) welfare: The attendant effects of students(cid:8217) crisis make it necessary for tertiary institutions to set up probe panels that will make necessary recommendations on how to forestall future occurrence of students crisis.
Such panels usually make series of recommendations, some of which will lead to improvement in students(cid:8217) welfare.
Apart from this, various tertiary institutions have evolved programmes and services aim at improving the welfare of their students in order to minimize or prevent students(cid:8217) crisis.
10 Improvement in workers(cid:8217) conditions of service: A number of students(cid:8217) protests recorded in Nigeria were against the economic policies of the Federal Government.
At the end of such protests, the government usually came up with palliative measures some of which led to improvement in workers conditions of service.
For instance the protest by university students in 1989 against the introduction of Structural Adjustment Programme (SAP) by the military government led to improved conditions of service for workers.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 State three positive effects of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
3.6 Strategies for Managing Students Crises in Nigerian Tertiary Institutions Based on the various causes of students(cid:8217) crises which were discussed in the preceding section, the following solutions are suggested: 1 Provision of adequate facilities on campuses: The proprietors and the authorities of tertiary institutions should provide adequate facilities such as classrooms, lecture theatres, laboratories, library facilities, recreational 146facilities etc on the campuses.
This will stem the wave of students(cid:8217) crises in our tertiary institutions.
Adequate facilities can be provided through increased funding of tertiary education by the stakeholders.
2 Curriculum reform: The curricula of tertiary institutions in Nigeria should be revisited with a view to making them more responsive to the needs of our society.
Moreover, students should be involved in curriculum reform and the society should be allowed to contribute adequately to curriculum reform programmes.
3 Regular communication between the authorities of tertiary institutions and the students: The authorities of tertiary institutions should communicate regularly with the students more importantly on decisions concerning their welfare.
Students should be updated on the activities of the tertiary institutions so that they can play their expected roles in the administration of the institutions rather than causing crisis.
4 Change in attitudinal orientation of politicians: Politicians who are fond of using students of tertiary institutions to cause crisis in order to achieve their selfish interests should have a change of attitude.
They should not sponsor students(cid:8217) riots to destabilize government or intimidate political opponents.
Any politicians found sponsoring or aiding students(cid:8217) riots should be permanently banned from active politics.
5 War against cultism: Stakeholders of tertiary education in Nigeria should collaborate in their efforts towards waging war against cultism on campuses.
This will to a large extent reduce the wave of students(cid:8217) crisis in the tertiary institutions.
6 Religious tolerance: There should be religious tolerance among the students.
Religious leaders and authorities of the institutions must work together to ensure that there is harmony between various religious groups on campuses in order to promote peace.
7 Economic development: The government should aggressively pursue policies and programmes that will bail the country out of its economic doldrums.
Such policies and programmes guarantee provision of more employment, drastic reduction in the rate of poverty, infrastructural development and adequate funding of education.
The global economic meltdown calls for government(cid:8217)s intervention in strategic sectors of the economy such as education, health, power, agriculture and manufacturing.
The development of the economy will reduce students(cid:8217) crisis in our tertiary institutions.
8 Participation of students in decision making processes: Every tertiary institution should involve students in decision making processes particularly on issues concerning their welfare.
Students should not be alienated in the processes of making decisions concerning their welfare.
The authorities of tertiary institutions should promote virile student unionism on their campuses to ensure adequate participation of students in institutions administration.
This will reduce students(cid:8217) crisis on campuses.
9 Reduced academic stress: Academic stress among the students should be reduced by improving the resource situations in the tertiary institutions.
While the proprietors and the authorities of tertiary institutions should provide more 147facilities on campuses, the enrolment of students should be controlled through strict compliance with the carrying capacity of the institutions.
This will prevent overcrowded lecture rooms, overcrowded libraries, laboratories and workshops and overcrowded hostels which usually put intense pressures on the students in their academic pursuits.
10 Re-orientation in the value systems of students: Various agents of socialization such as the family, religious bodies, schools government agencies and the media should collaborate efforts in mounting aggressive orientation programmes to change the value systems of students.
Such value systems include success at all cost, massive acquisition of wealth, attainment of enviable status in the society by any means.
The orientation programmes should also focus on the promotion of moral values of the society such as honesty, hard work, integrity, harmony, patriotism, obedience of laws among others.
These will reduce students(cid:8217) crisis in our tertiary institutions.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6 Identify any five strategies for managing students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
4.0 CONCLUSION The prevalence of students(cid:8217) crises is inimical to the development of tertiary education in Nigeria.
The dysfunctional effects of students(cid:8217) crises call for collaborative efforts of stakeholders in their prevention and control.
This will make the environment more conducive for effective teaching and learning in our tertiary institutions.
5.0 SUMMARY Recall that this unit has taught you students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
You learn the meaning of students(cid:8217) crisis, types of crisis, and historical overview of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
The unit also explained the causes and effects of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions and the strategies for managing them.
In the next unit, you will learn the influence of globalization on educational system in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
Define students(cid:8217) crisis.
b.
Explain four types of crisis identified by Hodge and Anthony (1991).
2a.
Discuss any five causes of students(cid:8217) crisis in Nigerian tertiary institutions.
b.
What are the solutions to students(cid:8217) crisis based on the identified causes.
3.
Students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian tertiary institutions have both positive and negative effects.
Discuss.
148 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aluede, O.; Jimoh, B.; Agwinede, B.O.
and Omoregie, E.O.
(2005): Student unrest in Nigerian Universities: Looking back and forward.
Journal of Social Sciences 10(1): 17-22.
Fajana, S. (1990): Conflict tactics and strategies of Nigeria in trade union convergence, diversity and implication.
Nigerian Journal of Personal Management.
4:8-12.
Hodge, B. J. and Anthony, S. (1991): Organisation theory: A strategic approach.
United States of America: Allyn and Balon Inc. Mgbekem, S.J.A.
(2004): Management of University Education in Nigeria.
Calabar: University of Calabar Press.
Olaniyan, D.A.
and Okemakinde (2003): Management of students(cid:8217) crises in Nigerian higher institutions: Implications for educational development in Babalola, J.B. and Adedeji, S.O.
(eds.)
Contemporary Issues in Educational Management: A book of honour.
Ibadan: Department of Educational Management, University of Ibadan.
149ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 1.
Rebellion 2.
Protest 3.
Unrest 4.
Violence 5.
Rampage SAE 2 i. Intra-personal crisis ii.
Inter-personal crisis iii.
Intra-group crisis iv.
Inter-group crisis SAE 3 1.
Agitation for liberation of Nigeria from British rule in 1943.
2.
Protest against the colonial government on its order that students should vacate the premises of Kings College, Lagos in 1944.
3.
Demonstration against the Infamous Anglo-Nigeria pact in 1962.
4.
Mass protest against increase in fuel prices and the Structural Adjustment Programme of the Federal Government in 1989.
SAE 4 1.
Poor facilities on campus 2.
Curriculum problem 3.
Communication gap between the authorities of the tertiary institutions and the students 4.
The influence of bad politicians 5.
Secret cults SAE 5 1.
Improvement in the quality of decisions made by the tertiary institutions.
2.
Improvement in students(cid:8217) welfare.
3.
Improvement in worker(cid:8217)s conditions of service.
SAE 6 1.
Provision of adequate facilities on campuses.
2.
Curriculum reform 3.
Regular communication between the authorities of tertiary institutions and the students 4.
Change in attitudinal orientation of politicians 5.
War against cultism 150MODULE 4 UNIT ONE TOPIC: THE INFLUENCE OF GLOBALIZATION ON EDUCATION SYSTEM IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Globalization 3.2 Influence of Globalization on Nigerian Educational System 3.3 The Implication of Globalization for Nigerian Educational System 3.4 The Challenges of Globalization for Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt students(cid:8217) crises in Nigeria tertiary institutions.
This unit will teach you globalization and Nigerian educational system.
You will learn the concept of globalization, the influence of globalization on Nigerian educational system and its implications for the educational system.
You will also learn the challenges of globalization for Nigeria.
2.0 OBJECTIVES When you must have studied this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) define globalization (cid:216) explain its influence on Nigerian educational system (cid:216) discuss the implications of globalization for Nigerian educational system (cid:216) explain the challenges of globalization for Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Globalization Globalization is the term used to describe the growing worldwide interdependence of people in countries.
According to Udida, Ebuara, Ozurumba and Ude (2007), it is seen as advances in technology.
It has created room for integration of the world in the areas of trade, technical and technology development as well as enhancing cheap and easy means of traveling and communication.
Adelabu (2006) opined that globalization embodies and exhibits trends and characteristics, which tend to de-emphasise the primacy of the traditional nation state while simultaneously accentuating the ascendancy of world wide and tendencies.
According to the author, the forces and characteristics of globalization tend to have collapsed traditional boundaries among nations, regions and among ethnic divides.
Francis in Abdul Raheem (2003) describes globalization as the great economic event that has brought unprecedented opportunities to billions of people throughout 151the world.
Globalization is the compression of the world and the intensification of consciousness of the world as whole.
It is principally aimed at the transcendental homogenization of political and socio-economic theory across the globe.
The manifestation of globalization is not restricted to the economic sphere only, it permeates all aspects of human endeavours.
Globalization of the world economy refers to the integration of economies throughout the world through trade, financial flows, the exchange of technology and information, and the movement of people.
The extent of the trend toward integrations manifest in the rising importance of world trade and capital flows in the world economy.
At this juncture, it must be emphasized that globalization is a multi- dimensional concept with political, socio-economic transnational and business undertones.
To this end, globalization could simply be defined as a set of processed leading to the integration of economic, cultural, political and social systems across boundaries.
It is a process of interaction among the people, companies and governments of different nations, a process driven by international trade and investment and aided by information technology.
This process has effects on environment, culture, political systems, economic development and prosperity and human physical well-being in societies around the world.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Globalization is the term used to describe the growing worldwide ____________ of people in countries 3.2 Influence of Globalization on Nigerian Educational System Globalization should ideally be seen as a phenomenon demanding for widespread systemic changes in education.
Globalization symbolizes a paradigm shift involving the re-thinking of beliefs and structures in traditional consciousness.
It symbolizes a shift from monocultural approach to education to multi-cultural approach with attendant implication for changes in all spheres of the school system.
Salimono in Abdul Raheem (2003) observe that globalization offers developing countries like Nigeria the opportunities to gain access to new ideas, technologies and institutional designed.
This means that globalization offers many opportunities to Nigeria and other developing countries as well as other actors in the global economy.
Globalization can still impact on the Nigerian education system in the following ways.
1.
Centrally defined curriculum For over forty (40) years, Nigeria and some other West African states had been using the same syllabus for their senior school certificate examination.
With globalization, developing countries in the world can redefine their curriculum in line with western world so that human capitals can move discoveries and technological innovations.
According to Adelabu (2006), most societies need innovative approaches to animate and support learning activities that will deep understanding and adaptation of knowledge in various context and problem situations.
This becomes necessary as schools are meant 152to adequately prepare students for a life-long reality of problem-solving, knowledge adaptation and constant adjustment to changes.
This is why Boyer (1995) opined that innovative curriculum approaches introduced by most developed countries are perhaps part of attempts at ensuring schools do not fail in adequately preparing youth and children for life realities.
This posits that with these students in the globalised world will be an effective thinker and problem-solver.
2.
Internationally competitive educational system Globalization is fast shrinking the world into a global village, the trend which has become the panacea to many world problems.
Oni and Alade (2008) opined that Nigeria needs a world-class educational system to accelerate her development and make her relevant in the new modernity.
An internationally competitive educational system is the very right step in building an economy that will bring home the dividends of globalization to the country.
Thus, there is the need for a genuine dialogue in terms of educational reform that will provide Nigerians with the skills needed to compete internationally.
3.
Opening-up of new opportunities Abdul Raheem (2003) posited that globalization has enriched the world economically, scientifically and culturally.
This is because globalization opens the economies to a wide variety of consumption of goods, new technology and knowledge.
The reason for this belief may not be unconnected with the dramatic increase in prosperity that globalization has brought in its wake especially in South Korea, India and South Africa.
Through the internet, globalization allows the access to ideas on new things and best practices in all areas of human endeavour.
For instance, new design, production technology, new managerial practice etc.
are made available to people, thereby enabling them to change their old practices.
These may lead to acquisition or imitation of foreign products, technologies and cultural practices which would have been made impossible without globalization.
4.
Improved method of teaching It can be said that with globalization the world is gradually moving in a unidirectional manner and the tendency towards uniformity at its highest peak.
Information Technology (IT) facilitates a free flow of research and expertise, making the best information simultaneously available in every part of the world.
These electronic connections have been serving the purpose of networking, collaborative research, studies and fellowship amongst students, graduates and their teachers, all within the perimeters of their offices.
IT also has the potential to widen access to learning opportunities.
All these tend to improve the quality of education.
Adelabu (2006) posited that the teacher in a globalized environment must be prepared to think globally and act locally in matters relating to education.
He must be able to create a learning friendly and animating environment in the classroom.
1535. Financing of education in the era of globalization The dictates of globalization appear to have placed additional burden on the school system thus making education a very cost-intensive enterprise.
Adelabu (2006) submitted that the current trend of poor and epileptic funding in education may not assist the country in any way.
It therefore becomes imperative on the government to make provision for ways to fund education in this globalized world.
The licensing of private universities is an important way of financing university education in the globalized world.
6.
Manpower training for economic growth and development As a result of various challenges of the globalized economy, the educational system particularly tertiary education is planned to train manpower required in the various sectors of the economy.
This is crucial because the economy can only grow and develop well if it is steered by adequate skilled manpower.
Moreover, educational institutions conduct various researches on the economy aimed at enhancing economic growth and development so that the nation can be well integrated into the globalized economy.
7.
Innovations in tertiary education Globalization has brought innovations to tertiary education in Nigeria.
According to Babalola (2007) these innovations include: (cid:216) Teaching and learning technologies (cid:216) Development of borderless education such as corporate universities, for profit-universities (cid:216) Transformation in the purpose of higher education which has necessitated a fundamental review in policies of tertiary education (cid:216) A shift towards a problem-based mode of knowledge creation and away from the classic discipline led approach, and the blurring of the distinction between basic and applied research (cid:216) A shift from the traditional departmental approach to interdisciplinary approach that reorganizes research and training around the search for solution to complex socio-economic problems of our immediate community.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How has globalization improved the methods of teaching?
3.3 The Implications of Globalization for Nigerian Educational System In view of the attendant positive and negative effects of globalization, there are various implications for the educational system in Nigeria.
Some of these implications are examined as follows: 1.
Economic globalization: As a result of economic globalization, Nigeria has to contend with powers of globalized production, liberalized economy, dominance of multinational corporations and international financial institutions global economic recessions among others.
These put certain demands on our 154educational system such as thorough research on economic growth; pursuit and practice of professionalism; massive training of manpower in various sectors of the economy among others.
2.
Democratization: The globalization of liberal democracy requires the promotion of democratic education which will promote its virtues.
The virtues of liberal democracy include human rights, environmental protection, trade liberalization, protection of women and minority groups(cid:8217) rights, free and regular electoral processes among others.
To this end, our education needs to be tailored towards the preparation of the country for democratization.
This can be done in the following ways: (cid:216) a reflection of democratic principle in the administration of educational institutions; (cid:216) equal educational opportunities for all citizens without discrimination; (cid:216) tertiary institutions should be centre for political enlightenment, constructive criticisms of government policies and training for future learning roles; and (cid:216) citizenship education based on civic virtues, duties and obligations, and legal status.
3.
Multilateral aid: In view of the persistent decline in multilateral aid to education, there is need for Nigerian government to be more inward looking in funding education.
Government should increase its budgetary allocation to education.
Budgetary allocation of far less than 26 percent to education is not enough to empower the sector in meeting global challenges.
Moreover, there is need for increased participation of stakeholders such as parents, private individuals, voluntary agencies, religious bodies, philanthropists and corporate organizations in funding education.
4.
State sovereignty: The concept of (cid:8220)global citizen(cid:8221) has come to limelight as a result of globalization.
This has made citizen of nation state members of a large global community who are under the trust of a domestic state.
Foreign authority structures are no longer remote, investigative news programmes constantly expose the activities of the nation to international viewers.
All these have undermined state power, weakened and threatened state(cid:8217)s sovereignty.
It therefore becomes necessary to expand the scope of our educational system beyond our national boundaries.
This has to be done through the internationalization of our school curriculum in order to integrate the culture and systems of other nations.
5.
Culture: Nigerian culture has been infiltrated by foreign culture through globalization.
This has brought about the imposition of western values, norms and standards without due consideration to our socio-political, cultural and historical background.
Global values such as justice, liberal democracy, privatization, free market enterprise structural reforms etc.
have been promoted and imposed on the developing nations by powerful western nations.
The 155implementations of some of these policies have created hardships for many developing nations.
The implication of this is that our government should formulate and implement educational policies that propagate and reflect aspects of our national culture such as traditional religion, languages, customs, arts and crafts, traditional cultural values and efforts should be made to globalize our traditional culture.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Which of the following is not part of the implications of globalization for Nigerian educational system?
a.
Privatization b. Democratization c. Economic globalization d. Multilateral aid 3.4 Challenges of Globalization for Nigeria Interdependencies between different countries and regions will continue to be reinforced by globalization.
To this end, the major challenge facing the developing world, particularly African countries is to put in place public policies that will maximize the potential benefits from globalization, and minimize the downside risks of destabilization and or marginalisation.
Such policies are already being implemented in most African countries.
In order to speed up its participation, there are five major challenges for Nigeria.
These are explained as follows: 1.
Macro-economic stability and structural reform: The country will need to maintain macro economic stability and reinforce the implementation of structural policies which will make our economy more flexible, encourage diversification and reduce its vulnerability to exogenous shocks.
Moreover, there is need for further reform in the areas such as public enterprise activity, the labour market and the trade regime.
Our government must also make sure that public services such as transportation networks, electricity, water and education are provided in a reliable and cost-efficient fashion.
2.
Economic security: Nigerian government must establish the right framework for economic activities for the purpose of removing sense of uncertainty that still plagues economic decision-making in most African countries.
This could be done through the creation of a strong national capacity for the formulation, implementation and monitoring of policies.
Our regulatory and legal systems must be such that will ensure transparency, predictability and impartiality.
Apart from the respect of private property rights and the enforcement of commercial contracts, arbitrariness, special privileges and ad-hoc exemptions should be eliminated even where they are intended to encourage investment.
1563.
Good governance: In order to achieve good governance, serious efforts must be made to eliminate corruption and inefficiency and enhance accountability in government.
Public funds must be judiciously utilized and the civil service must be reformed to enhance its efficiency.
There is dire need for electoral reform so that people can have confidence in the electoral system and their vote will count.
Government must also partner with private economic agents in such a way that there will be mutual trust and confidence.
4.
Reform of the financial sector: Globalization is characterized by an open and liberal system of capital movements that is beneficial to the world economy.
Nevertheless, the rising capital flows place additional burdens on banking regulation and supervision.
This requires more flexible financial structures.
To this end, Nigeria as a developing country is confronted with the challenge of reforming its financial sector.
Therefore, our government should accelerate the development of its financial institutions in order to make them respond effectively to the changing international environment.
5.
A partnership with civil society: Nigerian government need to encourage the participation of civil society in the debate on economic policy and ensure the masses(cid:8217) support for such policy.
Therefore, the government must pursue more active information policies which will explain the objectives of policies and solicit the input of those whom the policies are intended to benefit.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What is the major challenge facing the developing world, particularly African countries on globalization?
4.0 CONCLUSION Nigeria cannot afford to lag behind in integrating its education into the global system.
This is more so in view of the enormous benefits of globalized education.
However, globalization has some implications for our educational system.
To this end, our government must formulate and implement policies aimed at mitigating the dysfunctional effects of globalization on our educational system in particular and the nation as a whole.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, you have learnt globalization and Nigerian educational system.
Specifically, you were taught the concept of globalization and influence of globalization on Nigerian educational system.
You also learnt the implications of globalization for Nigerian educational system and its challenges for Nigeria.
The next unit will teach you Information and Technology Communication (ICT) in education.
1576.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
What is globalization?
b.
Explain the various ways through which globalization influence the Nigerian educational system.
2.
Discuss the various implications of globalization for Nigerian educational system.
3.
What are the challenges of globalization for Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Abdul Raheem, Y.
(2003): Globalization and Nigerian Economic Development.
Being a Paper Presented at the 4th Annual National Conference of the Social Studies Association of Nigeria (SOSAN) held at the University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Adelabu, M. (2006): Globalization and Imperatives for Changes in Educational Policy Making and Implementation in Nigeria.
Being a Paper Presented at the 3rd VITTACHI International Conference on Rethinking Educational Change IFRANE, MOROCCO 1st (cid:8211) 5th July.
Adeyemi, T. O.
(2008): Predicting Students(cid:8217) Performance in Senior Secondary Certificate Examination from Performance in Junior Secondary Certificate in Ondo State Nigeria.
Humanity and Social Sciences; Journal 3 (1) 26-36.
Akindutire, I. O.
(2005): Production of Quality Teachers for Quality Education in Nigeria.
Trailblazer 1(2) 26-27.
Babalola, J.
B.
(2007): Reform and Development of Nigeria(cid:8217)s Tertiary Education: Focus on Obasanjo(cid:8217)s Administration in Babalola, J.
B. Akpa.
G. O, Ayeni, A. O., Adedeji, S. O.
(Eds) Access, Equity and Quality in Higher Education; Ibadan: Awemark Industrial Printers.
Boyer, E. L. (1995): The Basis of School: A Community for Learning.
Princeton, N. J: Carnegie Foundation for the advancement of Teaching.
Jaiyeoba, A. O. and Atanda, A. I.
(2005): Quality Sustenance in Nigerian Educational System: Challenges to Government, in G. O. Akpa, S. U. Udoh & E. O. Fagbamiye (Eds) Deregulating the Provision and Management of Education in Nigeria.
Jos: M. P. Ginac Concept Ltd. Okebukola, P. (2005): The Dynamics of Innovation and Performs in a Modern University: Perspectives and Challenges for Nigerian Universities.
Being the text of the 14th Convocation Lecture of the University of Ado-Ekiti.
Delivered 27th April.
158 Olayode, K. O.
(1999); Concepts and Issues of Globalization in Education.
In J. O. Fadipe and E. E. Oluchukwu (Eds).
Educational Planning and Administration in Nigeria in the 21st Century.
A Publication of the National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration.
Ondo.
365-373.
Omoregie, N. (2005): Repackaging Secondary Education in Nigeria for Great and Dynamic Economy.
Paper Presented at the 2nd Annual National Conference of Association for Encouraging Qualitative Education in Nigeria (ASSEQEN) 9th (cid:8211) 11th May.
Oni, A.
A. and Alade, I.
A.
(2008): The Future of Higher Education in Nigeria: Global Challenges and Opportunities.
Retrieved on line from www.herp.net.org.
in 15-09-2009.
Quattara, A. D. (1997); The Challenges of Globalization for Africa.
An Address delivered by Deputy Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund at the Southern Africa Economic Summit Sponsored by the World Economic Forum, Harrare, May 21 Retrieved online from www.globalization-africa.org on 30th September, 2009.
Udida, L. A., Ebuara, V. O. Ozurumba, C. N. and F. Ude (2007): The Role of Technical and Vocational Education in the Employment of Nigerian Youth in the Era of Globalization: Problems and Challenges.
In J.
B. Babalola, G. O. Akpa and A. O. Ayeni (Eds) Managing Technical and Vocational Education in the Era of Globalization.
A Publication of the Nigerian Association for Educational Administration and Planning (NAEAP).
Ibadan: Awemark Industrial Printers 13- 19.
West African Examination Council (2007): Chief Examiners(cid:8217) Report.
159ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT (SAEs) SAE 1 Interdependence SAE 2 Information technology facilities networking, collaborative research, and access to tertiary and learning materials.
SAE 3 A (cid:8211) privatization SAE 4 To put in place public policies that will maximize the potential benefits from globalization and minimize the downside risks of destabilization and marginalization.
160MODULE 4 UNIT TWO TOPIC: INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGICAL (ICT) IN EDUCATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 What is Information and Communication Technology (ICT)?
3.2 Types of ICT Resources 3.3 Application of ICT in education 3.4 Problems of ICT application in Nigerian Educational System 3.5 Strategies for strengthening ICT usage in Nigerian Schools 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION In the last unit, you learnt the influence of globalization on educational system in Nigeria.
In this unit, you will learn Information and Communication Technology (ICT) as part of globalization process in Nigerian educational system.
Specifically, you will learn the meaning of ICT, types of ICT resources and the application of ICT.
The unit will also teach you the problems of ICT application in Nigerian educational system and the strategies for strengthening its usage in Nigerian schools.
2.0 OBJECTIVES When you must have diligently studied this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) Define ICT (cid:216) Describe the various types of ICT resources (cid:216) Explain the application of ICT in education (cid:216) Discuss the problems of ICT application in Nigerian educational system (cid:216) Explain the strategies for strengthening ICT usage in Nigerian schools.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 What is Information and Communication Technology (ICT)?
As a result of globalization the rate of interdependency among nations of the world has increased tremendously.
Such interdependency is facilitated by Information and Communication Technology (ICT) which has transformed the entire universe into a global village.
Every facet of human endeavour requires adequate information for sustainable growth and development.
This is easily provided by ICT.
ICT encompasses a range of new technologies and their application including all aspects of the use of computers, micro-electronic devices, satellite and communication technology (Common Wealth Secretariat, 1991).
Modern day technological devices are used in ICT to store and retrieve information needed by various facets of the society.
According to UNESCO (2002), ICT is the range of 161technologies that are applied in the process of collecting, storing, editing, retrieving and transfer of information in various forms.
Obanyan (2002) also defined ICT as a broad term that has to do with the harnessing of process, the methods and the product of electronic and communication related technologies (and other related sources in today(cid:8217)s knowledge driven society), for enhancing the productivity, the spread and efficiency of a set of programmed activities geared towards the achievement of clearly determined goals.
The various definitions considered imply that ICT involves the use of a wide range of technologies such as computers, mobile telephones, satellite, World Wide Web among others in collection, storage, retrieval and transfer of information for human use.
In the context of education, ICT involves the use of combination of technologies in generating information required for effective teaching-learning process.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 In the context of education, ICT involves the use of (cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230)(cid:8230) in generating information required for effective teaching-learning process.
3.2 Types of ICT Resources As pointed out in the preceding section, ICT involves the use of combination of technologies in generating information.
These technologies could be referred to as ICT resources, some of which are explained as follows: 1 Computer: It is an electronic machine designed to process information.
Computers perform complex tasks that can take human beings a life time to accomplish.
Some of the characteristics of computers include speed of computation and retrieval of information, accuracy of computation and transfer of information, storage capability and automatic processing.
The computer based information system has four phases of activity named input, processing, output and storage.
In the input phase, data are captured and converted to a form that can be processed by a computer.
The processing phase deals with manipulation and conversion of data into an appropriate form of information.
In the output phase, necessary information are provided for use while in the storage phase, processed data are stored in usable form.
2 Electronic mail (e-mail): This refers to the process of sending, storing and receiving massage electronically through the computer system.
The use of e- mail was developed in the 1960(cid:8217)s. E-mail is a faster, cheaper and safer form of sending mails across the globe.
It enables the user to send electronic message or document through the computer system to a specific e-mail address.
E-mail is faster as messages can be exchanged in few seconds or minutes unlike using postal mail which may take days, weeks or months.
E-mail can be used to send audio, video and text messages.
E-mail message usually contain a header that specifies the sender, recipient and subject, followed by a body that contains the text of the message.
A person must have a mail box containing e-mail address before he/she can send or receive e-mail messages.
Through e-mail, it is possible to communicate a message to a large number of people at the same time.
This is done through a mail exploder 162program which forwards a copy of the message to each member on the list at the same time.
3 Internet: It is a large network of interconnected computers that make communication and cooperation easy.
It is a collection of interconnected computer networks, linked by copper wires, fiber-optic cables, wireless connections among others.
It is characterized by the use of Internet protocol, network connectivity and public telecommunication system to securely share information.
Internet comprises multitude of interconnected network of computers scattered all over the world linked together by some links called protocols.
Through the Internet, the world has been turned to a global village where information can easily be disseminated, people can easily be connected and business transactions can easily be made.
4 World Wide Web (www): It is a global, interactive, graphical information system that is used over the Internet.
It contains digitized data stored in files called WEB PAGES.
It is simply called web.
www is a collection of interconnecting documents and other resources linked by hyperlinks and Universal Resources Location (URL).
It can only be accessed on the Internet and can be used to provide information on every facet of life.
In the school system, it is used for online admission and registration of students, payment of school fees and checking of examination results.
Various individuals, organizations and governments use this Internet technology with such descriptions as www.un.tlm.ng; www.ubad.edu.ng; www.teni.com among others as their website addresses.
5.
Electronic Notice Boards: These involve the use of communication software to allow personal computers to act as public address systems.
Electronic notice boards are created to link people who have the same interest for the purpose of information dissemination from time to time.
6.
Teleconferencing: This refers to a process whereby people conduct real-time discussion on the Internet.
Each participant will type his or her contribution to any discussion topic on the Internet and also read other people(cid:8217)s contributions to the discussion.
This is made possible with the Internet relay chat.
Each participant in the discussion group can enter and leave the discussion when he or she likes.
7.
Telephone: This is a communication device through which a conversation could be held with another person at an entirely different location from that of the initiator of the conversation.
Talks are held with people far and near with the aid of telephones.
GSM phones enable the users to send audio, video and text messages easily to one another within few seconds.
8.
Close Circuit television: It is a television distribution system in which the sender and the receiver are physically linked by wire.
It does not operate through the airwaves.
It may be between a single camera and a receiver within the same room for image magnification.
It could also be a link between a studio and several locations.
It has the advantages of privacy multi-channel capacity and freedom of being set up by any one or organization channel capacity.
It is used by law enforcement agencies for crime prevention and control.
Commercial banks and other corporate organizations also use close circuit 163television to monitor people(cid:8217)s activities in their premises for the purpose of crime prevention and control.
It is also used in some tertiary institutions for teaching special elective courses.
9.
Cable television: This is the dissemination of television programmes by wire into homes and institutions.
A favourably situated high mast antenna captures signals of the television.
In the alternative, a capable company can originate its own channel live or from tape of film.
Cable television facilitates people(cid:8217)s access to high quality channels as fiber optics make it theoretically possible to transmit 1,000 channels per cable, and such channels can be encoded and made available on rented decoders.
The broadcast of cable television is restricted to subscribers only.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Identify any five types of ICT resources.
3.3 Application of ICT in Education The importance of ICT in education cannot be overemphasized.
It facilitates the development of education in various ways, some of which are discussed as follows: 1.
It aids effective teaching and learning: It assists the teachers to take students beyond classroom limits by creating virtual environments to experiment and explore.
Effective instructional delivery by the teachers is guaranteed as ICT assists them with effective and efficient tools to take care of the individual differences of the students.
Moreover, it provides teachers opportunities for cooperation with colleagues through networking and Internet services.
This will facilitate cross-fertilization of ideas and improve the teaching skills of the teachers.
With the Internet, it is possible to access learning materials anywhere in the world.
On the other hand, the use of educational application software assists the students to work easily, make their writing easier and make them learn faster.
ICT offers educational resources such as software packages and web pages, which present a fresh opportunity for teachers and students to maximize their efforts in acquisition of new skills.
The self learning capabilities of ICT in education also assist the students in their mastery of school subjects.
Through the use of ICT, teaching and learning have been liberated from the constraints of linear curriculum.
The use of ICT has made teachers become facilitators and managers rather than dispensers of knowledge in the learning process.
Computer Aided Instruction (CAI) facilitates learning through drills and practice, tutorials, simulation and games.
2.
Enrichment of curriculum contents: Curriculum contents are enriched as teachers and curriculum experts are able to get curricular materials from the Internet.
These include information, messages, skills, strategies and relevant school practices not yet known by students and teachers and which cannot be found in recommended school textbooks.
Such materials can easily be downloaded for the information and academic development of students.
The contents of topics taught in the classroom can be improved through recent 164research findings in obtained through the Internet.
School curriculum is also enriched through the satellite microwave, cable and broadcast television which give students access to courses that are not available in their schools.
The Internet resources in education also aid both the personal and professional development of the teachers thereby making it easy for them to implement the school curriculum effectively.
3.
It increases access to education: It is obvious that the formal school system can no longer meet the ever growing demand for education.
This has made e- learning a viable option for many people to have access to education.
For instance, less than 20 percent of candidates seeking admission into Nigerian Universities annually are offered admission due to inadequate resources.
There are various e-learning undergraduate and postgraduate programmes which offer many of these applicants the opportunity to have access to university education.
The e-learning has the capacity of reaching out to many learners in the provision of quality education.
E-learning provides the learners interactive information and learning opportunities at a time, place and form appropriate and convenient for them.
4.
It improves the quality of higher education: The quality of higher education is improved through the virtual library project.
The project which is ICT based improves the quality of teaching, research and consultancy in higher institutions.
Through the virtual library project, members of the academic community have access to current books, journals and information resources held by global network of on-line libraries.
Such access promotes scholarship, research and lifelong learning.
Tertiary institutions in the country are encouraged by their quality assurance agencies to be part of the virtual library project.
Moreover, the introduction of Management Information System (MIS) has improved the quality of higher education.
For instance, MIS has assisted Nigerian Universities in decision-making for effective administration by providing the required data for making good decisions.
Furthermore, the administration of students personnel services in tertiary institutions is made easier as many tertiary institutions in the country now conduct on-line screening and registration of students and place students results on the Internet for them to check.
5.
It improves the teaching profession: The integration of ICT in teachers(cid:8217) training programmes will improve the teaching profession.
In realization of the potentials of ICT for improvement of the teaching profession, the Teachers Registration Council of Nigeria (TRCN) dedicated the year 2006 to ICT skills acquisition, summits and campaigning aimed at preparing teachers in Nigeria to maximize the advantages of the professional development on the web.
Teachers who are ICT compliant are uplifting the teaching profession as they inculcate ICT skills in their students.
6.
It improves the quality of university graduates: There has been apprehension about the quality of graduates from Nigerian universities when compared with their counterparts in developed countries of the world.
Through ICT exposure, the quality of graduates from our university has improved as many of them are 165now kept abreast of developments worldwide.
Apart from the fact that this has improved their skills, it has widened their interaction with individuals and corporate organizations across the globe.
Unlike before, many graduates now have access to employment, investment and admission opportunities worldwide through the Internet.
Through such access, some graduates have secured jobs and admission for further studies in foreign countries while some have entered into partnership business with foreigners.
7.
It aids effective management of the school system: The tasks of managing the school system involve activities such as planning, organizing, coordinating, supervision, provision of educational support services, budgeting among others.
All these activities require large volume of information for decision- making.
These information are easily provided by ICT.
Many schools now make use of ICT facilities in registration of students, maintenance of staff and students(cid:8217) records, keeping of inventory list of supplies, drawing of architectural design keeping of financial records, payment of salaries among others.
This makes the management of the school system easier and effective as information are easily stored and retrieved for making good decisions.
8.
It aids evaluation of learners: Some of the evaluation functions of the teacher have been taken over by some computer programmes.
These functions include generating and administering tests, grading and reporting, summarizing the results and providing feedback on results.
The use of appropriate programmes and the scanner has now made it possible to scan, score and produce the results of multiple choice tests written by several students in a matter of minutes or hours, instead of several weeks of manual marking.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 State three ways in which application of ICT can aid effective teaching and learning.
3.4 Problems of ICT Application in Nigerian Educational System The application of ICT in Nigerian educational system is confronted with various problems.
Some of these problems are discussed as follows: 1.
Problem of teaching personnel: Trained teachers in computer science who are to teach students the practical aspects of the subject are grossly inadequate in Nigerian schools.
Many teachers distance themselves from computer-related activities due to fears, ignorance, negative perceptions or inferiority complex.
Many teachers who are trained in computer science do not have access to computers either because they cannot afford them or they feel it is not necessary.
At the tertiary institutions, many lecturers are not competent in using ICT facilities for instructional delivery as a result of lack of training or apathy to the use of such facilities.
All these affect the acquisition of ICT skills by students at various levels of our educational system.
If the teachers who are to impart the knowledge and skills of ICT to the students are not trained and motivated, the rate of ICT illiteracy among the students will continue to increase.
2.
Inadequate funding: As a result of inadequate funding of education in Nigeria, ICT facilities are not ready available in schools.
Many schools do not have 166computers, where they are available, they are grossly inadequate to serve all the students.
The ratio of students per computer is very high and the level of Internet connectivity is equally low.
Many lecturers and students in tertiary institutions do not have access to adequate Internet, facilities on campuses but have to partronise business centres outside their institutions.
The high cost and maintenance of ICT facilities coupled with shortage of funds to procure the facilities impede the acquisition of ICT skills by teachers and students in Nigerian schools.
3.
Poor power supply: The effective functioning of ICT facilities depend on stable supply of electricity.
There is epileptic supply of electricity in Nigeria.
Interrupted electricity supply inhibits the usage of ICT.
Schools and business centres which operate Internet facilities in the country depend heavily on electric generators.
This makes the cost of maintaining such facilities exorbitant and consequently limits people(cid:8217)s access to them.
The safety and longevity of computer hardware and other electronic gadgets being used to aid instructional delivery cannot be guaranteed in an atmosphere of unstable supply of electricity.
4.
Low teledensity: The access of Nigerians to telecommunication facilities such as computer and Internet is still low.
Although, the introduction and infusion of GSM telecommunication technology has increased the access, it is still far below what is required to ensure mass utilization of ICT facilities for educational purposes.
Joseph (2006) reported that Nigeria has the second largest telecommunication in Africa with a subscriber base of 20 million and teledensity of less than 15% while Canada with a much smaller population has a teledensity of 107%.
Moreover Nigeria IT rating was 90 out of 115 countries in the world and ranked 13th in Africa behind Gambia, Namibia and Uganda.
5.
Low level of Internet connectivity: There is low level of Internet connectivity in Nigeria.
We still utilize thin band-with, non-existing intra-regional connectivity and inefficient fixed lines inhibited by inter-exchange congestion.
We depend on VSAT for our Internet connectivity, which has a much lower quantity and more expensive than land-based connection.
Moreover, there are few Internet service providers in the country and they charge high fees that may not be easily affordable to many people.
6.
High level of poverty: As a result of high level of poverty in Nigeria, the cost for ICT facilities is not affordable to many people.
As many as people are willing to buy computer hardware and soft ware, their exorbitant prices coupled with the parlous state of the economy make them unable to buy them.
Those who can afford them find the maintenance costly.
This is because electric generators remain the alternative source of power in view of the epileptic supply of electricity in the country.
7.
Shortage of basic infrastructures: Basic infrastructures such as classrooms, furniture, books, laboratories and air conditioners required for effective functioning of ICT facilities are not adequate in Nigerian schools.
This inadequacy limits students(cid:8217) access to Internet and other ICT facilities.
There are instances where computers are donated to schools but could not be used due to lack of basic infrastructures for their operation.
Some schools that strive to 167maintain ICT facilities amid inadequate infrastructures only end up closing shop not quite long as a result of breakdown of such facilities.
8.
Dearth of technical support staff: The installation, operation, maintenance and network administration of ICT facilities need to be handled by ICT technicians and personnel.
There is shortage of ICT technicians and personnel in Nigeria.
This does not make the country responsive enough to the ever growing challenges of ICT in the global arena.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4 Mention any four problems of ICT application in Nigerian schools.
3.5 Strategies for Strengthening ICT usage in Nigerian Schools In view of the significant impact of ICT on educational development, the following strategies are suggested for strengthening its usage in Nigerian schools.
1.
Training of teaching personnel: There should be mass training of teachers in ICT.
This can be done through an ICT based teacher training programmes in Colleges of Education, Universities and allied institutions.
Moreover, all employed teachers in public and private schools at all levels should under take mandatory training and retraining in ICT programmes in forms of seminars, conferences and workshops.
This will make them ICT literate and they will be able to impact the knowledge and skills to the students.
There is urgent need to review the curricular of various levels of education to reflect ICT application, communication and utilization skills.
2.
Increased funding of education: Our governments should commit more funds to education so that ICT facilities will be made available in schools.
The budgetary allocation to education over the years is still less than 15 percent.
This proportion is still far from the UNESCO recommendation of 26 percent.
The federal government should strive to meet the UNESCO standard in its budgetary allocation to education in order to empower our schools in the provision of ICT facilities.
State and local governments, voluntary agencies, corporate bodies philanthropists and private individuals should also be encouraged to increase their financial commitment to education so that more ICT facilities can be provided in schools.
3.
Regular supply of electricity: Our governments should be more aggressive in the provision of uninterrupted electricity in the country.
This will facilitate the mass usage of ICT facilities both within and outside the schools.
4.
Increase in teledensity: There should be collaborative efforts by stakeholders such as governments, Internet service providers, corporate bodies locally and internationally, telecommunication industry among others in increasing the access to Internet facilities in the country.
Such efforts should also geared towards ensuring mass utilization of ICT facilities for educational purposes.
5.
Poverty alleviation: Governments at various levels should be more aggressive in pursuing policies and programmes that can effectively alleviate poverty among Nigerians.
Priority attention should be given to provision of mass employment, income re-distribution, provision of infrastructures, good health services, diversification of the economy among others.
This will reduce the 168poverty level of the masses and many of them will be able to afford the cost of computer hardware and software and other ICT facilities.
6.
Provision of more basic infrastructures in schools: More basic infrastructures such as classrooms, furniture, books, laboratories, air conditioners among others, which are required for effective functioning of ICT facilities should be provided in schools.
This can be done through increased funding of education by the governments and other stakeholders.
7.
Training of more technical support staff: Government should embark on mass training of ICT technicians, course developers and personnel who will handle the installation, operation, maintenance and network administration of ICT facilities.
This will place the country in a better position to compete favourably in the ICT world.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5 How can the training of more technical support staff strengthen ICT usage in Nigerian schools?
4.0 CONCLUSION For Nigeria to be able to meet the global challenges of educational development, it must fully integrate the application of ICT into its educational system.
This can be done through a holistic approach to solving the myriads of problems, which militate against the mass utilization of ICT resources in our school system.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has taught you ICT in education.
You learnt the meaning of ICT, types of ICT resources and the application of ICT in education.
You also learnt the problems of ICT application in Nigerian educational system and the strategies for strengthening ICT usage in Nigerian schools.
The next unit will teach you the problems of educational administration in Nigeria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1a.
What is ICT?
b.
Describe any five ICT resources.
2.
Explain the importance of ICT to Nigerian educational system.
3.
Discuss any five problems which militate against the application of ICT in Nigerian educational.
4.
Explain the strategies for strengthening ICT usage in Nigerian schools.
1697.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINS Aderogba, A.A. (2007): The use of Information and Communication Technology for qualitative science education in Nigerian secondary schools.
Ikere Journal of Education Special edition on ICT March 1-6.
Adeyemo, O.A.
; Falade, A.A. & Adesope, A.O.
(2007): Challenges to successful implementation of Information and Communication Technologies in Nigeria(cid:8217)s tertiary education in Babalola, J.B.; Akpa, G.O.
and Ayeni, O.A.
(eds) Managing Technical and Vocational education in the era of globalization.
Pp.
175-182.
Ajayi, I.A.
(2008): Towards effective use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for teaching in Nigerian Colleges of Education.
Asian Journal of Information Technology.
7(5): 210-214.
Akubuilo, D.U.
(2007): Effective utilization of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) in science instruction at the tertiary level: some inhibiting factors.
In Babalola, J.B.; Akpa, G.O.
; Ayeni, A.O.
& Adedeji, S.O.
(eds) Access, Equity and quality in higher education.
Pp.
513-521.
Fowowe, S. S.; Shittu, S.G. & Adeleke, S. (2007): From chalkboard to digital learning system: A study of ICT in teacher education programmes;.
Ikere Journal of Education, Special edition on ICT.
March,: 1-6.
Johnson, O.A.
(2007): Enhancing quality in higher education through Information and Communication Technology in Nigeria in Babalola, J.B.; Akpa, G.O.
Ayeni, A.O.
& Adedeji, S.O.
(eds) Access, Equity and Quality in Higher Education.
Pp.
505-512.
Olusanjo, M.O.
(2007): Internet Technologies: What can they do in the management of vocational and technical education in Babalola, J.B.; Akpa, G.O.
Ayeni, A.O.
& Adedeji, S.O.
(eds).
Managing technical and vocational education in the era of globalization.
Pp.
191-195.
Onuma, N. (2007): Utilisation of information and communication technology in schools: Problems and suggestions in Babalola, J.B.; Akpa, G.O.
Ayeni, A.O.
& Adedeji, S.O.
(eds).
Access, Equity and Quality in higher education.
Pp.
487- 496.
Otakhor, E.O.
(2007): Facilitating improved education service delivery in Nigerian universities: The relevance of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) revolution.
In Babalola, J.B.; Akpa, G.O.
Ayeni, A.O.
& Adedeji, S.O.
(eds).
Managing technical and vocational education in the era of globalization pp.
113-118.
170ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 Combination of technologies SAE 2 1.
Computer 2.
Electronic mail (e-mail) 3.
Internet 4.
World Wide Web (www) 5.
Electronic Notice Boards SAE 3 1.
It assists the teachers to take students beyond classroom limits by creating virtual environments to experiment and explore.
2.
It assists teachers with effective and efficient tools to take care of individual differences of the students.
3.
It provides teachers opportunities for cooperation with colleagues through networking and internet services.
SAE 4 1.
Problem of teaching personnel 2.
Inadequate funding 3.
Poor power supply 4.
Low teledensity SAE 5 They will handle the installation, operation, maintenance and network administration of ICT facilities.
171MODULE 4 UNIT THREE TOPIC: PROBLEMS OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION IN NIGERIA 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems of educational administration in Nigeria 3.2 Solutions to the problems of educational administration in Nigeria 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The previous unit taught you Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in education.
There is no doubt that the various applications of ICT will facilitate effective administration of the educational system.
In this unit, you will learn the problems of educational administration in Nigeria.
The unit will also teach you solutions to the identified problems.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: (cid:216) Discuss the problems of educational administration in Nigeria (cid:216) Explain the solutions to the problems of educational administration in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONCEPT 3.1 Problems of Educational Administration in Nigeria Various problems militate against the effective administration of educational system in Nigeria.
Some of these problems are explained as follows: 1.
Unreliable Data: No meaningful educational administration can take place without the availability of accurate, timely and relevant data.
It is disheartening to note that successive population censuses in Nigeria were not reliable and they had generated acrimony among people in various parts of the country.
Unreliable data usually results in failure of educational programmes.
For instance, the Universal Primary Education (UPE) failed because there was no failure on the expected number of children in schools, the number of teachers and classrooms required.
Inaccurate data is also one of the challenges of Universal Basic Education (UPE) programme.
At the school level, school records are not properly kept in several cases due to apathy among other problems.
Moreover, many school heads are fond of 172supplying wrong data to the Ministries of Education.
In some cases, where the right data are supplied, they are falsified and inflated by some government officials for political or selfish reasons.
The day to day administration of the school system requires reliable and accurate data for effective decision making and where the data available is not accurate and reliable, school administrators will be working on wrong premise in the implementation of school programmes.
2.
Shortage of Skilled Manpower: Our Ministries of Education and their parastatals lack adequate professionally trained educational planners.
Many of the personnel in these organizations are not trained educational planners, yet they perform planning duties and school administrators are expected to execute the plans emanating from these non-professionals.
At the school level where the educational plans are implemented, many school heads have no training in educational administration.
Most of them rose to headship position of their schools based on seniority and experience as classroom teachers without training in educational administration.
The danger inherent in this is that school administration is largely placed in the hands of non-administrators who are more likely to perform below expectations.
Apart from shortage of trained school administrators in schools, inadequate trained teachers still feature prominently in our schools.
Untrained teachers usually lack the pedagogical practices that can guarantee effective instructional delivery in the school system.
3.
Political Instability: Effective educational administration depends among other things, on stable, peaceful political environment and continuity in governance.
In Nigeria, the polity is not stable.
Apart from the long period of military rule in Nigeria, which was characterized by instability in governance and unstable educational policies, successive civilian regimes are not much better.
The situation has been such that good educational programmes and projects being implemented by one government are abandoned as soon as another government takes over.
To this end, many school administrators face the problem of shortage of infrastructures in schools.
This usually impedes their effectiveness.
4.
Poor Monitoring and Supervision: Implementation of educational plans is the major task of educational administrators.
For this to be effectively done; there is need for good monitoring and supervision of schools.
However, many schools in Nigeria are not properly monitored and supervised, thereby giving room for administrative ineptitude, poor job performance by the teachers and high rate of indiscipline among staff and students.
Many supervisors who monitor and supervise schools lack professional training and are less competent than most of the teachers they supervise.
The internal supervision which ought to complement the external one being conducted by the Ministries of Education is not regularly done by school heads and heads of departments.
Regular monitoring and supervision is necessary for quality assurance in schools and where this is lacking the quality of outputs of the school system will be affected.
5.
Poor Funding of Education: The issue of funding of education in Nigeria has been a very contentious one.
While it is the feeling of educators and some 173stakeholders that education is grossly under funded, government usually proclaimed that education is given priority attention in its budget.
Various agitations by the Academic Staff Union of Universities usually centre on improved funding of education in the country.
It is an indisputable fact that the federal government is still far away from the UNESCO recommendation of 26% minimum budgetary allocation to education.
According to Ajayi (2007), between 1999 and 2006, the average budgetary allocation to education by the Federal Government was less than 10%.
The inadequate funding of education by the government has resulted in poor facilities, shortage of textbooks and instructional materials in schools.
These problems inhibit effective administration of schools in Nigeria.
6.
Undue Politicization of Education: There is undue politicization of education in Nigeria, a situation that is not conducive for effective administration of the educational system in the country.
Although, education cannot be completely divorced from politics, its undue politicization has led to failure of educational programmes and ineffective educational administration in the country.
For instance, politicians who got people(cid:8217)s mandate to become governors because of the promise of free education programme failed in successful implementing the programme due to poor planning and lack of adequate funding among others.
Allocation of funds to education, location of schools, distribution of educational facilities etc.
has been unduly politicized in the country.
The situation has been such that decisions on educational matters are based on selfish reasons of the politicians rather than merits.
7.
Inconsistent Education Policies: Some educational plans or policies require time to implement before their impact can be felt.
However, as a result of political instability in Nigeria, which has permeated both military and civilian regimes, educational plans, policies or programmes are terminated at will by successive governments.
For instance, the Universal Primary Education (UPE), Scheme introduced by the Federal Military Government in 1976 was abandoned under the civilian regime of 1979-1983 during which the 6-3-3-4 system of education was introduced.
Moreover, the National Open University Project initiated by Sheu Shagari regime was terminated in April 1984 by Buhari regime only to be resuscitated in 2001 by Obasanjo regime.
In 1991, the National Primary Education Commission (NPEC) was scrapped, but resuscitated in 1993.
The inconsistency in the educational policies and programmes of government does not facilitate stability and continuity in the development of educational system in the country.
8.
Corruption and Poor Accountability: Effective administration of the educational system in Nigeria is retarded by corruption and poor accountability.
The scarce resources available to the education sector calls for prudence in utilization of funds and accountability on the part of educational administrators.
It is sad to note that there is prevalence of misappropriation and embezzlement at all levels.
School heads, teachers, education officers, supervisors and staff of examination bodies are involved in corrupt practices.
There are reported cases of diversion of WAEC/NECO examination fees collected from students, by their school heads.
Many school heads and teachers 174collude with WAEC/NECO officials to aids cheating during examinations.
The situation is compounded by the inability of the government to prosecute school heads, education officers and teachers involved in corrupt practices.
It is no longer news that many educational administrators are not responsive to the yearnings and aspirations of the country as contained in the National Policy on Education because of their selfish interests.
9.
Industrial Crisis: The education sector in Nigeria has witnessed series of industrial crisis in recent times.
This is not unconnected with poor conditions of service of staff at various levels of education.
The failure of government to respect agreement reached with various industrial unions in the education sector usually snowball into industrial action.
For instance, primary school teachers in the country had to embark on industrial action for several weeks before the government agreed to implement a new salary structure for them.
Recently, teachers in 19 out of the 36 states of the federation whose governments were yet to commence the implementation of the salary structure were defected by their national union to embark on strike.
For more than 3 months now (September, 2009) all the industrial unions in our public universities have been on strike over the failure of the federal government to sign the agreements reached with them.
Similarly, all tertiary institutions owned by Oyo State government have been on strike for more than 3 months over excessive tax regime by the government.
During strike, schools are closed down and academic activities are disrupted.
Frequent industrial crisis in the educational sector is inimical to effective educational administration in the country.
10.
Brain-drain Syndrome: Universities in Nigeria have continued to lose their best brains to overseas universities or equivalent institutions where their services are better rewarded.
Some of them who cannot migrate abroad find succour in other sectors of the economy that are juicy in terms of conditions of service.
Young graduates with first class honours and second class upper division who support to show interest in lecturing job are not attracted to the system as many of them prefer to take up appointments in other sectors that offer them better pay.
There are establishments that pay a young graduate monthly salary that is more than five times the salary of a professor.
The situation is becoming worse with the reluctance of the government to adequately fund the universities and improve their staff conditions of service.
ASUU has been persistent in its agitation for adequate funding of university education and improved welfare package for its members in order to stem the wave of brain drain syndrome in the universities.
It is pathetic to note that the federal government is yet to realize the need for federal government is yet to realize the need for urgent intervention to save the university from total collapse.
If the scenario persists, the attainment of the aims and objectives of university education in the country will continue to be a mirage.
11.
Volatile and Militant Student Unionism: One of the problems militating against the administration of university education in Nigeria is volatile and militant student unionism.
Instances abound where students violently react to national and internal problems.
Such violent protests are usually being 175masterminded by militant student unions with the collaboration of student cultist and miscreants.
The history of students(cid:8217) protests in Nigeria has shown that during such protests, students were killed and some vice- chancellors were removed.
The protests usually led to intermittent closure of universities.
12.
Poor Physical and Instructional Facilities: Physical facilities such as classrooms, laboratories, libraries, workshops, equipment, furniture and fittings are inadequate in our schools, where these facilities are available, in several cases, they are in a very bad state.
In many schools, inadequate classroom buildings have resulted in overcrowded classrooms, a situation which is not conducive for learning.
There are many schools with libraries, laboratories and workshops without the required facilities for effective teaching and learning.
The state of physical facilities in many of the universities in Nigeria is not encouraging.
Apart from shortage of physical facilities such as lecture theatre/halls, laboratory, resource centres, studios and workshops in the universities, many of the physical facilities available are in deplorable conditions.
The presidential visitation panels which looked into the operations of all the federal universities between 1999 and 2003 reported that academic and physical facilities at the universities were in deplorable states with insufficient lecture theatre/alls, laboratories and so on (NUC 2005).
In terms of instructional facilities, the situation is not different.
In several cases, audiovisual aids, charts, pictures, posters etc are not available in schools.
Where they are available, they are inadequate.
It is quite obvious that not all the instructional facilities can be provided in public schools by the government as teachers are also expected to improvise some of them.
However, many teachers are unable to do this because of financial constraints or lack of commitment.
13.
Enrolment Explosion: Rapid increase in our population has led to sporadic increase in the demand for education.
This has made students enrolment at various levels of education to increase beyond the available facilities.
Primary and secondary schools, particularly in urban centres have over- enrolment of pupils and students.
In several cases, more than 60 students are found in classes meant for 30 to 35 students.
In some of the classrooms, teachers are highly restricted to the chalkboard areas throughout their teaching because it is not possible to move freely in the classrooms to supervise students(cid:8217) works.
These have made effective teaching learning practically impossible.
Apart from the fact that teachers are unable to give personal attention to students, marking of assignments is tedious and burdensome while compilation of results is frustrating particularly where a teacher handles more than two classes.
The situation is similar in the public universities.
Lecture rooms, libraries, laboratories, workshops and hostels are always overcrowded.
According to Akindutire and Ajayi (2007) the NUC reports on 2005 accreditation exercise showed that Nigerian universities were 150 percent over- enrolled.
Furthermore; over 72 percent of the state universities were over crowded.
In all, Nigeria(cid:8217)s top 10 overcrowded universities have 154,799 extra students.
The report also showed that the total enrolment in Olabisi Onabanjo University and Lagos State University was more than the combine enrolment 176of University of Ibadan, University of Lagos, University of Nigeria, Nsukka and Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, which are all first generation universities.
Enrolment explosion in school makes the administration of the educational system in the country cumbersome.
14.
Teachers(cid:8217) poor conditions of service: Teachers at all levels of education in Nigeria are poorly paid.
Their take home pay can hardly take them home.
In several cases, teacher(cid:8217)s salaries are not regularly paid, their promotion are unduly delayed; they are not encouraged and assisted to attend seminars, conferences and workshops; the infrastructures and institutional materials required to do their job effectively are not readily available.
There has been persistent agitation by the Nigerian Union of Teachers (NUT) on the need for improved conditions of service of teachers.
At the University level, ASUU has been on strike for more than 3 months now (September 2009) over the refusal of the Federal Government to sign the agreement the reached with the union.
The contents of the agreement include better pay for lecturers.
15.
Curriculum Deficiency: There are deviations from the contents of the school curriculum and what is taught.
This could be attributed to the failure of educational planners and policy makers to involve teachers who are responsible for the implementation of the curriculum in its making.
There is a gap between the curriculum and the needs of the society it is meant to address.
For instance, many of our graduates in some disciplines are not fit into the world of work in their areas of specialization.
This is evident in their areas of specialization.
This is evident in their inability to practicalize what they studied in the universities.
Perhaps this is as a result of poor implementation of the curriculum.
According to Babalola (2007), curriculum analysis by Okebukola in 2002 reveals that while the contents of the minimum standard course descriptions as laid down by the NUC for Nigerian universities agree well with course contents of Universities in Britain, North America and South Africa, a gap exists in the implementation.
16.
Student Indiscipline: Our value system is fast depreciating among the youths.
They no longer cherish virtues such as hard work, honesty, integrity, sincerity etc.
The bad influence of foreign culture on the youths is compounding the problem.
Social vices are highly embraced by the youths.
Many students find it convenient to engage in examination malpractice; cultism is gaining more ground among the students; many of them are truants; drug abuse is becoming a popular habit among students; many students have flagrant disregard for constituted authorities; and some of them are involved in rape, thuggery, arson, armed robbery and murder.
There is high level of indiscipline among students in our schools.
This makes the administration of the educational system burdensome.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 1.
Which of the following is not a problem of educational administration in Nigeria?
(a) Shortage of skilled manpower 177(b) Consistent educational policies (c) Undue politicization of education (d) Political instability 3.2 Solutions to the Problems of Educational Administration in Nigeria The solutions to some of the problems that militate against effective administration of the educational system in Nigeria are explained as followed.
1.
Provision of reliable data: Governments and educational administrators should collaborate their efforts in order to have reliable data bank that will aid effective planning and administration of the educational system.
All the three levels of government in the country should ensure the conduct of reliable population census, which will be a genuine reservoir of demographic data for various uses.
School administrators, teachers, education officers should conscientiously work together to create authentic education data bank, devoid of falsification, manipulation or inflation of figures.
Such data will be useful and reliable for effective planning and administration of the educational system.
2.
Training of more skilled manpower: Governments should support various educational programmes aimed at giving professional training to serving educational planners in the ministries of education and school administrators for effective performance of their duties.
Such programmes include seminars, conferences and workshops.
Tertiary institutions should also mount part-time educational programmes to give on-the-job professional training to serving educational planners and school administrators.
More trained teachers should be employed in schools while the untrained ones should be mandated to have professional training through sandwich and part-time teacher education programmes of tertiary institutions, within a stipulated time.
3.
Political stability: The politicians, the electorates, the security agencies, the electoral bodies, the judiciary, the armed forces and other stakeholders should work together harmoniously to ensure stable polity through good governance.
This will facilitate stable educational policies and reduce the rate of abandoned educational programmes and projects in the country.
4.
Regular monitoring and supervision: Schools should be regularly monitored and supervised by ministries of education to ensure compliance with laid down standards and effective administration and instructional delivery.
More competent hands should be recruited as supervisors while those on the job should be given professional training from time to time.
At the institutional level, the school heads and the heads of departments should be more alive to their responsibilities regarding instructional supervision in order to complement the efforts of the external supervisors from the Ministries of Education.
5.
Improved funding of education: Government at various levels should make adequate fund available to education.
The budgetary allocation to education should be increased to 26% as recommended by UNESCO while other stakeholders such as the parents, community, philanthropists, schools and industrial organizations should also increase their financial commitments to 178education.
Improved funding of education will enhance the provision of more facilities in schools.
6.
Reduced politicization of education: Education should be less politicized.
Allocation of funds to education, location of schools, distribution of educational facilities etc.
should be based on merits and laid down standards rather than selfish interests of the politicians.
Education programmes that cannot be sustained by the economic base of a state should not be made a campaign issue by the politicians.
7.
Consistent Educational Policies: Successive governments in the country should be patient by allowing educational policies and plans put in place by their predecessors to thrive instead of changing them at will.
Educational policies and plans should only be modified to suit the demands of time when the need arises instead of their complete cancellation or abandonment for selfish reasons.
8.
Anti-Corruption Crusade and Accountability: Governments at various levels should be aggressive in waging total war against corruption in the country.
Anybody involved in misappropriation and embezzlement of public funds and other corrupt practices should be prosecuted and punished to serve as deterrent to others.
School administrators, education officers and teachers should be made accountable on their duties and responsibilities in order to make them more responsive.
9.
Industrial harmony: Industrial harmony should be promoted in the education sector through better conditions of service for teachers at all the levels of education.
Governments should not wait until the teachers agitate for better pay before increasing their pay.
There should be a standing policy that will ensure wage increment from time to time based on the growth of the economy.
This will minimize industrial crisis in the education sector.
10.
War against brain drain Syndrome: The government should wage war against brain drain syndrome through adequate funding of the universities and improved welfare package for lecturers.
Such welfare package should be such that can attract lecturers from overseas countries to work in our universities.
Moreover the facilities in the universities should be upgraded to meet international standards so that the lecturers can conveniently do their job.
11.
Intellectual and Constructive Student Unionism: It is high time the students in our universities engage in intellectual and constructive student unionism.
This will enhance peaceful study environment and uninterrupted academic calendars.
They should believe in dialogue rather than confrontation or violence as a mechanism for conflict resolution.
12.
Provision of Adequate Physical and Instructional Facilities: Adequate physical facilities such as classrooms, laboratories, libraries, workshops, equipments, furniture and fittings should be provided in schools in order to aid effective teaching and learning.
Moreover, instructional facilities such as audio-visual aids, charts, pictures, posters etc should be adequately provided in schools through the collaborative efforts of the governments, schools, parents, voluntary agencies, philanthropist and corporate bodies.
Better funding of 179education will aid the provision of adequate physical and instructional facilities in our schools.
13.
Controlled Environment: Student enrollment at various levels of education should be controlled.
This can be done through establishment of more schools and expansion of facilities and recruitment of more teachers in the over enrolled schools.
Moreover, strict compliance with carrying capacity should be ensured among the public universities.
Adequate funding of the universities will also assist them to expand their facilities and recruit more personnel in order to combat over-enrolment of students.
14.
Better Conditions of Service for teachers: Teachers at all levels of education should be well paid.
The payment of their salaries should be regular, they should be promoted as and when due and they should be encouraged and assisted to attend seminars, workshops and conferences.
Infrastructural and instructional materials should be adequately provided in schools for the teachers to do their job effectively.
15.
Proper Implementation of School Curriculum: School curriculum should be properly implemented.
There should be no gap between the contents of the curriculum and what is taught.
Moreover, teachers who are expected to implement the school curriculum should be involved in its making.
The teachers should be regularly trained to update them so that they are professionally empowered to implement changes in curriculum.
16 Student Discipline: Stakeholders such as governments, school administrators, teachers, parents, and religious leaders among others should collaborate their efforts towards enforcing discipline among the students.
Students should cherish virtues such as hard work, honesty, integrity, sincerity etc and detest the bad influence of foreign culture.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Mention two solutions to the problems of educational administration in Nigeria that can be anchored by the students.
4.0 CONCLUSION Administration of the educational system in Nigeria is constrained with numerous problems that are attributed to the government, school administrators, teachers, students and the society.
The solutions to these problems call for collaborative efforts of the stakeholders.
5.0 SUMMARY Recall that in this unit, you have learnt the problems of educational administration in Nigeria.
These problems include unreliable data, shortage of skilled manpower, political instability, poor monitoring and supervision, poor funding and undue politicization among others.
You were also taught the solutions to these problems.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 180 Examine the various problems that militate against the effective administration of the educational system in Nigeria.
What are the solutions to these problems?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adepoju, T. L. (2000): Improving Educational Efficiency in Nigeria: A Planner(cid:8217)s view in Fadipe, J. O. and Oluchukwu, E. E. (eds) Educational Planning and Administration in Nigeria in the 21st Century.
Ibadan: National Institute for Educational Planning and Administration (NIEPA) Ajayi, I.
A.
(2007): Achieving Universal Basic Education (UBE) in Nigeria: Strategies for Improved Funding and Cost Effectiveness.
The Social Sciences 2(3): 342- 345.
Ajayi, I.
A. and Ayodele, J.
B.
(2002): Fundamentals of Educational Management.
Ado Ekiti: Greenline Publishers.
Ajayi.
I.
A, Ayodele J.
B. and Tenibiaje, D. J.
(2002): Education in Nigeria: Past and Present.
Ado-Ekiti: Greenline Publishers.
Akindutire, I. O. and Ajayi, I, A.
(2007): The unresolved issue of Quality Assurance in Nigerian University.
Journal of Sociology and Education in Africa 6(1): 13- 25.
Babalola, J.
B.
(2007): Reform and Development in Nigeria(cid:8217)s Tertiary Education: Focus on the Obasanjo(cid:8217)s Administrattion in Baabalola, J.
B. Akpa, G. O, Ayeni A. O. and Adedeji, S. O.
(eds).
Access, Equity and Quality in Higher Education Ibadan: NAEP Publication.
Ibukun, W. O.
(1997): Educational Management: Theory and Practice: Ado Ekiti: Bamgboye & Co. Press (Nig) Ltd. Ibukun, W. O.
(2004): Management of Secondary School Education in Nigeria.
Problems and Challenges in Fagbamiye E. O., Babalola J.
B, Fabunmi, M and Ayeni A. O (eds) Management of Primary and Secondary Education in Nigeria.
Ibadan: NAEP Publications.
Obi, E. (200): Issues in Educational Administration.
Enugu: Empathy International.
Olagboye, A.
A.
(2004): Introduction to Educational Management in Nigeria.
Ibadan: Daily Graphics (Nigeria) Limited.
181ANSWERS TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES (SAEs) SAE 1 b- consistent educational policies SAE 2 1.
Intellectual and constructive student unionism Student discipline 182 EDA 807 TOPICAL ISSUES IN EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION BLURB BY DR.
I.
A. AJAYI Department of Educational Foundations and Management, Faculty of Education, University of Ado-Ekiti, Ado-Ekiti 183EDA 807: Topical Issues in Educational Administration is a 2-credit course to be taken by Ph.D. students in Educational Administration at the National Open University of Nigeria.
The course is made up of fifteen study units and a course guide.
It aims at giving learners an understanding of some topical and contemporary issues in Educational Administration and how such issues have influenced Nigerian educational system.
It focuses on historical development of educational administration in Nigeria; the principles of educational administration; leadership; power and authority; communication; time management; cultism and globalization among others.
Learners will find the course interesting.
184
