 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDA809 COURSE TITLE COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS EDA809 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Course Team Dr. C. N. Musa (Developer/Writer) - UNIBEN Prof. N.A.
Nwagwu (Editor) - UNIBEN Dr. S O Ogundiran (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii EDA809 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Amina Kano Crescent Wuse II Abuja.
E-mail: centrainfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-117-0 All Rights Received iii EDA809 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction……………………………………………....………… 1 Course Description ………………………………………………… 1 Objectives……………………………………………….………….. 2 Course Guide………………………………………….…………….
2 Course Aims and Objectives……………………………………….
2 Course Materials and Structure…………………………………….
3 Study Units………………………………………….……………… 4 Textbooks and References ………………………………………… 5 Assignments ………………………………………………..……… 5 Final Examination and Grading…………………………………… 6 Course Marking Scheme…………………………………………… 6 How to Get the Most from this Course……………….....………….
7 Facilitators/Tutor and Tutorials…………………………...………... 8 Conclusion………………………………………….……………….
9 Summary……………………………………….…….……...……… 9 iv Introduction This Course Guide has been prepared to provide you with a broad overview of the course – Comparative Studies in Higher Education System.
It will also facilitate your navigation through this self- instructional material very effectively.
Essentially an access device, this course guide has been prepared in such a way that it would introduce you broadly to the course material and how you can effectively use the material in order to derive maximum benefit from reading and studying it.
In addition, it is normally expected that many questions will agitate your minds as you read the course material.
Such questions may include how to effectively plan your study-time since many of you are full-time or part-time employees in your various organizations.
When to submit the many assignments may also agitate your mind.
Then, most importantly, since this is Open Distance Learning and the instructor is not readily available, what alternative support services are available to you is another area of concern.
This course material will serve as a reference tool to consult because all these questions have been anticipated and the answers and suggestions have all been built into the course material.
Course Description Comparative Studies in Higher Education Systems is a postgraduate course which covers the major aspects of Comparative Higher Educational practices worldwide.
Starting with Bureaucratic, Departmentalization and Committee Systems in Higher Educational Institutions, it goes on to examine in some detail, the state of Higher Education practice in some developed and developing nations of the world.
Finally, the course examines some specific Higher Education problems and the strategies which have been universally applied in solving them.
The main objective of the course is to provide doctoral degree students in education a broad knowledge of the major factors which shape educational practice worldwide.
Since Higher Education plays a very significant role in human capital development, it therefore expected that this course will equip the students with the necessary information for a better and informed understanding of their roles in the national developmental process.
Objectives EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS When you have completed reading this course guide, you should be able to: • appraise this Course Guide • draw an outline of the course structure and content • summarise the substance of the course • describe how you have studied the course • list the support services which have been available to you and how you have been assessed for the course.
Course Guide Comparative Studies in Higher Education System.
The course is for postgraduate students especially at the doctoral level and it is a two unit elective course.
There are five modules which have been broken down into fifteen units, that is, each module has three units.
In addition to several resource tools which may be available to you, this course guide has also been specially prepared for your level of learners who have enrolled for the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degree in Education of the National Open University of Nigeria.
Some of the information which have been provided for you about the course in this guide include: the aims, the objectives, what the course is all about, what course materials you will be using, what support services are available to you both for learning, assignments and examination.
It will equally provide you with the necessary guidelines on how to plan your study-time and the probable amount of time you may spend on each unit.
It is advisable for you to carefully go through this course guide and complete the feedback from which is provided at the end before you commence studying the course.
You will be required to submit the completed feedback form and your first Tutor-Marked Assignment to your tutorial facilitator at the study centre in your location.
As much as possible, this guide has been specially written with in-built answers to several anticipated questions.
However, all further questions would be answered at the study centre.
May God provide the unmistaken guidance towards your success in this course?
Course Aims and Objectives As doctoral students you are expected to have a broad based knowledge of the major factors which shape education as it is practised worldwide.
This is with the sole aim of equipping you with the necessary information for a better and informed understanding of the direction of ii EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS educational systems of the world.
When you have acquired such knowledge, an inquiring mind is expected to have been created in you as a way of helping you understand, analyse and proffer solutions to the educational issues in your country.
You are expected to be able to provide some enlightened opinions about educational discourse, especially as some of you are occupying several positions of responsibility requiring important decision making such as Secondary School Principals, Assistant Directors or even Lecturers in higher institutions.
The knowledge from this course will help you almost on a daily basis to make well informed contributions to any educational issue.
The entire course covers comparative studies in various aspects of higher education especially in Nigeria and with passing references to some other parts of the world.
The role of higher education in the development of the human capital has been emphasized all through the course and how this process can facilitate national development.
Remember that each of the modules has three units each of which has its own objectives.
Therefore, when you have covered the entire course units, you should be able to: • Use specific examples to illustrate how departmentalization and bureaucratization have facilitated higher educational development in Nigeria • Explain how the committee system works in higher education in Nigeria • Describe very briefly how two or three named countries have surmounted some financial and curricular problems in their higher education systems.
• Enumerate the major challenges which the Federal Government of Nigeria has been facing in financing and administering her higher education system.
• Suggest reasons/explanations why higher education funding has been a serious challenge to developing nations Course Materials and Structure The course has the following major components: • The course guide (which you are reading now) • The Modules/Course Summary There are five modules in all.
Module 1 introduces you to the field of Comparative Education with particular reference to the educational elements generally susceptible to comparison like the bureaucratic and departmental structure of higher education.
Module 2 examines the iii EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS committee system and line/staff relationships in higher education administration.
Module 3 looks at higher education in selected countries of the world.
Module 4 provides an in-depth analysis of the role of the federal government, the NUC and other agencies in the administration and funding of higher education in Nigeria.
Finally, module 5 examines some higher education problems and the international strategies which have been variously applied in solving them.
Study Units There are fifteen study units in all in this course.
Each study unit consists of one week’s work which you should be able to complete within a period of three hours.
Each of the study units comprises specific objectives, guidance for study, reading materials and some self- assessment exercises (SAEs) where applicable.
There are also Tutor- Marked Assignments (TMAs) which are expected to assist you in the achievement of the stated learning objectives of the individual study units of the course.
The comprehensive list of the study units is as follows: Module 1 Bureaucratic Departmental Structure of Higher Educational Institutions Unit 1 Overview of Comparative Studies in Higher Education Unit 2 Departmental Structure and Linkages in Higher Education System Unit 3 Bureaucratisation of Higher Education Unit 4 The Nature of Committee System in Higher Education Module 2 Factors Influencing the Development and Management of Higher Education Unit 1 National Philosophy and History of Education Unit 2 Politics of Education and National Development Unit 3 Economics and Funding of Education Unit 4 Social and Religious Factors Module 3 Higher Education Systems in Developed Countries Unit 1 Higher Education in United Kingdom Unit 2 Higher Education in the United States of America Unit 3 Higher Education in France Unit 4 Higher Education in Germany Module 4 Higher Education System in Developing Countries iv EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Unit 1 Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Higher Education in South Africa Unit 3 Higher Education in Brazil Unit 4 Higher Education in China Module 5 Selected Problems of Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 1 Problems Relating to Governance Unit 2 Problems Relating to Curriculum/Academic Programmes Unit 3 Problems Relating to Funding Unit 4 Problems Relating to Access and Quality Assurance Textbooks and References Briggs, Leslie J.
(ed) (1977).
Instructional Design: Principles and Applications.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J. Educational Technology Publications.
NOUN (2009) “Writing a Course Guide and Editing” in Course Material Development in Open Distance Learning Training Manual.
Lagos: NOUN.
Assignments Each of the 15 units of this course has at least 3 Tutor-Marked Assignments which have been specially designed to cover all areas which have been treated in the course.
You will be given your assignments and the dates for submission at year study centre?
You will be told how many questions or assignments to prepare and which of them your assessment will be based on for your continuous assessment.
Each assignment carries 10% and three of them will make up 30% of the total score for the course.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutorial facilitator for formal assessment on or before the stipulated dates for submission.
The work which you will submit to your tutorial facilitator for assessment will count for 30% of your total course score.
Guidelines for Writing Tutor-Marked Assignments: 1.
On the cover-page of your assignment, write the course code and title, assignment number (TMA 1, TMA 2, etc) and date of submission, your name and matric number, and it should look like this: v EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Course code: Course Title: Tutor-Marked Assignment Date of Submission School and Programme Matriculation Number 2.
In answering your TMA questions, you are required to be precise and to the point.
Your answer should be based on the course material, further readings and relevant experience from the field.
However, do not copy from any of these materials.
If you do, you will be penalized.
Wherever necessary, remember to provide relevant examples and illustrations.
3.
Use ruled foolscap sized paper for writing answers.
Make and keep a copy of your assignments.
4.
All answers should be handwritten by you, leaving a margin of about 1.5 inches on the left hand side and about 5 lines before the answer to the next question for your tutorial facilitator’s comments.
5.
When you have completed each assignment, make sure that it reaches your tutorial facilitator on or before the deadline.
If for any reason you cannot complete your work on schedule, contact your study centre manager and tutorial facilitator before the assignment falls due to discuss the possibility of an extension.
Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under exceptional circumstances.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for EDA809 will be of 3 hours duration, and will carry 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consist of questions which reflect the kinds of Self-Assessment Exercises and questions in the TMAs which you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course will be assessed.
You should use the time between finishing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course material.
You will find it useful to review your answers to SAEs and TMAs before the examination.
For you to be eligible to sit for the final examinations, you must have done the following: 1.
You should have submitted all the Tutor-Marked Assignments for the course.
2.
You should have registered to sit for the examination.
The deadline for examination registration will be available at your study centre.
Failure to submit your assignment or to register for vi EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS the examination (even if you sit for the examination) means that you will not have a score for the course Course Marking Scheme Assignments TMAs, Three Assignments = 30% Final Examination Overall course score = 70% Total = 100% Course Overview The course is spread over fifteen weeks of about three hours of course coverage per week, making a total of forty-five (45) hours.
Each of the fifteen units is accompanied with a minimum of three (3) tutor-marked assignments which you are required to complete and submit to your tutorial facilitator at the study centre of your location.
Self-Assessment Exercises (SAEs) There are some Self-Assessment Exercises distributed throughout your course material.
You should attempt each exercise immediately after reading the material which precedes it.
Possible answers to the exercises are provided at the end of the course material.
No reference should be made to them until after you must have attempted the exercises.
Since these exercises are purely for self-evaluation, they are not to be submitted.
How to Get the Most from this Course This course has been designed in study units which you should read as if you are reading a lecture.
They effectively replace the lecturer and you can read them at your own time and pace.
Each study unit has common features with the others like introduction to the subject matter, the learning objectives and how they are integrated with the whole course.
The objectives will guide you as you progress.
There are also exercises which are designed to help you recall what you have studied and to evaluate your learning by yourself.
The tutor-marked assignments which are to help you in the achievement of the objectives of the units are also included in the course.
You will need to draw up a personal time table which will help you go through the course appropriately.
When you have gone through the first unit, check how long it took you to cover both the reading and the assignments which should not be more than three hours.
You are free to make generous notes on the margins of the course material which you can use later for your revision.
vii EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Facilitators/Tutor and Tutorials Since this is a distance learning programme where a lot would depend on your personal effort, a number of academic support services will be provided in the course of your study.
These include: facilitation, tutorial sessions and couselling support services.
The course material is essentially your “teacher”.
In order to provide you with an opportunity for face-to-face contact with your peers, tutorial sessions have been provided for at the end of each unit.
These tutorial sessions are to be coordinated by a tutorial facilitator who is to determine how long the session should last and how many tutorials you should have.
Since there are five modules, then five tutorial sessions if well planned would be adequate for the course.
Facilitation Your tutorial facilitators are subject experts at the study centres and they are expected to do the followings for you: • provide answers to your questions during tutorial sessions either through face-to-face, phone or by e-mail.
That means that you should have the phone numbers and the e-mails of your tutorial facilitators.
• coordinate group discussions • provide feedback on your assignments • pose questions to confirm learning outcomes • coordinate, mark and record your assignments/examination scores and • monitor your progress English is the language of instruction.
This course material is available in print, CD and on the NOUN website – URL: www:nou.edu.ng Counselling At the NOUN, counseling is an integral part of the learning programme which is provided at the academic and personal levels.
There are both centre managers and tutorial facilitators and counselors to assist you with questions on academic matters such as course materials, facilitation, submission of assignments and so on.
You are to avail yourself with the services of these functionaries/services at the study centre.
Conclusion viii EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS This course guide has provided you with the high-points of the course in a nutshell in order to help you achieve the objectives of the course.
It has highlighted the aims and objectives of the course, course summary, course overview, some self-assessment exercises and study questions – all to guide you and help you achieve maximum results.
Summary This Course Guide has been prepared for EDA809: Comparative Studies in Higher Education System.
The course is subsumed under the general Comparative Studies in Education.
It specifically selected certain comparable elements of higher education systems such as the bureaucratization and departmentalization which has characterized university systems worldwide.
In five short modules, the course material has examined various other elements of education especially higher education in Nigeria.
It is expected that the knowledge acquired from this course will equip students with the necessary information and skills required to assess similar problems in their respective areas of educational influence.
ix EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Course Code EDA809 Course Title Comparative Studies in Higher Education Systems Course Team Dr. C. N. Musa (Developer/Writer) - UNIBEN Prof. N.A.
Nwagwu (Editor) - UNIBEN Dr. S O Ogundiran (Coordinator) - NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA x EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office 5, Dar es Salaam Street Off Amina Kano Crescent Wuse II Abuja.
E-mail: centrainfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published By: National Open University of Nigeria First Printed 2011 ISBN: 978-058-117-0 All Rights Received xi EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 Bureaucratic Departmental Structure of Higher Educational Institutions…………………….……….
1 Unit 1 Overview of Comparative Studies in Higher Education.
1 Unit 2 Departmental Structure and Linkages in Higher Education System……………………………………… 13 Unit 3 Bureaucratisation of Higher Education……………..... 20 Unit 4 The Nature of Committee System in Higher Education.
30 Module 2 Factors Influencing the Development and Management of Higher Education……………....... 38 Unit 1 National Philosophy and History of Education……… 38 Unit 2 Politics of Education and National Development…….
45 Unit 3 Economics and Funding of Education...……………… 52 Unit 4 Social and Religious Factors………………................... 58 Module 3 Higher Education Systems in Developed Countries... 63 Unit 1 Higher Education in United Kingdom..……………..... 63 Unit 2 Higher Education in the United States of America...... 70 Unit 3 Higher Education in France……………………….….. 81 Unit 4 Higher Education in Germany………………………… 88 Module 4 Higher Education System in Developing Countries.. 96 Unit 1 Higher Education in Nigeria…………….…................... 96 Unit 2 Higher Education in South Africa………..……………106 Unit 3 Higher Education in Brazil………………..………….. 113 Unit 4 Higher Education in China………….…….………….. 119 Module 5 Selected Problems of Higher Education in Nigeria.. 132 Unit 1 Problems Relating to Governance………...………….. 132 Unit 2 Problems Relating to Curriculum/Academic Programmes………………………………………....…141 Unit 3 Problems Relating to Funding……………..………….
147 Unit 4 Problems Relating to Access and Quality Assurance... 155 xii EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS MODULE 1 BUREAUCRATIC AND DEPARTMENTAL STRUCTURE OF HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS Unit 1 Overview of Comparative Studies in Higher Education Unit 2 Departmental Structure and Linkages in Higher Education Unit 3 Bureaucratisation of Higher Education Unit 4 The Nature of Committee System in Higher Education UNIT 1 AN OVERVIEW OF COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Comparative Higher Education 3.1.1 Definitions 3.1.2 Characteristics of Higher Education 3.1.3 Comparing Higher Education with other Levels of Education 3.2 A Brief History of Higher Education in Nigeria 3.3 The Nature of the Learner in Higher Education 3.4 The Place of Higher Education in National Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The Comparative Studies in Higher Education Systems is a postgraduate course which has been specially designed for those of you at this highest level of learning in your educational career, that is, the doctoral level.
As doctoral students you are expected to have an expanded knowledge of the major factors which shape the educational thoughts, processes and developments of the nations of the world.
These factors may range from social, economic and even to cultural ones, all of which require very close scrutiny in order to understand the direction of the educational systems of the countries under consideration.
The overall purpose of this effort is to create in you a very inquiring and innovative mind which is expected to help you in your consideration and 1 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS analysis of the educational issues in your country.
At your level, the importance of the knowledge of the educational systems of other countries from the comparative perspective cannot be overemphasised.
Such knowledge is expected to help you almost on a daily basis, in your decisions either to adapt, adopt or to appropriate those elements which could help in strengthening and improving the educational systems in your respective countries since the very infectious virus of globalisation has successfully broken the barriers between nations.
In this unit, attention will be focused on the nature of comparative higher education, pointing out the major characteristics and at the same time comparing them to other levels of the education system in Nigeria.
Even as the focus will be on Nigeria, very close comparative references will be made frequently to other countries developed and developing, with the sole aim of acquainting you with the international perspective of the course.
This is very important because in recent times, all over the world, economic and social developments have continued to be engineered by the advancement and very ingenious application of higher education knowledge.
Most developing nations, with the possible exception of the “Asian Tigers”, have not been able to develop the necessary capacity to generate and effectively harness higher education knowledge for the pursuit of sustainable development and improved standards of living.
It is a common knowledge, and with proof from the 1996 World Bank reports that many developing nations, including Nigeria are living below the poverty line of one U.S. Dollar per day.
One of the potent ways of changing that situation is via the instrumentality of Research and Development (R&D) in Higher Education.
We cannot know how the successful nations have done it unless we study their educational systems to know how they have used the instrumentality of higher education to construct a knowledgeable economy and a developed society.
It has been reported that the success story of the “Asian Tigers” is the reward for their substantial investments in the development of the “human capital” especially in the higher education sector.
This is essentially the rationale for this course.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain what comparative higher education is all about • enumerate some of the characteristics of higher education • draw comparisons between higher education and other levels of the education system, pointing out the major distinguishing 2 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS characteristics between primary, secondary and tertiary levels of education • write a brief summary of the history of higher educational development in Nigeria • write a brief profile of the learner in a higher education system in comparison to the learner in other educational levels • assess the role of higher education in the national development of nations, pointing out examples of nations which have changed their developmental fortunes by means of their huge investments in higher education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Comparative Higher Education 3.1.1 Definitions The operative concepts above are three – comparative, higher and education.
It is better to sharpen your understanding first, by explaining each of the terms.
Ordinarily, to compare means to examine at least two things by placing them side by side and pointing out the similarities and differences between and within the objects.
It is possible to compare two persons in terms of their look and general physical appearance.
It is also possible to compare two or three houses in terms of their shapes, architectural designs and so on.
It is even possible to compare two or more governments, say a parliamentary democracy and dictatorial or military regime.
Such comparisons bring out very clearly the differences and similarities between the systems which can be used as a guide in making decisions about the things being compared.
All over the world, three levels of education are generally recognised.
They are primary/or elementary, secondary and tertiary/or higher education.
As the name implies, higher/or tertiary education is the highest of all the levels.
It includes all levels of education above the secondary or high school cadres.
For most higher education, the successful completion of the secondary level is a prerequisite for entry; there are several levels of higher education.
There are the colleges of education, technology, polytechnics and their many variants.
Then, there is the university/system which is the highest level of higher education.
Each of these levels has its successful completion certificate or diploma as the case may be.
Education, as you are aware, has elastic nature and indefinite in its definition.
For our purpose, however, it might just be sufficient to align 3 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS with Taiwo (1980) and Fafunwa (1991) who have explained education as a complex system in which interdependent functionaries are interacting with the aim of achieving the goals which the society had set for itself.
It generally involves the deliberate action of teachers, parents, governments and several other interested groups who are concerned with the well-being and development of the society.
The special places usually set aside conventionally for the implementation of the educational goals are the schools.
Comparative higher education, therefore, is a categorisation of the general field of comparative education, with emphasis on the higher or tertiary level of education.
Generally, the focus of such comparisons is in the areas of the historical developments, the structure and the transfer of academic models, the curriculum, financing and administration and other international linkages.
There are also considerations for students and the myriads of students’ problems and so on.
3.1.2 Characteristics of Higher Education Higher education refers to a level of education provided by universities, vocational universities, community, colleges, institutes of technology and other collegiate level institutions, such as vocational schools, trade schools and career colleges that award academic degrees or professional certifications.
It is generally not compulsory in most countries of the world.
Higher education usually includes teaching, research and other social and community related services of the universities.
Higher education is very closely connected to national economy especially as it serves as a source of trained high level and well educated manpower for all the sectors of the economy.
This is why most of the academic programmes in higher institutions all over the world are job or professional oriented.
For example, higher medical education prepares the students for positions in the medical and health related services.
In the same way, higher education in engineering education usually prepares engineering professional students to become in the various fields of engineering.
As in the United Kingdom and most Commonwealth countries, there are several types of higher education – the higher general education and training.
This usually takes place in the conventional universities and is theoretically and practically inclined, offering degrees in the various areas of learning including the doctoral level.
There are also the higher vocational universities, the polytechnics and monotechnics.
Most teaching staff in higher institutions are also actively involved in research and community work.
To qualify for teaching in higher institutions, the person must first obtain a doctorate degree in an area of his specialisation.
At the lower or beginners level, the masters’ degree may 4 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS be the only requirement.
Other than the academic area, there are other support staff in the main administration who are also well qualified in their respective fields as accountants, social workers, library and technical services.
The focus of higher education worldwide has been on the problems of teachers as well as students, of planners as well as administrators.
Even though educational systems vary from country to country, the critical issues in higher education are generally shared by teachers and researchers alike all over the world.
This is why higher education characteristically offers the opportunity for an exchange of research results, experience and insights, and provides a regular forum for discussion among the experts in the field.
Higher education generally provides authoritative reviews, comparative studies and analysis of specific approaches to problems.
For example, the problems associated with examination malpractice and admission fraud in higher education in Nigeria are common to all the universities.
Strategies that have worked in some universities are being continually modified and improved upon to solve the same problems in other universities.
This has been made possible only through some comparative sharing of ideas and information.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 In your own words, explain what Comparative Education is all about.
Essentially, higher education is usually not compulsory in many educational policy formulations of many nations, whereas the lower levels – the primary and secondary education are compulsory for many nations.
In Nigeria for example, the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria states clearly at Section 18 of Chapter II that “… government shall strive to eradicate illiteracy, and to this end, government shall as and when practicable, provide – (a) free, COMPULSORY and universal primary education”.
The launching of the Universal Basic Education (UBE) in September of the same year was the result of this constitutional provision.
Higher educational institutions are usually fewer than the lower levels of education.
As at January 2009, Nigeria had only 95 officially recognised universities nationwide.
Meanwhile, Edo and Delta States alone had over 700 secondary schools with the number of primary schools totaling four times that number.
The infrastructural requirements for the lower levels are usually not as elaborate as they are for higher education.
The same is true for the quality and quantity of staff required to run the two lower levels of the education system.
Above all, while higher education provides its clientele with the necessary skills and training for the labour 5 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS market, the lower levels merely prepare the younger citizens for further education and in many cases for basic education only.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 In what ways is higher education different from other levels?
3.2 A Brief History of Higher Education in Nigeria Higher Education in Nigeria is closely connected with the history of the colonial administration in the early part of the 19th century.
According to Taiwo (1980:88), the Asquith Commission was in August 1943 appointed to: consider the principles which should guide the promotion of higher education, learning and research and the development of universities in the colonies; and to explore means whereby universities and other appropriate bodies in the United Kingdom may be able to cooperate with institutions of higher education in the colonies in order to give effect to these principles.
This was immediately followed by the establishment by the colonial government of the Inter-University Council for Higher Education Overseas otherwise known as the Elliot Commission.
It must be pointed out however that before then, the Yaba Higher College had already been established in 1932 and became fully operational in 1934.
As the need for higher education in the colonies intensified, it was recommended that universities should be established immediately as colleges of the University of London.
Facilities were to be provided in the university colleges for the much needed secondary school teachers, with the curriculum covering the areas of the Arts, Sciences, vocational subjects and room created for research.
This was why, in 1948, the University College of Ibadan (now University of Ibadan) was founded.
About the same time, similar colleges were reportedly opened at Legion in the Gold Coast (now Ghana) and at Makerere in Uganda-all of them being British colonies.
In fact, it was reported that the nucleus of the foundation students of the University College Ibadan were the students (148 of them) who had been successful in the entrance examination of 1947, into the Yaba Higher College in the Lagos colony.
Shortly before independence in 1960, Sir William Hamilton-Fyfe had recommended a Territorial College for Nigeria – covering the area of technical education training of technical teachers and manpower for commerce and industry.
The result of the recommendations was the 6 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS establishment in each of the regions, the Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology simultaneously at Ibadan, Zaria and Enugu.
Immediately after independence, following the 1960 Ashby Report popularly referred to as Investment in Education, it was recommended that the Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology be integrated into the university system of Nigeria.
The University College, Ibadan did not attain its autonomy until December 27, 1962 with the University of Ibadan Act of 1962 and Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, president of the Republic was the visitor.
While the universities of Ibadan and Lagos were established as federal universities (and they still are), others, which were later taken over by the federal government, were originally regional universities (Taiwo, 1985, Fafunwa, 1991).
The University of Nigeria, Nsukka was therefore established on October 7, 1960, integrating the facilities of the Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology at Enugu as its campus.
Buoyed by the Ibadan and Nsukka success stories, the other regions became frenzy with the quest for university education.
Therefore in 1962, three autonomous universities sprang up simultaneously – the University of Ife at Ile-Ife – (now Obafemi Awolowo University) on June 30, 1962, the University of Lagos, first at Idi-Araba in October in 1962 and the Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria on October 4, 1962.
The Ahmadu Bello University incorporated the Zaria branch of the Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology, the Ahmadu Bello College in Kano (later Bayero College), the Institute of Administration, Zaria, the Institute for Agricultural Research, Samaru, and the Veterinary Research Institute at Vom.
It was not until eight years after that a sixth university – the University of Benin (formerly Midwest Institute of Management and Technology) was established in 1970.
That is the genesis of higher education in Nigeria.
It is however gratifying to note that as at today, Nigeria can boast of about 102 government approved universities, 27 of which are federal owned, 34 state owned and 41 privately owned.
As at January 2009, the 102 Nigerian universities had a total 99, 464 staff strength, with 27,394 academic staff and 72,070 non-academic staff.
The entire student population stood at 1,096,312, constituting about four percent enrolment rate.
On a comparative basis, while Nigeria has only four percent of her population enrolled in higher education, India has seven percent, Indonesia eleven percent, Brazil twelve percent while South Africa has as much as seventeen percent of her population enrolled in higher education.
7 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.3 The Nature of the Learner in Higher Education At the higher education level, the learner is significantly different from those of the lower levels of the education system.
Higher institutions are expected to be populated essentially by adults who are expected to have completed a certain level of education which should have qualified them for admission into a higher institution.
In fact 16 years was the lower age limit allowed for admission.
For many sub-degree and postgraduate programmes, there are virtually no age restrictions.
Most of the professional and certificate courses in higher institutions are populated by a very wide range of learners – young, middle-age, adult and very advanced individuals.
A lot of academic freedom is provided for all the learners in terms of their choice of course/programme, socialisation/association and general discipline.
They are, however, guided by the rules and regulations of the respective higher institutions.
In spite of the measures put in place by various higher institutions to make learners fall in line with the rules and regulations of the institution, Okebukola (1998:310) had denounced the growing menace of gangersterism among learners in institutions of higher learning.
Musa (2008:157-169) had also denounced the menace of cultism in most higher institutions in Nigeria.
Other vices in which students of higher institutions have been fingered include examination malpractice, cyber fraud, admission racketeering, and a host of other disruptive, extremely violent and maladaptive behaviours.
It must be pointed out however that, the nature of the learner in institutions of higher learning was originally not in the manner which has been described above.
The typical higher education student was originally an epitome of high moral and intellectual discipline.
He/she represented a high level of those to be respected in society.
Then you might be tempted to ask, at what point did things start going wrong?
In order to answer this question, we might have to take a retrospective trip down memory lane on our journey through nationhood, independence and on to the era of the military misadventure into governance in Nigeria.
Perhaps, we might find an answer.
3.4 The Place of Higher Education in National Development The role of higher education as an important catalyst for national development has long been established.
Education is a change agent and a very potent weapon against ignorance, superstition and poverty.
Education is the modern means by which new skills, attitude, knowledge, values and information may be effectively acquired, and these are the main ingredients for social and economic development 8 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS worldwide.
From the functionalist perspective, education, particularly higher education, is a great level of society which provides individuals with opportunities to forge ahead providing society with the skilled human power needed for national, economic, social and political development.
King (1979) had compared educational development with the three stages of technological development.
The first stage of educational development is for limited people.
The second stage extends the benefits of education further to the core of the population who may find employment in the nation’s civil service or in the commerce or industry.
A large percentage of the middle class belongs to this second stage.
Here, you will find those who have obtained university degrees in the various fields of human endeavour and are occupying responsible positions in the various sectors of the nation’s economy.
In these positions, they make their contributions towards the development of the society using the skills which they have acquired from higher educational training.
They, the university degree holders, are also present in the private sector, academia, and in government; they hold sway especially at the top echelon of the policy making machinery of government.
The third stage of the educational development involves the training that is required for the technological age, the age of mass communication.
According to Bell (1973), this is the education for the post-industrial society where a large percentage of the work force is engaged in Information and Communication Technology (ICT).
Their field of operation is the information superhighway or what we can call the worldwide web (www), the internet and so on.
As development occurs, which is the result of the contributions from those who have acquired higher education, the society responds positively as well by changing in terms of the values and attitudes towards education.
At the individual level, many families respond favourably towards education by their willingness to obtain loans for financing their children’s education.
This is because they have seen how higher education qualifications have opened doors into the world of choice of career opportunities for people.
This is what Inkeles and Smith (1974) have described as the modernization effect and the making of the modern man who places a very high value on formal education and the acquisition of the necessary skills for economic development in a modern society.
For a developing economy like Nigeria, the various sectors of the economy need to be modernised.
To achieve this, Nigerian leaders (political leaders) must be willing and ready for massive changes rather than “sporadic fire brigade” ones which is often experienced in Nigeria.
9 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Such changes must involve all the institutions of the society- transportation, communications, health sector, economic planning, and above all the educational system – particularly higher education, which is the instrument for economic development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 What led to the establishment of the “Ashby Universities”?
4.0 CONCLUSION In this unit, we have examined the concept of comparative higher education, identifying it as a specialised area of study, a sub-category of the general area of the discipline of comparative education.
In examining the characteristics of higher education, reference was made to other levels of education with emphasis on the learner and learning characteristics.
A consideration of the role of higher education in national development revealed that the two are almost inseparable.
In fact, it has been pointed out that, it is almost impossible for any nation to develop without first investing heavily on human capital development which is the main function of higher education.
5.0 SUMMARY Comparative higher education is a categorisation of the general field of comparative education with emphasis on the higher/tertiary level of education.
The brief history of higher education in Nigeria has shown that higher education was tied to the historical development- from the colonial era to the present time.
Successful educational system brings about a successful nation and a developed economy has obvious in the American nations.
Higher education in Nigeria is also closely connected to our socio-economic and political development.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Comparative Higher Education is about similarities and differences between the various elements of the post-secondary level of the education system.
In order to bring out such differences and similarities, the educational elements such as the general philosophies and objectives, the educational structure, the administration and financing, the curriculum and teacher education are compared.
The main purpose for such comparison is essentially to utilise any information or knowledge so acquired in the solution of similar educational problems elsewhere through adaptation, modification or even wholesale adoption.
10 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS (Note that the question requires the student to explain comparative education in his/her own words, so their explanations may not necessarily be the same with my own).
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Higher Education is generally career-oriented and specialised whereas the lower levels are preparatory for further studies.
Higher education is normally not compulsory in most parts of the world whereas the lower levels are.
The student cohort for higher education is usually more mature and responsible than the lower levels.
On the other hand the student population is usually higher for the lower educational levels than higher education.
There are also fewer higher educational institutions than in other levels.
In the same way the infrastructural requirements for higher education are generally more elaborate than for the lower levels.
There is a higher level of specialisation with students studying fewer academic subjects than at the lower levels where students study as many as eight or ten different subjects.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 The “Ashby Universities” were established to meet the urgent needs of the British colonies of which Nigeria was one.
The Ashby Commission which was set up to examine and project the manpower needs of the British Colonies in West Africa had recommended the establishment of Universities.
Essentially, it was in anticipation of Nigeria’s independence in 1960 in terms of the manpower needs of Nigeria in the next twenty years.
The Report which was submitted almost on the eve of Nigeria’s political independence in 1960 led to the founding of the Universities of Nigeria at Nsukka, Lagos, Ife, Ibadan and the Ahmadu Bello University in Zaria.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Define comparative higher education.
2.
Make a list of four characteristics of comparative higher education.
3.
Describe the evolutionary stages of higher educational development in Nigeria.
4.
State briefly, the relationship between research and development in the national development programme of a nation.
11 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ballantine, Jeane H. (1989).
The Sociology of Education: A Systematic Analysis.
Englewood Cliffs: New Jersey Prentice-Hall Inc. Bates, Robert H. (2008).
Ethnicity, Capital Formation and Conflict.
Paper presented at the Festschrift Conference for Myron Weiner, Sept. 24-26.
Kellogg Institute: University of Notre Dane.
http://www.nd.edu/~kellog/events/pdfs/Bates.pdf.
Fafunwa, A. Babs (1991).
History of Education in Nigeria (New Edition).
Ibadan: NPS Educational Publishers Limited.
Iwuama, B.C., et al.
(1992).
Comparative Education: A Functional Approach.
Agbor: Central Books Limited.
Musa, C.N.
(2008).
“Managing Cultism in Tertiary Institutions in Nigeria” in African Journal of Contemporary Issues.
8 (3): 157- 169.
Postlethwaite, T. Neville (1988).
(Ed.).
The Encyclopedia of Comparative Education and National System of Education.
New York: Pergamon Press.
Taiwo, C.O.
(1985).
The Nigerian Education System: Past, Present and Future.
Lagos: Nelson Pitman Limited.
12 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 2 DEPARTMENTAL STRUCTURE AND LINKAGES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Structure of Higher Education System 3.1.1 The Undergraduate Programmes 3.1.2 The Masters’ Programmes 3.1.3 The Doctoral Programmes 3.2 The Departmental Structure of Higher Education System 3.3 The Postgraduate School System 3.4 Linkages with the International Community 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In unit one, you were given a general overview of comparative higher education in terms of the characteristics historical development and its relationship or contribution to national development.
This unit will take you a little further into the details of the organisational structure of higher education – as practised worldwide.
As pointed out earlier, higher education is mainly a post-secondary affair just as secondary education is a post-primary affair.
As the primary level of education prepares learners for secondary education, so also does secondary education prepare the individual for higher education.
It is however possible to secure a place in a higher institution for a degree without necessarily attending a secondary school.
Such candidates would have to have obtained some other minimum qualifications such as the General Certificate of Education (GCE) at either the ordinary or advanced level.
In the United Kingdom, the Cambridge School Certificate is generally the prerequisite both at the ordinary and the advanced level.
In the United States of America, it is the College Entrance Examination for most community colleges which award university degrees of their parent universities.
In Nigeria, there are several examination bodies whose qualifying examinations give prospective higher education seekers access to universities of their choice.
These include the Senior Secondary Schools, National Examinations Commission (NECO), National Business and Technical Education Board (NABTEB) and 13 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS various colleges of technology and polytechnics whose Ordinary National Diploma Level (OND) graduates seek direct entry admission into universities for degrees.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • chart the structure of higher education • describe some undergraduate programmes • describe some postgraduate programmes • outline the departmental structure of higher education • state the functional relationships between the postgraduate school and the various academic disciplines in a higher institution in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Structure of Higher Education System Higher education systems all over the world are very intricately structured because of the functions which higher education performs in societies.
Administratively, higher education systems are highly bureaucratic consisting of all kinds of administrative structures – personnel, accounting services, students affairs, estate and maintenance services, and so on.
On the academic front, the system is fragmented along specialised academic disciplines.
While the academic disciplines such as English, Mathematics, Economics, Accounting, Psychology, Guidance and Counselling constitute distinct departments; groups of related disciplines or courses constitute faculties.
In some countries, the collegiate system is adopted instead of faculty.
Most higher education systems –faculty or collegiate, run academic programmes both at the sub-degree, certificate, undergraduate and postgraduate levels.
Some higher education systems even adopt the school system in place of college or faculty.
Administration of higher education is based on convenience and the particular colonial heritage from which the system evolved.
In Nigeria for example, some universities combine the collegiate and the faculty arrangement.
The University of Benin, Nigeria has a College of Medical Sciences which houses over three schools – Dentistry, Medicine and Surgery, Basic Medical Science and others.
It also has Faculties of Law, Education, Arts, the Social Sciences and Management Sciences.
The Indiana University, United States of America adopts the School System like School of Physical Education and Recreation (SPEAR), School Education, School of Telecommunications and so on.
From this arrangement, it is obvious that the school and college are higher in the structure since they are 14 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS made up of faculties; faculties are in turn higher than the units and the departments in the structural set up.
But it appears that while the faculty and collegiate culture is European in origin, the school system is essentially American.
3.1.1 The Undergraduate Programmes Except for some specialised institutions such as military universities, higher institutions run undergraduate degree programmes in the areas covered by their respective systems.
Such programmes may be in the arts or humanities or what others might refer to as the liberal arts.
There are programmes in or pure sciences, the social and management sciences, medical sciences, communications and technology, agriculture and several other vocational sciences.
These undergraduate programmes are expected to be closely connected to the various sectors of the nations’ economy such as the civil service, commerce and industry because they are expected to absorb the products of educational system.
The widespread unemployment which many nations, including Nigeria, India and Brazil are experiencing is a direct consequence of the mismatch between the labour market and the graduate output in the various higher institutions of the nations in question.
Increased access to higher education worldwide has given rise to widespread unemployment.
In many countries (including the developed economies), the expansion in the employment sector is by far lower than the rate of expansion and increased access to higher education.
3.1.2 The Masters Programmes Masters degree programmes are run by institutions of higher learning only.
As in the undergraduate programmes, the degree programmes at the masters level are described as postgraduate studies – covering, at a more advanced level, similar areas as in the undergraduate level.
Higher education at the masters level worldwide involves a specialisation in a narrower area of the candidate’s field of study at the undergraduate level.
A graduate of English has the option of enrolling for a masters’ degree in either Literature-in-English or in English proper.
Similarly, a graduate of education may decide to enroll for a masters degree programme in any area of Education such as Educational Management, Educational Psychology, Measurement and Evaluation, Educational Sociology or Educational Philosophy.
To qualify for a masters degree, the candidate is expected to have obtained a certain level of pass at the undergraduate level.
In some countries such as the United States of America, a prospective graduate is expected to have passed some aptitude tests like the Graduate Records Examination (GRE) and some other ones.
There are several other postgraduate programmes between 15 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS the first degree and the masters programmes.
These include postgraduate diploma programmes in education, health, agriculture, and so on.
They are all professional qualifications which many establishments require of their applicants.
While the masters degree in some area may last for two academic sessions, others may be for just 12 months depending how the institution’s academic calendar and hard-working the students are.
Postgraduate students are generally taught by well qualified and experienced academic staff who must possess the postgraduate qualifications with a reasonable number of years of teaching experience at the higher education level.
3.1.3 The Doctoral Programmes The doctoral programmes are the highest in the hierarchy of degree programmes.
The doctoral programmes occupy a very special place in the structural arrangement of higher education programmes.
Doctoral programmes are generally specialized and research-oriented.
While over 100 candidates may enroll for an academic programme at the undergraduate level, less than 50 percent of that number proceed to the masters level.
Similarly, less them fifty percent of those at the masters level will proceed to the doctoral level.
The reason for this is not far- fetched.
The doctoral degree is not a requirement in many areas of employment.
It is only at the higher education level and in the academic area (teaching) only that a Ph.D. has of recent become a sine-qua-non.
To qualify for a doctoral degree programme, most universities insist on a good academic standing both at the undergraduate and masters levels; and the proposed area of research must have the potential for making some significant contribution to the particular area of the candidate’s specialisation and to epistemology generally.
The structure of doctoral programmes varies from one system to another even within the same country.
While some programmes place emphasis on foundational course work before the research proper, leading to a thesis writing, some other universities emphasise extensive research right from the onset, leading to a compendium of dissertation.
Some universities combine both systems – some prescribed courses leading to some research work and a write-up.
In the United States of America, some higher institutions award different types of doctoral degrees such as Doctor of Education – (Ed.D); Doctor of Jurisprudence (D.J); Doctor of Business Administration (Bus.D) as opposed to the conventional British type - Doctor of Philosophy Ph.D.
In Nigeria as well, many universities are beginning to adopt the American system – as in Doctor of Pharmacy, (D.Pharm); Doctor of 16 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Optometry – (D.Opt) in a five to six year programme as opposed to the previous practice in which a candidate was required to move gradually from a bachelors to masters and finally to the doctoral.
The advantage in the American typology is that, it saves time.
On the average, while it now takes about five years for a doctoral degree in those specialised areas, it took a minimum of nine years – four years undergraduate, two years masters and three years for the doctoral programme in those same areas.
For example, most of you who are taking this course – EDA809 must have had your B.A (Ed) or B.Sc.
(Ed) and M. (Ed) or M.Sc.
(Ed) in your respective fields before you qualified for this Ph.D. programme in Education and you are not likely to have spent nothing less than seven years in all as at today.
3.2 The Departmental Structure of Higher Education System All the academic programmes in higher education system are housed in the academic departments of the universities.
These departments are usually headed by professors who are also the chief academic officers or the chief examiners of the departments.
The Heads of the departments preside over the various units of the department and represent the departments at both the Faculty Boards and at the Senates of the universities.
Statutorily, the departments are the owners of the degrees which the universities award.
A group of related departments constitute a faculty which is usually headed by a professor, usually designated as the dean of faculty.
He or she represents the faculty in senate while the heads of departments represent their departments in senate.
the university which is usually the “engine-room” of any higher educational system worldwide is headed/chaired by the vice-chancellor who is the number one academic officer of the university and is usually a professor.
In fact, he or she is usually referred to as the “primus-inter-pares” first among professoral equals.
He/she is also the administrative head of the entire university system.
In the United States of America, they are designated president of the university.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the pre-requisite qualifications for doctoral studies in most universities around the world?
3.3 The Postgraduate School System As the name implies, the school of postgraduate studies is responsible for all the postgraduate programmes of the university.
Like a faculty, it is headed by a dean who is usually a professor of good academic standing.
The school acts as a clearing house for all postgraduate 17 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS programmes which are provided at the departmental levels.
The administrative aspects of all postgraduate programmes are carried out by the school of postgraduate studies.
3.4 Linkages of Higher Education with the International Community The academic world is very closely linked at several levels.
At the personnel level, there are exchanges of programmes between cooperating higher institutions all over the world.
Academic staff enjoys very generous exchange of ideas especially in the areas of research and development.
Between cooperating institutions, there could be exchange of staff and students on a regular basis.
At the curricular level, no higher institution can claim to be self-sufficient.
Learned journals are freely exchanged between institutions on a regular basis.
In recent times, the internet has opened an information window into the world almost in an infinite manner.
The virtual library is now in vogue even in many developing countries.
This is why degrees from one institution are recognised in other institutions.
4.0 CONCLUSION You have been presented with a brief analysis of the departmental structure and linkages in higher education systems.
You would have noticed that the system is strikingly different from other levels of the educational systems both in structure and organisation.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed you to the organisational structure of higher education.
The undergraduate, masters and doctoral programmes were discussed in some detail.
Also, the structure of the academic departments, faculties and the school of postgraduate studies were highlighted.
How the various higher education systems are linked worldwide was also discussed.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE The masters degree in the relevant field of study is basically the requisite qualification for most doctoral degrees studies around the world.
Proficiency in the language of instruction and a confirmed capacity to undertake a rigorous research study, possibly with minimum supervision are other ancillary requirements which qualify a student for doctoral degree studies.
18 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Draw a chart to show the various levels/structure of Higher Education in Nigeria 2.
Describe three major differences between undergraduate and postgraduate programmes in higher education 3.
What are the main functions of the school of postgraduate studies?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Altbach, Philip; G. Robert, F., Arnove, & Gail, P. Kelly (Eds) (1982).
Comparative Education.
New York: Macmillan.
Bums, Barbara B.
(1971).
Higher Education in Nine Countries: A Report prepared for the Carnegie Commission on Higher Education.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ignas, Edward and Raymond J. Corsini (Eds).
(1981).
Comparative Educational Systems.
Itasca: IL: F.E Peacock.
King, Edmund J.
(1979).
Other Schools and Ours: Comparative Studies for Today, (5th Ed).
London: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
19 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 3 BUREAUCRATISATION OF HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Concept of Bureaucracy 3.1.1 Bureaucratic Elements/Characteristics in Higher Education 3.1.2 Division of Labour 3.2 Authority Types/Structure 3.2.1 Charismatic Authority 3.2.2 Traditional Authority 3.2.3 Legal-Rational Authority 3.3 Rules and Regulations 3.4 Career Orientation in Higher Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education involves the organisation of men or women, ideas and information; materials and the environment in special ways with the objective of achieving certain goals, such as the inculcation of certain values, skills and attitudes in the selected individuals.
It is a very complex process which involves teaching and learning, learners and teachers, curricular materials and strategies all of which take place in specialised environments called schools.
For desired changes to occur and for learning to effectively take place, all these elements would have to be formally arranged in a very professional way by those specialists who have been trained for that purpose.
It is perhaps for these reasons that schools have been designated as formal organisations which are characterised by a complex network of bureaucratic structures.
In this unit, therefore, you will be exposed to the various ways in which higher education has been bureaucratised.
20 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of bureaucracy • relate bureaucratic elements to educational practice • describe some higher educational processes which have been clearly bureaucratised • state briefly how authority is structured and exercised in higher education • list some rules and regulations which guide the organisation of higher education system in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Bureaucracy Bureaucracy is a concept in organisational theory which was made popularised by the German Sociologist, Max Weber.
He used the concept to explain the nature and functions of formal organisations such as the educational system.
A bureaucracy is generally characterised by some association or group of persons who have come together for common purposes.
In order to achieve those purposes, established a system such as school or an industry where individuals could work cooperatively and interdependently for the success of the organisation.
Even in modern bureaucracies, these features are still prevalent.
There is always a clear network of the division of labour and some form of strict adherence to the laid down organisational rules which should not be by-passed.
Because of the fear of not being branded, unprocedural or a non- conformist, functionaries in bureaucracy have been known to have deliberately ignore very obvious opportunities for individual’s initiative in carrying some some of the assigned roles.
This is why the concept of bureaucracy sometimes emotively, evokes some derogatory connotation (Kramer, 1977).
Because of the hierarchical nature of the authority structure, any inadverted delay at any level of the structure may cause very frustrating inexplicable for further delays in the long line of actions on any decision-making process in the bureaucratic system.
This is why some authorities refer to bureaucracies in very pejorative terms such as red-tapism and pettiness in which people conform, sometimes blindly, to organisational rules which create bottlenecks and unwarranted delays (Peretomode 1991).
In many large organisations, such as the higher education systems, the bureaucratic system has been modernised and 21 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS effectively institutionalised with clear-cut procedures to effectively execute the educational programmes.
3.1.1 Bureaucratic Characteristics/Elements in Higher Education According to Max Weber, a bureaucracy should ideally be characterised by rational, disciplined, precise, stable, reliable and effective organisational structures Peretomode (1991:51).
Higher education systems unlike the other educational levels, have grown into very big organisational complexes to the extent that they can only be effectively and efficiently managed by means of the application of the Weberian bureaucratic model.
This model is characterised by clear-cut division of labour and specific allocation and or delegation of responsibilities; a hierarchy of authority which is very well structured along career profiles and typologies; rules and regulations; an impersonal orientation; a very meticulous and well-documented records.
A close examination of the current structure of any higher education system will reveal an overwhelming presence of all these bureaucratic features.
Starting from the students’ level, the practice of the bureaucratic model is very evident in their day-to-day running of the various student organisations such as the Students Union Parliament, that is, the students’ representative council.
Here, all segments of the community of students are effectively represented and their interests are protected.
At the executive level, the Students’ Union has a governing body which is headed by an elected president and several other officers representing almost all areas of students’ activities and interests.
Other areas where bureaucracy is at work include the Vice-Chancellor’s office where a long line of officers work cooperatively together to keep the vice chancellor’s office alive.
Then the Registry – headed by a principal officer – the Registrar, is a very complex bureaucracy all by itself.
The registry is the administrative power-house of the higher education system.
With the registrar at the apex of the administrative hierarchy, there is a chain of deputy registrars heading the different sections such as personnel-academic and non- academic, senior and junior, Examinations and Records, Admissions, Students’ Affairs, Public Relations, and so on.
There is also the Bursary which is another big bureaucracy –headed by a principal officer designated as the University Bursar.
This officer usually has a number of accounting professionals heading the various sections of the bursary.
These include salaries and wages, pensions and gratuities, administration, personnel – senior academic/non-academic, junior non- academic, pensions, endowments, and so on.
Other areas of the higher education system where the bureaucratic model is evident include the department of works and services, estate and gardens, security services, 22 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS medical and health services and several others.
The same structure is applicable elsewhere especially in commonwealth countries.
3.1.2 Division of Labour Because of the specialised nature of the role and functions of higher education in all societies, there is a clear cut division of labour along the lines of specialisation.
At the academic level, the job of teaching is neatly divided among the various departments of the respective faculties.
In the Faculty of Education, for example, tasks are divided among professionals in Educational Administration, Educational Management, Educational Foundations, Educational Psychology and Curriculum Studies, Guidance and Counselling, Technical Education including Vocational Studies, Adult and Non-formal Educational Studies, Health and Physical Education, and several others.
Administratively, there are deans who head and administer the faculties.
Then the faculties are made up of academic departments which are in turn headed by senior academics such as professors or senior lecturers.
The departments comprise staff – both junior and senior non-academic administrative staff, all from the central registry.
There are also different categories of academic staff from Graduate Assistants to Professors in the various academic disciplines of the department.
The labour is so neatly divided among the rank and file of the functionaries that, it becomes very easy for an undergraduate studying for a degree in English to accumulate course credits in several related departments of Linguistics, Theatre Arts and Mass Communication, all neatly coordinated within the academic bureaucracy.
There is also room for inter-faculty course auditing by students.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What aspects of higher educational administration can be described as bureaucratic?
3.2 Authority Types/Structure There is a hierarchy of authority in all the official positions.
In the organogram of the entire higher education system, for example, the authority flows directly down the line in a maze of subordinate authorities from the Vice-Chancellor through his deputies.
With the Vice-Chancellor as the principal officer, of the hierarchy of authorities also include the library, that is, the University Librarian, the University Bursar and the Registrar who are also principal officers.
Under them are 23 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS several other categories of officers who exercise authority clearly at their respective levels.
The organogram of a typical Nigerian university may look like this: VC UN.LIB DVC REG DVC UN.BUR AC Ad DNS DPLIB DIR WKS PROV DEP BUR DEP REG DIR.
HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD HOD Fig.
1: Organogram of a Typical Nigerian University.
Legend: VC - Vice Chancellor, DVC – Deputy Vice Chancellor Academic, AC DVC – Deputy Vice Chancellor Administration, UN.LIB – Ad University Librarian, REG-University Registrar, UN.BUR – University Bursar.
DNS - Deans of Faculties, DP.LIB – Deputy Librarian, DIR WKS – Director of Works PROV - Provosts of Schools/Colleges, DEP.BUR – Deputy Bursar, DEP.REG – Deputy Registrar, DIR – Director of Programmes, HOD – Heads of Departments.
3.2.1 Charismatic Authority In a complex system as the higher education system, it is not very easy to make people work in such a way that rapid progress would be achieved and the organisational objectives be attained.
Different officers would therefore want to make claims to all kinds of legitimacy in the exercise of the authority which the system has conferred on them.
In exercising such authority or power, some succeed while many others fail woefully in attempts to make others (subordinates) work in accordance with the laid down rules.
The question then arises, why do some officers succeed and others, even within the same system fail?
What is the secret?
Weber argues that some individuals exude charisma in their relationships with other human beings.
They are charming and loving and so people are attracted to them in whatever they do.
Such officers or 24 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS individuals are therefore able to make the people under them work successfully and the goals of the organisation are easily attained.
Even in a classroom situation, two teachers may teach the same concept and the teacher who exercises the charismatic authoritative typology would succeed more than the other teacher who parade some other authority types.
This charismatic authority is characterised by some innate personal qualities such as warmth, friendliness, calmness, enthusiasm and so on.
All these give the teacher who exercises charismatic authorities some edge over the other functionaries in the same system.
This is also why some students learn better under some teachers than in others.
Some students would even protest when they are assigned to some lecturers for project supervision for the same or similar reasons.
3.2.2 Traditional Authority The traditional authority is generally associated with customary and traditional beliefs.
Unlike the charismatic type, this authority is generally conferred on the individual whether or not such an individual has the innate qualities required for any authority structure.
In conservative systems, as opposed to progressive ones, the traditional authority is very much at work.
In religious circles, the ordained priest is traditionally the sole authority.
He or she is never questioned in the exercise of the authority ecclesiastically conferred on him or her.
In the monarchies as in the Oba of Benin, Lagos, Ooni of Ife, Obi of Onitsha or the Sultan of Sokoto, the traditional authorities are beyond question.
In fact, they are revered in their domains.
In Bini folklore, for example, Obas are not “made” through mere ceremonial coronations, rather, they are “born” into Obaship, they descend directly from the deity called Osanobua.
3.2.3 Legal-Rational Authority This type of authority equally has its own jurisdiction.
It is not necessarily exercised based (as in charismatic) on personal qualities.
Rather, it is based on the position which is legally occupied by an individual.
The authority is conferred on individual by law as set out in the legal instruments which established the organisation.
According to Weber, the exercise of the legal-rational authority is bureaucratic because the organisation has created rules and regulations concerning the rights, obligations, duties and responsibilities of the functionaries of the organisation.
As a result, the operations are standardised, just as in the external moderation/examination of candidates in higher education by external examiners who have been authorised legally by the senate of 25 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS the higher institution.
This makes it possible for an external examiner to upgrade an otherwise failed grade to a pass when the examiner is convinced that the candidate/student has made some commensurate effort which should earn a pass mark.
To this end, some bureaucratic practices in higher education can be protective to some members of the system – including students.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What is the nature of the authority structure in a typical higher education system in Nigeria?
3.3 Rules and Regulations As in all formal organisations, the higher education system has specific operational/administrative/academic guidelines which have been formally established and outlined in the instrument or blueprint of the institution.
All members of the institution are expected to abide by the guidelines, rules and regulations in their day-to-day activities.
It is by these means that the behaviour of the individuals are controlled in the system.
Any infringement on the rules and regulations by the functionaries carries with it some sanctions.
For example, all higher institutions have handbooks for both staff and students which guide the behaviour and conduct of students and all members of staffs.
There are also some bureaucratic machinery which have been established to enforce these guidelines with very clear lines of communication.
In the halls of residence, for example, students have hall officials who enforce the rules at their level.
The universities also have Hall Wardens, Hall Masters, and Hall Security Officers, all of who work cooperatively for the welfare of the residents of the halls.
On the academic front, all students are assigned to academic course advisers as soon as they are matriculated and registered.
They also have academic Heads of Department and Deans of Faculty in that order for any problem.
The office of the Dean of Students is equally a clearing-house for all students’ matters.
3.4 Career Orientation in Higher Education Except at the junior cadre, employment and studentship in higher institutions are based specifically on technical competence in terms of qualifications.
As for students, there have been, in recent times, resort to Post-University Matriculation Examination screening exercises by individual universities for candidates seeking admission with the University Matriculation Examination (UME) scores of the Joint Admission and Matriculation Board (JAMB).
This is because of the loss 26 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS of confidence in the UME scores paraded by candidates.
The Post-UME screening scores are now used in placing them in the various degree programmes which prepare them for careers of their choice.
In the same way, the lecturers are employed on the basis of their qualifications in terms of degrees and areas of the university’s needs.
Advancement or promotion is equally based on qualification and good report.
Administrative or non-academic staff such as professional accountants, secretaries, technologists, medical and para-medicals, etc are also appointed on the basis of their qualifications.
In their own case, advancement is mainly on seniority and good report in their various career lines.
In all cases, career orientations are clearly outlined.
4.0 CONCLUSION The bureaucracy which characterises higher education has been presented.
It is clear that the running of an educational system is not too different from other formal organisations.
The various sections of the organisational structure of any higher institution are very closely interconnected and interdependent.
They are all guided by specific rules and regulations which are carefully followed by all the functionaries of the system.
5.0 SUMMARY Attempts have been made in this unit to make you familiar with the concept of bureaucracy and relating its major characteristics to educational practice.
Some specific higher educational processes which have been highly bureaucratised have also been expounded graphically.
This unit has also revealed how, by a careful arrangement/organisation, a high level of efficiency is maintained through an intricate network of hierarchical authority structures and functions.
Above all, the entire system is peacefully held together by strict adherence to the laid down rules and regulations with the result that conflicts are at the barest minimum.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 All formal organisations have the main characteristics of bureaucracy.
The administration of higher education is very bureaucratic in its nature.
Because of the large size of the administrative structure of higher educational systems, clear-cut divisions of labour/roles are generally outlined.
Since it is not quite possible for the Vice-Chancellor to be present everywhere, responsibilities and authorities are delegated.
There 27 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS is also a clearly defined hierarchical authority structure and strict adherence to laid down rules and regulations.
All offices are generally oriented impersonally towards the common good of the institution and the attainment of the institutional goals.
At the apex of the higher educational bureaucracy is the Vice-Chancellor, who is assisted by one or two deputy Vice-Chancellors.
Other principal officers in the bureaucracy are the University Registrar, the University Librarian and the University Bursar.
Each of these principal officers has a very complex and long chain of functionaries who report to him/her.
Even at the student level bureaucratic elements are very evident in the students union administration.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 The typical authority structure in Nigerian higher education system has the following hierarchical typology: • The Vice-Chancellor • Deputy Vice Chancellor(s) • University Librarian • The University Bursar • University Registrar • Provosts • Deans and Directors • Heads of Department 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe a bureaucratic system.
2.
How is the concept of bureaucracy relevant in the higher education process?
3.
With so many staff in a higher education system, how are efficiency and discipline enforced or maintained?
4.
Enumerate some rules and regulations which guide students’ behaviour in higher institutions.
28 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Blau, Peter M. & Scott, Richard W. (Eds).
(1962).
Formal Organisations: A Comparative Approach.
San Francisco: Chandler.
Campbell, Ronald; F. Bridges, Edwin M. & Nystrand, Rapheal O.
(Eds) (1978).
Introduction to Educational Administration, (5th edition).
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc. Kramer, Fred A.
(1977).
Dynamics of Public Bureaucracy: An Introduction to Public Administration.
Cambridge Mass: Winthrop Publishers Inc. Peretomode, Victor F. (1991).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives for Students and Practitioners.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Ltd. Weber, Max (1947).
The Theory of Social and Economic Organisation.
Glence, III: Free Press.
29 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 4 THE NATURE OF COMMITTEE SYSTEM IN HIGHER EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Nature of Committee System in Higher Education 3.1.1 Explanations and Justification for Committees 3.1.2 Characteristics of Committees 3.1.3 Higher Education Committees Compared to Committees in other Organisations 3.2 Types of Committees in Higher Education 3.3 Limitations of Committees 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Higher educational institutions have become very complex organisations because of the alarming rate of expansion in number and population.
In the previous module, a clear picture was given on the gradual expansion which took place in the higher education sector shortly after independence up to the mid-sixties.
As at today, Nigerian universities, both private and public, number up to about 95 with an additional 14 which have been classified illegal because they have not been licensed by the appropriate authorities.
The 95 universities with a total student population of about 1.192 million have very daunting organisational.
Management and above all, financing problems.
These problems include how, can the administrators of universities run them efficiently and successfully under very limited financial resources?
How does a management team of a university admit about four or five thousand students from as many as 50 thousand applicants?
How do you maintain order and discipline in a university system of about 17 thousand students with 25percent of them resident in university hostels?
How does a university make lecturers numbering over 900 hundred work efficiently under very unfavourable working conditions?
How does a university administration manage non-academic staff numbering about five thousand in both junior and senior cadres?
These and several other challenges are the ones which higher education systems, especially in the emerging democracies, are facing even in this era of economic downturn.
The process of decentralisation of management and the 30 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS establishment of functional committees in tackling some of these issues in various sectors of the higher education system.
This is the basis of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES The objective of this unit is primarily to expose you to the workings of the committee system in the management of higher education.
It is therefore hoped that: By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the nature and structure of a committee • justify the use of committees in the management of higher education • compare committee work in a higher educational organisation and some other organisation • make a list of some higher educational committees • outline the functions and some limitations of the committee system.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Nature of Committee System in Higher Education There seems to be no hard and fast rules about the nature of committee in systems organisations.
Generally, committees are either ad-hoc, standing or constitutional/statutory.
Ad-hoc committees are appointed for a particular short term task and dissolved after completing the task.
Standing committees meet throughout the life span of the body appointing them – studying and making recommendations concerning the well being of the organisation.
Constitutional committees are generally statutory as contained in the instruments establishing the organisation.
Whether or not a committee or committees would be needed in an organisation is essentially dependent on the nature, the functions and the size of the organisation.
In small organisations where the decision-making process is very short, there may be no serious need for committees.
But in very large organisations, such as, higher education systems, committees are more likely to improve the effectiveness and efficiency in the overall management and organisation of the various sections of the system.
Decisions that will require the inputs of members of the organisation and other stakeholders cannot be taken unilaterally by the chief executive of the organisation.
Such decisions, before they are taken, would require the inputs of all members 31 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS both from within and outside the organisation.
Hence, the need for a committee arises.
In a university system, for example, the Vice -Chancellor is the chief executive officer of the university.
As the number one academic officer of the institution, the Vice-Chancellor cannot, just in a fiat, take decisions on very important matters which affect all students and staff.
All universities have a body called the senate which comprises all the professors of the institution, provosts, deans, institutes directors, and heads of academic departments.
The senate, headed by the Vice- Chancellor, sees to all academic matters of the university.
As comprehensive and representative as the Senate appears to be, many of its decisions are based on the recommendations from the various faculties and committees.
In other words, committees are an integral part of organisations.
In higher education, there are all kinds of committees some of which are called by different names like boards or panels.
Whether panels, boards, or committees, they all perform very similar functions in higher educational organisations.
One of the most important committees of any higher institution is the Admissions Committee.
At the University of Benin, it is called the University Admissions Board (UAB).
This committee is one of the several committees of the Senate.
It is made up of representatives of all the faculties, colleges, schools and institutes.
It is headed by a senior academic, generally of the rank of professor, who is appointed by the Vice-Chancellor in consultation with the committee of deans and the principal officers of the university.
Using the criteria which have been stipulated by senate, the Admissions Committee collates all the applications and recommends for the approval of senate, the admission of students into the various departments of the respective faculties.
In recent times, a new committee, the Post-University Matriculation Examination (Post-UME) committee has come into existence.
When the university has set its cut-off mark for the University Matriculation Examination (UME) conducted by the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB), all candidates who selected the university as 1st and or 2nd choice and meet the cut-off mark, they are also required to also apply for the Post-UME screening exercise of the particular universities which they have chosen.
This screening exercise is conducted by a committee specially appointed for that purpose.
Unlike many other committees which are standing, the Post-UME committee is not a standing committee.
It normally stands to be dissolved as soon as its chairman submits the Post-UME and Post-Direct Entry (PUDE) screening results to the Vice-Chancellor who in turn hands the result to 32 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS the chairperson of the University Admissions Board (UAB) for the admission exercise.
3.1.1 Explanations and Justification for Committees Committees are usually small body or a small group of persons that have been put together for carrying out some specific assignments with the aim of achieving some organisational goals.
Usually, members of committees are selected on the basis of their specialisation or expertise in the area in which the committee is to be involved.
For example, membership of a curriculum review committee would be expected to be specialists in curriculum development.
Such decisions as to what should be contained in a course programme, s the programme scope, duration of as well as who should teach (implement) the course are all specialist curricular decisions.
In the same way, a security committee would normally be headed by an officer who is vast in the enforcement of rules and regulations of an organisation.
In many cases, retired officers of any of the armed forces are always appointed to head the security committee.
Sometimes, a very senior member of staff with good reputation may be appointed to head the security committee.
Other members would also be expected to be persons who are above board, strict disciplinarians men or women who cannot compromise in any way.
As pointed out in the introduction, committees are simply indispensable in large organisations especially in higher education systems because it is not possible for the head of the institution or organisation to carry out all the responsibilities required to move the organisation forward.
Committee system is a way of democratisation and carrying everybody along in a decentralised system.
The committee system gives everyone in the system some sense of belonging, as they see themselves as being part of the decision-making process.
3.1.2 Characteristics of Committees A committee is usually composed of a superior officer – usually the chief executive of an organisation.
In a university system, the Vice- Chancellor presides over several bodies.
The Vice-Chancellor, as the chairman of senate, in consultation with the DVCs, decides which committees are to be set up to carry out certain functions for senate.
The Business Committee of Senate generally previews all academic matters which come to senate from various faculties.
In many cases, only academic matters which have passed through the Business Committee of Senate can be brought before Senate.
The same is true for the Academic Programmes Planning Committee.
No academic programme can be presented to Senate for approval by any faculty until the programme has successfully passed through the crucible of the Academic Programmes Planning Committee.
Committees are guided by terms of reference 33 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS provided by the appointing authority.
No committee is allowed to go beyond its jurisdiction.
A Students’ Disciplinary Committee, for example, is only empowered to investigate disciplinary matters which have been referred to it by the Dean of the Faculty.
After investigation, all students involved are then invited for questioning and fair hearing, after which recommendations are made to the appropriate authorities for implementation.
Quite often, many accused persons misunderstand the characteristics and limitations of committees’ particularly disciplinary or fact-finding committees.
Disciplinary committees can only make recommendations and not punish offenders.
It is the appointing authorities that have the power to punish any offender who may have been found culpable by the committee.
Most committees are also characterised by time limitations –they are not permanent structures.
The tenure of the appointing officers quite often determines their life span as well.
3.1.3 Higher Education Committees Compared to Committees in other Organisations Educational systems generally render social services which deal directly with human beings as opposed to other systems such as the assembly line which deals essentially with machines and men.
In the same way, committees in a manufacturing organisation would be more concerned with the efficient production of good quality products with sophisticated machines.
This would be followed by marketing of the goods and may be, quality control assurance.
There will be committees to source for such inputs as raw materials, markets and marketing officers.
On the other hand, committees in higher education systems would be concerned with the quality of students being admitted into universities – a fall out of which is the resort to the conduct of Post- University Matriculation Examination Screening (PUME) exercises for university admission applicants.
Similarly, committees in higher institutions would look out for highly qualified academic personnel.
The good quality of the end- product of higher education that is, the graduate is equally of concern to its management as it is in high quality goods from the factory.
Universities are not necessarily concerned with the search for appropriate job opportunities for their graduates, even though they are generally elated by good feedback positive reports concerning the on- the-job performance of their products.
On the whole, the outcome of the activities of committees in higher education are generally long term oriented whereas, in many other formal organisations, the results or rewards are more immediate or at best, short-term.
34 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Why do you think higher education institutions cannot operate without the committee system?
3.2 Types of Committees in Higher Education In most higher education systems, there are generally academic and non- academic (administrative) areas.
The academic area includes all teaching staff from graduate and teaching assistants through all categories of lecturers to professors.
The non-academic staff is mainly administrative and technical in nature – including work and services in medical, security and utility.
The activities of non-teaching staff are expected to be both ancillary and complementary to those of the academic staff.
In some areas, there are overlaps all of which are expected to lead to the achievement of common goals of the institutions; hence, many committees include both academic and non-academic functionaries.
Some of these committees include: • Admissions Committee (Board) • Senior Staff Welfare Committee • Junior Staff Welfare Committee • Senior Staff Disciplinary Committee • Junior Staff Disciplinary Committee • Finance and General Purposes Committee (F&GPC) • Audit Committee • Ceremonials Committee • Curriculum Evaluation and Review Committee • Equipment (Maintenance Committee) • Housing Allocation Committee • Appointments and Promotions Committee • Physical Development/Planning Committee • Health Committee • Alumni Relations Committee • Strategic Planning Committee • Library Committee • Budget Implementation Committee • Sports Committee • Safety and Security Committee, and many others.
35 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.3 Limitations of Committees As in all human organisations, committees in all higher education have their limitations.
One of the limitations is their terms of reference which normally restrict them to specific areas.
Generally, committees are also limited by time as in ad-hoc committees.
Sometimes, the chairmen of some committees are unable to carry everybody in the committee along in their findings and recommendations.
This portrays division in the committee and also detracts the committee from carrying out their duties.
The result is that report of the minority in spite its fairness or authenticity, may be disregarded in favour of the report of the majority.
Such minority report is never generally considered a reflection on the work of the committee as a body.
Another limitation of many committees is the level of commitment of committee members.
This is demonstrated by the attendance of meetings as scheduled by the chairman.
The work of a committee may be impaired by such poor attendance.
Sometimes, some committees are composed of rubber-stamp committee members who never make useful and constructive contributions to matters at hand – whether for or against.
The work of the committee may be seriously hampered by such members.
One other limitation of the committee is that it might, in its wisdom make what it considers the best of recommendations to the organisation towards solving a problem, but the organisation reserves the right to accept or reject any recommendation, sometimes without any explanations.
So, committees are at the mercies of whichever authorities appointed them.
Finance may also limit committee functions.
4.0 CONCLUSION The committee system has become an integral part of the planning and management of higher educational system all over the world.
It is not possible for an individual to manage a higher institution all alone.
He or she needs the inputs and cooperation of all other functionaries in the system.
In fact, without committees, it is not possible to achieve the objectives which an institution may have set for itself.
All the various segments of the organisation –general administration, accounting, teaching and learning, students’ and staff welfare and the curriculum have to be properly managed and coordinated in order for the university to succeed.
36 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 5.0 SUMMARY Higher education system is a very complex and large formal organisation.
It is a very dynamic system in which very many changes take place, some very rapidly.
In order to properly coordinate the activities which go on in the entire system and in order to get everybody involved and carry them along, the committee system of management becomes a sine-qua-non.
This will make every member of the system develop a sense of importance, a sense of belonging especially if they find themselves being appointed to serve in one or two committees.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Higher educational institutions cannot effectively operate without committees because the committee system affords many functionaries of the institution the opportunity to be part of the complex process of decision making.
Membership of committees engenders the spirit of belongingness in the members.
It enables the practice of collective responsibility.
It allows effective coverage of all areas of the organisation.
Without the committee system, it becomes a little difficult to actualise the basic tenets of democracy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe very briefly the nature of committees.
2.
Why can higher educational systems not do without committees?
3.
Is there any difference between committees in higher educational institutions and those of other formal organisations?
Explain 4.
Name ten committees common in higher educational institutions.
5.
Describe any three areas in which the task of a committee can be limited.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Bush, Tony (2008).
Leadership and Management Development in Education.
London: SAGE Publications Ltd. Clark, Alan (2007).
The Handbook of School Management.
Cape Town Kate: McCallum.
http://www.wga.org Committee System: The Writers Guild of America.
37 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS MODULE 2 FACTORS INFLUENCING THE DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION Unit 1 National Philosophy and History of Education Unit 2 Politics of Education and National Development Unit 3 Economics and Funding of Education Unit 4 Social Religious Factors UNIT 1 NATIONAL PHILOSOPHY AND HISTORY OF EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of National Philosophy 3.1.1 National Character 3.1.2 National History 3.2 Higher Educational Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The development and management of higher education globally is influenced by several factors.
In the previous module, you were given an overview of the nature of higher education with regard to its bureaucratic and departmental structure and the dependence of higher education on the elaborate network of committee system.
In this module, therefore, effort will be made to examine the various factors which influence the development and management of higher education.
The national philosophy and history of education are very crucial factors which influence educational development.
38 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the concept of national philosophy for any nation • describe the attributes which give a nation her character and history • outline the ways in which a nation’s philosophy and history generally shape her educational outlook.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of National Philosophy The philosophy of any nation is generally expressed in the belief system of the people.
It is found also in people’s ideas about life, about man, about existence, nature of existence and its worth.
National philosophy may also be evident in the ideals of the people, the values which they hold in very high esteem.
It may also encompass the aspirations of the people of that nation; that is, their visions in the future.
For example, the new fad in the Nigerian inspirational lexicon is to be counted among the 20 most developed nations in the year 2020, hence the popular Vision 20/2020 propaganda blitz, even when we are allocating an insignificant six percent of the 2010 national budget of N4.1 trillion to the education sector.
In essence, a nation’s philosophy serves as a barometer for measuring her developmental odyssey.
The educational system of any nation, like her political, social or the economic system is generally regarded as the fabric of that nation.
For example, studying a nation’s educational thought and practices has always been seen as a way of understanding her social dynamics, the possibilities for change and improvement, and by extension, general patterns of development among institutions and ideas in the world at large (Eckstein, 1988, Hans 1959, Kandel 1933, Ulich 1961).
Paulo Freire’s (1970) conscientisatious philosophy in his pedagogic prescription for his oppressed Latin American people was a clarion call for social reforms.
While the French emphasise progress of ideas and logical reasoning, (that is, the ability to think) in their national philosophy, the British place emphasis on adaptability, intelligence and independence.
The Americans, because of her historical antecedents, has been able to move away from the established tradition onto an experimental pragmatic relativism, all of which have influenced her educational theory and practice (Okonkwo, 1992).
In practice, therefore, a nation’s philosophy may be found in her educational practice, commerce and industry, in her politics and in her 39 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS religious orientation.
In fact, Eckstein (1988) argues that the role of schools extends beyond the narrow definition of instruction, to, as it does, teaching a whole range of ideological values and attitudes.
Thus, an educational system cannot be fully and comprehensively studied without close reference to its cultural setting.
Although no two nations are the same in several respects, the education systems in all countries perform a number of similar functions, including such tasks as initiating the young into the practices and beliefs of the adult world; conserving social myths; incorporating new ideas into existing forms; and selecting and differentiating groups of people for different roles.
Through their individual and common experiences in education, students are taught the technical knowledge which is required for the economic survival of the nation.
In addition, they are taught to be followers or leaders and are differentiated by sex roles, age cohort, and in many cases, race, religion and even occupational status.
All these can always find expression in the philosophy of the nation.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What is the national philosophy of Nigeria?
3.1.1 National Character The national character of any nation refers to the specific institutions, the system of belief, culture, political institutions, economy, educational practices and many more, all of which may also be found in the national philosophy.
The sovereignty of any nation is an index of her national character.
The characteristics of such sovereignty include a clearly defined national territory whose boundary and integrity can be defended at any time.
This is why all nations maintain a well-equipped military force on air, maritime and land, Air force, Navy and regular Army for self-defense.
Another important indicator of national character is the currency; that is, the monetary policy.
No matter how small or weak a nation may be, her currency is her means of identity.
Britain uses the pound sterling (£), America have the dollar ($), and the naira (N) is exclusively used in Nigeria.
There is a macro-economic and international relationship between nations in terms of the relative value of one currency against another.
The stronger and more stable an economy is, the stronger the currency.
That is why in the world market, the American dollar or the British pound sterling and the Japanese yen are generally the dominant standards against which all other currencies try to measure their values.
40 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS The Nigerian currency is rated at about 150 naira to one American dollar.
Another indicator of national character is the national flag while political dispensation, whether monarchy, communism, socialism or democracy is another index of the character of a nation.
The economy may be capitalist, socialist, agrarian or rural and even industrial.
The religious disposition may also be used to describe the national character.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, for example, is almost synonymous with Islam, just as most of the Arab nations, while Christianity is the dominant religious orientation of the European nations.
The effects of all these institutions on the educational disposition in all nations of the world are enormous especially at the higher levels.
3.1.2 National History It is practically impossible to discuss the development and management of higher education system of any country without reference to the nation’s historical antecedents.
When the Americans left Europe for the new world, they wanted a new identity – an identity that is significantly different from the inwardly conservative British policy in almost all spheres.
The Americans took bold steps to experiment pragmatically, and so they evolved the philosophy of pragmatism and experimentalism.
In the same way, the Nigerian experience is very illuminating.
The history of Nigeria cannot be told without reference to Britain, Nigeria is deeply rooted in Ten Downing Street in London in language, dress sense, taste, education and religion.
We have swallowed everything hook, line and sinker to the extent that anything made from Nigeria is “decidedly” “inferior” in every sense.. Higher education of a nation is greatly affected by the national history.
There is always some merit in studying the historical antecedents of nations because it is from such studies that a number of tentative theories have emerged.
These ideas depend on the development of comparative higher education as a field.
These have given rise to the view that the phenomena under study are not merely a chance occurrence, but that they contain some potential explanatory meaning – the concept of causation, that is, the educational phenomena are both the results of other factors and the causes of further events.
Coleman (1965) had argued that education may function as a tool for the achievement of national unity or political reconciliation especially in societies marked by cultural pluralism as in Nigeria.
The success or failure of education in uniting Nigerian is opened for individual’s judgement, bearing in mind the different orientations which education 41 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS has given different Nigerian the ideals of the 36 years old National Youths Service Corps Scheme and the dream of nationalist leaders.
Educational systems in countries, marked by similar circumstances, often show similar forms.
This historical fact explains the founding of the first colonial higher institutions at Makerere in Uganda, Legon in the Gold Coast (Ghana) and Ibadan in Nigeria by the British colonial office in 1948.
This led to the developmental theories that, just as there are stages in a nation’s economic, social, or political development, so there are stages of educational development.
In the same way, such nations experience similar dysfunctions, problems, stresses and tensions in the management of their educational systems.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Relate Nigerian history to her educational development.
3.2 Higher Educational Development The spread of education has opened up many nations and created awareness in many individuals.
The expansion in the economic sector has equally created new demands for higher and more specialised skills in almost all sectors of the economy.
Similarly, the spread of social democratic ideals is generally associated with efforts to reduce elitism, bridge the gaps created by early selectivity in the educational system.
Attempts have been made to introduce comprehensiveness into the system just as Chief Awolowo tried to do with his Universal Primary Education in 1955, and the liberalisation of the next level with the introduction of secondary modern schools in the defunct Western Region.
At the higher level, the establishment of the “Ashby Universities” was steps in the same liberalisation of education.
By the same token, the demand for increasing numbers of highly educated personnel and advanced technical skills in most developed nations had seriously challenged the traditional autonomy and unity of university education, thereby forcing some nations to introduce some new areas of study and new forms of governance and financial support to deal with the new imperatives.
That is the way education should respond.
4.0 CONCLUSION National philosophy and history of education as factors influencing the development and management of higher education of any nation are undisputable.
If education indeed is the instrument by which nations 42 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS develop their human potentials, then, it is impossible to actualise the visions contained in the philosophical postulations of any nation without some deliberate and vigorous prosecution of the appropriate educational programme for her citizens.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, attempt has been made to examine the factors of National philosophy and the history of education as they affect higher education.
In the examination of the national character and national history, it has been pointed out how the development of education, whether lower or higher, is intricately tied to these factors.
Education as an institution cannot function effectively in isolation.
If it is to be relevant in the society for which it has been developed, then it must respond to the same factors which operate in the same socio-economic and political milieu.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSSEMENT EXERCISE 1 Higher educational institutions cannot effectively operate without committees because the committee system affords many functionaries of the institution the opportunity to be part of the complex process of decision making.
Membership of committees engenders the spirit of belongingness in the members.
It enables the practice of collective responsibility.
It allows effective coverage of all areas of the organisation.
Without the committee system, it becomes a little difficult to actualise the basic tenets of democracy.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Explain the details which a nation’s philosophy should normally contain.
2.
Describe some of the significant attributes by which a nation may be identified.
3.
Can those attributes be reflected in the educational system?
How?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Coleman, J.S.
(Ed).
(1965).
Education and Political Development.
Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ.
Eckstein, M.A.
(1988).
“Concepts and Theories in Comparative Education in The Encyclopeadia of Comparative Education and National Systems of Education.
Postlethwaite, T.N.
(Ed).
Pergamon Press, pp.7-9.
43 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Fraire, P. (1970).
The Pedagogy of the Oppressed.
Hans, N. (1959).
“The Historical Approach to Comparative Education” in IRE.
Vol.
5 No.3.
Kandel, I.L.
(1959) “Methodology of Comparative Education” in IRE Vol.5 No.3.
Okonkwo, C. (1992).
“Nigerian Educational System versus those of some other nations” in Comparative Education: A Functional Approach.
Iwuama, B.C.
Aluede, R.O.A.
et al (Eds).
Central Books Ltd. Agbor, pp.102-125.
Ulich, R. (1961).
The Education of Nations: A Comparison in Historical Perspective.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
44 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 2 THE POLITICS OF EDUCATION AND NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of the Politics of Education 3.1.1 Relationship between Politics and Education 3.1.2 The Nature and Features of Education System 3.2 Politicisation of National Development 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education is generally classified as a social service which is rendered to the citizens as a matter of right by any serious government.
The issue of education is almost second to none among the services which a government renders to her citizens.
At the lower levels of education, many well meaning nations provide education freely and compulsorily for the younger citizens.
That is why you often hear of universal primary education; free primary education; education for all, special education for some categories of the population; and very often non-formal and continuing education for some adults who missed the opportunity for education when they were younger.
Because of the planning, management and financial implications of these processes, it becomes somewhat difficult to separate education and politics since the policies originate from the politicians.
The question that may be bothering your mind now is, why does any nation allow such an important matter as education to be influenced by political considerations?
Who should decide the direction of education?
What should schools teach?
Who should teach what in school?
How much money should be allocated to schools?
What contributions should the education system make towards national development of a nation?
These are some of the issues to be considered in this unit.
45 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • define policy formulation and the processes involved • relate politics to education • explain why a nation cannot do without the institution of education.
1.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Concept of Politics of Education In very simple terms, politics is the science of governance.
In this unit, we are concerned with the influence of such science on education particularly at the higher level.
According to Nwagwu (2002:5) politics symbolises selfish quest for power and authority to share, allocate and control resources and determine the direction of public educational politics.
It is through the process of education that knowledge, skills and values are disseminated to the students.
The policy for carving out these processes is unfortunately, in the hands of politicians at all levels.
3.1.1 Relationship between Politics and Education Education is a public enterprise.
To this end, it may not be possible to exclude politicians and political influence from educational process and practice.
At all levels of government federal, state and local, governments have definite roles to play in the management and control of education.
Government functionaries in modern democracies usually have definite roles, and in playing such roles, they exercise enormous power and authority especially in financial matters.
According to Nwagwu (2002:3), experience has shown how political manoeuvers in the field of education have resulted in the populace being given simplistic notions of the magical benefits of formal education.
These have led to exaggerated aspirations and expectations among parents, guardians and the students about what the education system can do for them.
Some students have perceived education – particularly university education as some “eldorado” Students tends to resort to crime and violence in rebellion against university management when their expectations are not met.
Nwagwu argues that politicisation of certain aspects of education is not restricted to politicians and governments.
At the institutional level, he further argued that, there are also many intellectuals and some elite leaders who play politics with academic matters.
This unbridled invasion of the educational arena by 46 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS politicians normally carries with it some unquantifiable price.
There is, therefore, the urgent need for some form of protection for all professionals in education who have vast knowledge of importance of education.
As a process, education indeed enables learners acquire the appropriate knowledge, skills and values; and students may not be able to maximise these benefits without being backed up with governmental policies, adequate funding and provision of infrastructural facilities.
Many problems and inadequacies result from education policies which have been manufactured in a haste without due consideration to modalities and inputs for their realisation.
It is hoped that a more educated and informed citizenry operating in a democratic environment will engender greater popular participation and discussion in policy making in education; and thus regulate excessive political interference.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the negative effects of unbridled political interference in educational matters?
3.1.2 The Nature and Features of Education System The nature of education is such that it encompasses a wide range of interests because of its public enterprising nature.
At the higher level, for example, universities worldwide are established by governments, organisations – private or public; individuals and even religious organisations to provide a number of services to: (a) produce high level skilled personnel and provide lifelong learning for all citizens.
(b) generate, disseminate and apply new knowledge.
The implication is that the universities are empowered to pursue knowledge, create and disseminate it to people to use for various societal needs and aspirations.
In order to generate knowledge, the university is also empowered to get involved in meaningful research whose findings will promote the welfare of all the citizenry and challenge them into all kinds of actions contained in the research results; and (c) engage meaningfully in contribution to national and international dialogue and critique, because the university is a principal institution of civil society where ideas should thrive and ferment.
All of these services have very major implications on the organisation and operation of any higher education system (Aboribo, 2002).
This is because, the contents of what the universities should teach in terms of the course content; the coverage and in what combinations; the special 47 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS skills which would be acquired through these courses; who and how they should teach in these universities what kind of learners/students should be admitted into these universities and by what criteria of selection; and how long it should take them to complete the respective programmes, all have to be taken into consideration by different agencies of the supervising ministry of education.
The university teachers as well as the students are all expected to play an invaluable role in the formation of public opinion in the society where they live and the society served by the university.
As part of its functions, the university should coordinate teaching and research and also contribute to the political thought while maintaining its autonomy as an institution with clearly defined goals.
In order to put monopoly aside in the management of education, and have a comprehensive representation of the society in the educational decisions the proprietors of higher education have had to establish educational agencies, commissions, boards, parastatals and other sundry bodies to serve as buffer institutions (Frachmann 1998) or as intermediary bodies (Neave, 1998, Ofoegbu 2004).
These agencies, while acting as liaisons, generally facilitate relationships (administrative and finance) between the institutions and the bureaucratic bottlenecks which characterise the supervising ministry of education and the National Universities Commission (NUC).
This arrangement, coupled with the peculiar characteristics of the educational system has made it vulnerable to certain political pressure propaganda, public opinion and all kinds of control.
According to Nwagu (2002:7), education is a highly socialised and domesticated activity.
It is everybody’s business but ends up as nobody’s business.
In addition, the system has the dynamic features of a living organism, and therefore, it is sensitive to time and place as it is to environmental conditions.
For this reason, we cannot adopt educational policies from one place to another.
Generally, professional educators perceive the school as a place for nurturing and encouraging individual growth, initiative, divergent thinking and critically analytic minds.
Politicians who control and fund the education system may prefer the schools to be prefabricated opinion factories in which blind conformity is encouraged; minds and abilities are manipulated and controlled; and individualism is feared and muzzled as dangerous radicalism.
The effects of politics on education is that people expect much from education, yet popular support for funding education is minimal.
The politicians in government make the critical decisions after the experts have made their well researched, rationalised and persuasive recommendations.
Education never really gets what it deserves, but only what the government is willing to allocate to it.
Even when it is allocated, the bureaucracy in the ministry had consistently thwarted the release of adequate funds.
48 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Which characteristics of education make it susceptible to all manner of interference?
3.2 Politicisation of National Development The issue of national development is as political as the issue of education and this makes it difficult to separate politics from national development.
But first, what is development?
Development has both the human and material dimensions.
We can say that a society or a nation is developed, and this will be in terms of the infrastructures, economy, technology, industry and so on.
There are international indices for development.
For instance, most developed economies are characterised by very high gross domestic products (GDPs), very high income earning capacities, export-oriented economy, high literacy rates, low death rates or high life expectancy and a generally high standard of living.
If we take the example of Nigeria, we can very easily extrapolate these indices and see how they apply in Nigeria.
Nigeria is a developing country; the economy is import-dependent since the level of manufacturing is very low.
The level of technology is equally very low and the economy is mono-cultural – depending very narrowly and dangerously on one major export earner – crude oil which we cannot even refine in sufficient quantity.
The standard of living in Nigeria is also very low.
By World Bank standards, Nigerians live on less than one American dollar per day.
Literacy rate is equally very low, with very primitive consumption patterns and tendencies, especially with respect to the accumulation of property and wealth.
Nigeria’s investment in Research and Development (R&D) is abysmally low, much lower than many other developing nations.
For example, only six percent is allocated to the education sector in the 2010 budget estimates/proposals.
Unlike the developed nations, Nigeria has not been able to invest substantially in the development of the human capital through the means of higher education.
The majority of the ruling elite belong to the very small minority whose educational and training background is such that their concept of development means only what they can grab for themselves.
In developed societies, technocrats dominate the polity and they are generally “selfless service” oriented with very decent consumption patterns.
But the reverse is the case with most developing countries of the world including Nigeria.
Very selfish motives and primordial considerations generally becloud principled and well thought out developmental plans.
Except for political considerations, what explanations can be given to the sitting of some developmental projects in Nigeria?
What safety and economic sense 49 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS does it make to pump crude oil all the way from the Escravos at enormous cost to Kaduna to be refined if not for geo-political considerations?
Why does a nation reduce the benchmark for educational qualification for participation in governance to a ridiculous level of “school certificate” attempted?
All these have had very serious political implications on our development especially via the instrumentality of higher education.
2.0 CONCLUSION It is very important for all those who are involved or directly connected with matters of politics, education and then development to be very dispassionate in their policy decisions so that, no part of the system is inadvertently affected very negatively.
Functionaries of government maybe politicians, educationists or developmental experts all have their important roles to play in the development of higher education of any nation.
They should function symbiotically or cooperatively for the common good of the citizenry and the nations at large.
3.0 SUMMARY This unit has covered the Politics of Education and National Development.
It has examined the concepts of politics and political participation in education and development.
It highlighted the relationships between the institutions of politics and education – the one in the art of governance and the other in capacity building and the intellectual development of the human capital and not working at cross purposes.
4.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
How are higher education policies formulated and implemented?
2.
Which positive roles can politicians in government play in the policy formulation and management of higher education in any country?
3.
What role does higher education play in the national developmental programme of any nation?
50 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Aboribo, R.I. (2002).
“Our Universities in a Globalised World: Some Reflections on the Challenges of the 21st Century” in Refocusing Education in Nigeria: A Book of Readings.
Oriafo, S.O.
et al (Eds) Benin City: Da-Sylva Influence.
Frachmann, E. (1992).
“The Role of Buffer Institutions in Higher Institutions” cited in Ofoegbu, F.I.
“Agencies, Boards and Commissions in Nigerian Education System” in Organisation and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Nwagwu, N.A.
et al (Eds) (2004).
Benin City.
Festa Press Ltd. Neave, G. (1992).
“On Bodies Vile and Bodies Beautiful: The Role of Buffer Institutions between Universities and State” cited by Ofoegbu, F.I.
in Nwagwu, N.A.
op.
cit 2004.
Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
The Politics of Education Policies in Nigeria.
Faculty of Education Lecture Series No.1, University of Benin, Benin City: Festa Press Ltd. Ofoegbu, F.I.
(2002).
“Agencies, Boards and Commissions in Nigerian Education System” in Organisation and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Nwagwu, N.A.
et al (Eds).
Benin City: Festa Press Ltd. 51 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 3 ECONOMICS AND FUNDING OF EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Economics of Funding Education 3.1.1 Education and Economic Institutions 3.2 Education and Politico-Economic Institutional Systems 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Of all the factors which influence the overall development and management of higher education, the factors of economics and funding stand out very prominently.
Education is universally regarded as a process for the preservation, maintenance and the upgrading of social values, knowledge and skills in order to guarantee the continuity and well being of the society.
By the same process, citizens are acculturated so that they may have some values to transmit as they grow.
Education is the responsibility of everybody in the community.
The education should also develop creative individuals who will in turn, as change agents, effect the necessary desirable changes.
As Minister of Education in 1986, Professor Jibril Aminu had pointed out that education is not only a means of human socialisation and development, but equally a potent means of self actualisation.
Education increases equality in society by levelling and bridging the gaps between the various social and economic classes; increasing income distribution means; increasing the pool of talent which is available to society and by engendering equality.
In addition to being able to completely eradicate illiteracy and ignorance, education also facilitates the acquisition of the necessary economic skills and acceptable attitudes, saleable knowledge for social and economic development of society.
Education has been seen universally as a vehicle for solving world problems – including economic problems and for climbing the social ladder, thereby enhancing the individual and group freedom and dignity.
This is why the funding of education is of utmost significance to any well-meaning government.
As far as funding is concerned, the business of education is a very expensive venture at any level, and for higher education, it is capital- intensive.
Because of its irreplaceable contribution to national 52 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS development, education development has often been regarded as very urgent and imperative.
In fact, as far back as 1952, before political independence, Chief Awokoya, who eventually became the Minister of Education in the defunct Western Region of Nigeria had declared that the urgency of educational development requires that education be treated as a national emergency, second only to war.
Nigerians are so educationally thirsty that they are prepared to go to any length in order to acquire it.
Professor Abraham Imogie once declared that you may call any structure a school, a college or a university and locate it anywhere in Nigeria in no distant time,, Nigerians will enroll and be ready to pay anything to be educated.
This has resulted in the uncontrollable phenomenal expansion in the education sector with the attendant results of poor infrastructure arising from poor funding.
But the government insists that, it is doing its best in the provision of adequate fund to education.
By the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, education (including its funding) is classified under the concurrent legislative list, which means that funding is a collective responsibility for all levels of government – federal, state and local governments.
In 1999, about 11.2 per cent of the total annual budget was allocated to education.
This percentage had steadily dropped to 8.3per cent in 2000; 7.0 per cent in 2001; 5.9per cent in 2002 and a ridiculous 1.8% in 2003, whereas in the military years, records showed that 1996 had 12.32per cent allocation, 17.59per cent in 1997 and 10.25per cent in 1998.
In the on-going 2010 budget debate in the National Assembly, it has been revealed that only 6.0per cent of the N4.1 trillion budget proposal has been allocated to education – a far cry from the 26per cent recommended by the United Nations for all member nations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • describe the relationship between education funding and economics • explain how a well funded education system can stimulate economic development • enumerate the role of some socio-economic institutions in educational development.
53 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Economics of Education Funding Education is a very capital-intensive venture which involves a lot of financial capital outlay.
In order to get the best of education, a lot of economic planning has to be done.
This is in terms of the needed resources to provide the educational service.
All kinds of infrastructures – buildings, furniture, equipment, books, playgrounds manpower – well- trained teachers, administrative staff, students and many more are required for a good educational development.
When it comes to the curriculum both in terms of content and pedagogy, some serious strategic planning is required especially at the higher levels of education.
3.1.1 Education and Economic Institutions The relationship between education, economic development and modernisation has been canvassed by development economists especially in the newly emerging nations.
Governments have always acted on this premise by investing heavily on education even though it has not paid off in many countries where corruption and ineptitude have characterised the policy makers and implementers.
Many governments have power to adopt or reject educational programmes, or transform totally the education system.
It has happened in the People’s Republic of China in Fidel Castro’s Cuba and very recently, in the countries described as the “Asian Tigers”.
Even in Nigeria, it is such abiding faith in the potentially of education that led to the formulation of the 1977 National Policy on Education whose implementation has been characterised by all manners of failures.
This is because the desired objectives of the programme have become unrealizable.
The result is the recent attempt in another educational programme called the Universal Basic Education with no reference whatsoever to the higher education component of the education system.
In order to meet the needs of the citizens and eventually the national goals, very well-trained personnel are required.
Such personnel are like some machinery whose economic value in the labour market can be increased considerably through further education, especially in occupational skills.
When the Iron and Steel industry took off in Nigeria in the early eighties at the Delta Steel Company, Aladja in Delta State, Nigeria, over 15percent of the staff on the production and managerial line were sent to Europe for occupational training although, the phenomenon called the Nigerian factor”, has affected the fortunes of the once vibrant Aladja Steel Company.
54 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS According to Ballantine (1989), the system of demand and supply of educated persons does not always work perfectly as it is for machinery and capital.
Many individuals in developing countries who are privileged to receive some higher education are always among the elite.
But the prestigious fields for which their training prepares them are not necessarily those areas immediately needed by their countries.
For example, Cuba is now a major “exporter” of medical doctors to friendly countries because of overproduction of them.
In the same way, India is overflowing with many lawyers and engineers who cannot be absorbed into the system.
Nigeria is experiencing the same in terms of inability to absorb the products of her education system.
Brookover (1975) has argued that a surplus of highly educated personnel with advance degrees in the Social Sciences and Law, for example, along with a shortage of agricultural and industrial technicians has made manpower economists to be very critical of the types of education emphasised in many developing societies.
The assumption generally, is that if the proper number of people were given appropriate types of education, a maximum level of employment and productivity could be achieved.
Research results from some developing countries such as Nigeria, Argentina or Ghana indicate that many recipients of vocational were employed in clerical or commercial concerns and better than they would have been, if employed in their field of vocational training.
It was observed that the cost of vocational education in these countries did not compare favourably with the contribution it made to economic development.
Very unfortunately, much of the demand-supply problem has arisen because of unsuitable models of education which had been blindly borrowed from the colonisers.
This situation has given rise to the calls by comparativists in education to borrow a leaf from Nwahiwu Nyerere’s bold venture in his “education for self reliance” – a programme in which he trained people for the needed critical skills which will facilitate national development.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 In what areas would you say that the Nigerian education system has been producing “excess of graduates” or even “unemployable graduates”.
3.2 Education and Political-Economic Institutional Systems For integrated development and modernization of a nation, educational and developmental planners must gain support for massive and rapid 55 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS changes which involve all the institutions in the society in quest for development.
Transportation communication, health systems, economic planning, capital education system for many levels, types of knowledge and skills will all be needed.
Developing the human capital necessary to carry out the economic development requires willingness to modernise and be mobile, the motivation to pursue the education or training needed, and cooperation with the goals which have been set by the ruling elite.
As in many socialist states, special emphasis is always on “egalitarian and relevant” education such as in Russia.
In the same way, capitalism is the order in Western Europe and the United States of America where all kinds of inequalities predominate in spite of the democratic and human rights equalitarian sloganeering.
This is because education generally reflects the position of the dominant group.
However societal institutions are interdependent and the education system generally reflects the political structure and the distribution of power.
Models of change or development in education reflect these political – ideological underpinning and define what a society is and the actions it takes.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Is it really possible to separate politics from education?
How?
4.0 CONCLUSION It is clear from the foregoing that we cannot clearly separate the funding of education from the macro-economic configurations of the society.
The funds expended on education are generated from the various economic institutions and activities.
Conversely, the products of the education system with all their skills and knowledge provide the labour in the various economic institutions.
For an efficient system therefore, the economy and the educational institution have to work harmoniously together.
5.0 SUMMARY Very briefly, we have considered economics and the funding of education as factors which influence the development and management of higher education.
Looking at the major economic institutions, it has been pointed out that there is a lot of interdependence between the various sectors.
And for the development of an effective higher education system, the role of the economic institutions in the generation of adequate financial resources for meaningful education funding cannot be overemphasised.
56 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 6.0 TUTOR-MARKET ASSIGNMENT 1.
What kind of relationship exists between educational and economic institutions?
2.
To what extent is it true that adequate educational funding is a function of the level of development of a nation?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Brookover, W.B.
& Erickson, E.L. (1975).
Sociology of Education.
Homewood IL: Dorsey Press.
Ballantine, J.H.
(1989).
The Sociology of Education: A Systematic Analysis, (2nd Ed).
Englewood Clifss:, NJ.
Prentice-Hall, Inc. Foster, P. (1966).
“The Vocational School Fallacy in Development Planning” in Anderson, C.A.
et al (Eds) Educational and Economic Development.
Chicago: CASS.
Nwadiani, Mon.
(1997).
Education in Foreign Countries: Lessons for Policy Planning and Practice.
Vols 1&2 Benin City: NSEP.
Nwagwu, N.A., Aluede, O. et al (2007).
(Eds) Readings in Comparative Education.
Benin City: Yuwa Concept Nig.
Ltd. 57 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 4 SOCIAL AND RELIGIONS FACTORS IN HIGHER EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Social and Religious Factors 3.1.1 Social Factors 3.1.2 Religious Factors 3.2 Education and the Institution of Religion 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Higher education is essentially about man – how to sufficiently equip man with higher level skills, information and knowledge required for both individual and social development.
A consideration of the social and religious factors as they influence the development and management of higher education calls attention to both the spiritual and material aspects of man.
Both the spiritual and material elements of man are expected to work complimentarily for the full development of man.
Some of the problems which bedevil many societies may emanate from the unfortunate neglect of some aspects of man in the development process.
The human mind is controlled by both the spiritual and the material forces in our social environment.
Therefore, any human development programme like education cannot therefore, neglect the consideration of the spiritual ingredients that should be incorporated in the educational programme for the citizens.
Of all the institutions which influence human conduct and general lifestyle, religion is the most important one.
In this unit therefore, we shall consider the social and religious factors and their influence on higher education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • explain the meaning of social factors • explain the meaning of religious factors • describe the role of religious education in the moral development of man • describe the role of education in social control.
58 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Social and Religious Factors 3.1.1 Social Factors Social factors are those aspects of human’s life which the society or community imposes on him/her.
While some of the characteristics are natural, others are man-made and they all combine to impinge on the activities.
Literature is replete with taxonomies of social factors.
For example: • Family life, quality of life, value system, youth restiveness, youth militancy, juvenile delinquency, middle age anxiety, fear of failure, marriage problems, corruption, examination malpractice, education phobia, character, morality, cultism, students’ unrest, unemployment, prostitution, and so on.
All these are some social problems which a well planned higher education system has to pay special attention to in order for the education to be relevant.
Later in the unit, we shall discuss a couple of them very briefly as they relate to educational development and management.
3.1.2 Religious Factors The influence of religion on human is overwhelming.
This is why any educational programme that fails to take appropriate cognisance of the religious influence naturally has a number of forces to contend with in the society.
Religion has spiritual appeal to groups and individual.
Religion, either in the form of doctrines, tenets or dogmas or invocations appeals to the human emotions, intellect, habits and beliefs.
Many nations of the world have adopted national religions.
In many Arab nations, Islam is preeminently the official way of life, both in private and in the public.
Sometimes, it becomes very difficult to separate religion from national life.
In Saudi Arabian Kingdom for example, Islam is different to separate from official business In the Vatican in Rome, the same can be said of the Roman Catholic faith.
Nigeria has Islam, Christianity and Traditional religions.
One of the defining characteristics of the East-West dichotomy in humanity is the factor of religion.
While the West is dominated by Christianity, the East is characterised by Islam, Hinduism and Buddhism.
Judaism is circumscribed around the Judean strip of Israel and a few neighbours’.
The Christian religion has been of great 59 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS educational and cultural influence right from the Graeco-Roman period in the era of St. Thomas Aquinas, Quintilian and other early Christian philosopher-educators.
Early Christian influence was so overwhelming that the educational traditions had their origins in the religions Cathedrals of Popes, Emperors, Kings or Queens in Europe.
In fact, until the period of the industrial revolution in Europe, education was essentially a church affair for the clergy and some clerics-strictly under the control of the church both in concept, content and practice.
All instructions followed the Christian religions doctrinal format and method.
All textbooks had the Holy Bible as the foundation.
The same is true of Islam in the East.
Within a country, or a village, the relationship between education and religion is very complex and sometimes, contradictory.
In Nigeria, for example, especially in the northern states, the Koranic school and the “almajiris” stress traditional religious beliefs, attitudes and behaviour patterns.
The Koranic school does not support change even though it exists next to state-owned schools or Christian missionary schools which stress modern attitudes and the importance of education as a means of forging ahead.
In fact, the recent phenomenon of the Boko Haram rodent uprising in some northern state of Nigeria has proclaimed that Western education is evil.
Comparatively in Northern Ireland, the Roman Catholic parochial schools and the state schools attended primarily by protestant groups, protect and perpetuate a distinction between the social classes and the hostilities between the religious groups.
In Afghanistan Iran Pakistan and other Islamic enclaves, the fundamentalist schools support the status quo and the word of the Muslim leader (the Ayatollalis) is law.
In the United States of America, some Pentecostal fundamentalist Christian schools stress some sectarian fanatical values diametrically opposed to the constitutional separation of church and state, they express the groups’ alienation from the modern values of the society.
The Jiminy Jones’ 1979 Guyana suicide group – “People’s Temple” is a case in point.
There is also the Louis Farrakhan’s “Nation of Islam” or the “Moonies”.
They are all forces whose influence on education cannot be ignored.
In Israel, religion (Judaism) and education work hand in hand to accomplish the goals of the state.
All communication in Israel is done in Hebrew language; and the religious training provides unifying themes for the Jewish homeland against all threats from their Palestinian and other hostile Arab neighbours.
60 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.2 Education and the Institution of Religion Religion, like education, is an important instrument of change, as it is often closely linked to a people’s ethnic, racial or national origins.
Attitudes towards change are reflected in religious schools or in state schools where the religion is practiced.
If a change is consistent with the principles of the religion, the church may in fact be the vanguard of change.
On the other hand, religion may also retard change by standing in the way of change – especially if the change threatens the principles or the belief of the system.
Any educational development programme that ignores the influence of religion does so at its own risk.
This is because religion pertains to man’s essence and existence.
The existential attributes of religion has been responsible for its description as the “opium of the masses”.
All oppressed people in the world find solace in the warm embrace of one of the religions.
According to Nicholas Hans (1967), man’s concept of religion and his reaction to its effects are simply unpredictable.
Religions doctrines appeal directly to the soul and intellect of the religious person.
Every nation therefore tries to fashion its educational objectives and practices along religious lines.
Even in states that are secular, many phases of religious practices can be found in their educational practice.
4.0 CONCLUSION The influence of social and religious factors in higher education have been discussed, pointing out that the human being has both the material and the spiritual components which must be taken into consideration in any educational programme.
The human being responds to both social and religious influences of the society s/he lives in.
The overriding social influences of family life on the human being are such that the educational system would have to make special provisions for it.
This is because both the students and the educational functionaries come from families and they have to be conversant with the chemistry of various families.
A student who comes from an unstable family or a single parent “family” may not react the same way to a learning problem as would a learner from a warm and loving family.
Similarly, the understanding and practice of religion in a community may affect the social or moral climate of the school.
In developing educational programme therefore, all these factors have to be carefully considered.
61 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 5.0 SUMMARY This unit has considered the influence of social and religious factors.
These factors have overwhelming influence on the human person.
The human being is essentially a social being exposed to the vagaries of the socio-religion influences of the community where s/he lives.
In educating the human being therefore, these influences have to be built into the education system.
The spiritual aspect of man can be adequately taken care of, only by means of some sound moral or religious training as provided for in the educational programme.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Using specific examples, describe some social factors which can influence a student’s education.
2.
Why is religion important in an educational programme, especially higher education?
3.
Why are social problems still prevalent in many societies in spite of the deliberate plan of the education system to curtail them?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ballantine, J.H.
(1989).
The Sociology of Education: A Systematic Analysis, (2nd Ed).
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc. Iwuama, B.C.
; Nweke, R.A. et al (1992).
Comparative Education: A Functional Approach.
Agbor: Central Books Nig.
Ltd. King, E.J.
(1979).
Other Schools and Ours: Comparative Studies for Today, (5th Edition).
London Holt: Rinehart and Winston Ltd. Nwagwu, N. et al (2007).
(Edsd.)
Readings in Comparative Education.
Benin City: Yuwa Concept Nig.
Ltd. Oroka, O.
(1998).
(Ed).
Readings in Comparative Education.
Port Harcourt: Abe Publishers.
62 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS MODULE 3 HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS IN DEVELOPED COUNTRIES Unit 1 Higher Education in United Kingdom Unit 2 Higher Education in the United States of America Unit 3 Higher Education in France Unit 4 Higher Education in Germany UNIT 1 HIGHER EDUCATION IN UNITED KINGDOM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in United Kingdom 3.2 Structure and Organisation of Higher Education 3.3 Management and Supervision of Higher Education 3.4 Funding of Higher Education 3.5 Academic Programmes, Admissions and Certification Processes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION The United Kingdom (UK) is a small nation made up of small Islands in northwestern Europe with Great Britain being the largest of the cluster of the Islands –commonly referred to as the British Isles.
Other components of the UK include Northern Island Scotland, and Wales – all covering an approximate area of about 244,110 Square kilometres (94,251 sq ml), that is, about the same size as the American state of Oregon or even twice the size of New York State.
The small size notwithstanding, the UK is highly populated with 2002 estimates showing a density of 245 persons per square kilometres.
The UK is highly industrialised and developed economically with a very old history of preeminence in the Arts, Sciences and very sophisticated technology.
Traditionally a constitutional monarchy, the UK is a highly prosperous and peaceful nation whose citizens enjoy a very high standard of living.
63 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Many nations of the world have been greatly influenced by the culture and history of the United Kingdom through the process of colonisation.
For over three centuries, the UK held sway in world affairs and in the early 20th century, nearly one quarter of the world nations and peoples were under the control of the British Empire.
Former colonies of the United Kingdom include Nigeria, Ghana, Canada, Australia, India, Hong Kong and many others whose laws, religious and educational systems are still hybrids of the British system.
As a highly developed nation, education is very important and of vital concern throughout Britain because, the economy depends on a highly educated professional and skillful workforce.
One of the problems which the UK has consistently faced is that of immigrants.
Immigration has had important consequences on the education system.
The immigrants and other ethnic minorities, who are concentrated in the urban centers’, continually, seek recognition for their varying special, cultural and linguistic needs.
This problem is very pronounced in Wales and Scotland, where the indigenous language is still spoken and taught in many educational institutions.
Legislation pertaining to education is equally bedeviled with a series of controversies because the education sector is very economically significant to the British.
For example, at the higher education level, priority is given to scientific and technological disciplines which are important to the British economy.
Compared to the United States of America, fewer people proceed to higher education in the United Kingdom probably because of the extreme specialisation in the industry or perhaps some other historical antecedents.
There are generally centralised systems as in funding of many British schools with the local governments providing supplementary funds.
England and Wales have a national curriculum of core courses for elementary and post elementary levels of education.
There are both state (government) schools and public (private) schools which have all turned comprehensive secondary schools all catering for those desiring to go into the universities.
There are also secondary modern schools which provide vocational education for all in Britain.
Among the famous private secondary schools in Britain are Eton College, Harrow School, Rugby School and Winchester School – all founded in the middle ages and training grounds for Britain’s leaders and other influential and wealthy aristocratic families.
About one third of British students leave school as soon as possible after attaining age 16, usually taking lower level jobs in the workforce.
Those who stay in school beyond age 16 may pursue either further education or higher education.
In Britain, further education is largely vocational, as is 64 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS adult education with about 3.5 million enrolled in the various programmes in 1995.
On a comparative basis, the percentage of young people enrolling in higher education in Britain is far lower than in the U.S.A. where over 50 percent attend universities.
Available records show that in 1995, about 1.7 million students were enrolled in higher education.
With over 90 universities, the U.K has several categories of than with the foremost ones being Oxford and Cambridge both of which were founded in the middle ages.
The parliamentary democratic structure of the government reflects the separate historical and legal developments of the components of England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland each of which has its own department spaciously responsible for all educational affairs.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • outline the educational philosophy and objectives of higher education in the United Kingdom • describe the organisation structure of higher education in the U.K • list some of the academic programmes and what is required to qualify for them.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in the United Kingdom Britain is a very conservative society with a long tradition of non- interference by the central government in educational matters.
Three basic philosophical principles form the kernel of British education: (i) Quest for academic excellence (ii) Quest for the preservation of culture and tradition (iii) Quest for science and technological development The higher education system is particularly geared towards: (i) The development of knowledge and applying it to solve contemporary problems (ii) The training of highly skilled human resources (iii) The provision and updating for adults in science, technology and business subjects.
65 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS All these philosophical signposts made education very selective and for only the few who could cope with the strains of tough examinations.
Education, they insist, must help to entrench in the citizens the conservative traditional ethics of discipline.
3.2 Structure and Organisation of Higher Education The Secretary of State for Education and Science who is also the political head of the Department of Education and Science (DES) is the cabinet minister responsible for Education in England and specifically for the university system throughout the United Kingdom.
For many years, Oxford and Cambridge universities have been the models for educational systems around the world.
They provided access to high positions for intellectual elite.
Before the 1926 Robbin’s Commission, there were about 20-25 universities in the United Kingdom.
This number had risen considerably by 1965 to about 45.
With the worldwide trend of deregulation, open access to all levels of education by all groups of persons in the society, and the urgent needs for a more educated workforce to fill the technical positions in an industrialised society, several changes have occurred in the structure and organisation of higher education in the UK.
The great universities have liberalised and opened their doors to a larger number of qualified students from various backgrounds – like state-supported schools, institutes and colleges.
In spite of these, university access is still very limited, with children from privileged backgrounds and professional standing better chances of acceptance than for those from the lower socio-economic levels.
Standards are still very high, with some university places being reserved for the best students.
Since 1966, a number of polytechnics have been developed to meet the need for trained engineers, technical experts and all categories of technicians.
There is the Open University which was established in 1971 to give opportunity to people who might have missed out the benefit of higher education.
These included teachers, other workers and those staying at home.
The Open University concept became so accepted that by 1976 about 53,000 applications were received.
The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) radio or television (TV) was the main media with texts carefully developed for all available courses.
Many local Education Authority Colleges offer courses of both further education and higher education.
The universities and polytechnics are the main centers’ of degree level work and research; the polytechnics are especially strong in part-time higher education programmes.
A first degree programme in the United Kingdom usually requires three years 66 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS of full time study but some courses require four years or more especially in the professional areas.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What organisational problems do immigrants create in the British higher education system?
2.
What led to the establishment of more Polytechnics in UK?
3.3 Management and Supervision of Higher Education Many of the universities in the United Kingdom are independent.
Each university has its management and supervisory personnel who work for the success of the university.
The polytechnics and the local education authority colleges of higher education have governing bodies which exercise considerable freedom in the management of their affairs.
There is a University Grants Commission (UGC) which was created in 1919 to insulate the universities from direct government influence.
The universities receive government funds indirectly through the UGC which functions very much like Nigeria’s National Universities Commission (NUC).
3.4 Funding of Higher Education in the UK Many universities in Britain, in spite of their autonomous status, receive some grants from the British Treasury on a yearly basis.
These treasuries include parliamentary grants, government department grants, student fees, and proceeds from research, endowments, local authority grants, donations and subscriptions from various private organisations and so on.
Unlike many other nations, funding is not a major problem in the UK because it is not politicised.
3.5 Academic Programmes, Admissions and Certification Processes Higher education in Britain has a very long history with the universities dating back to the middle ages.
In the same way, many of the academic programmes are very old.
Humanistic or liberal arts education was very dominant in the curriculum programme of several British universities.
Such liberal arts education included courses in the classical studies of the Creek and Roman periods.
They include Latin, Literature (prose, poetry and drama) Law, History, Economics Constitutional Studies, Logic, Philosophy, Theological Studies and many more.
After the industrial revolution, many more courses in the applied sciences and 67 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS engineering disciplines were now introduced.
Many polytechnics were approved to run university degree programmes up to the doctoral levels.
For higher studies, entry requirements were very stiff and competitive and to a very large extent, this condition has not improved.
On completion of secondary education at 16 years of age, students are awarded the ordinary level General Certificate or the old Cambridge School Certificate.
For those who intend to proceed to higher education, they are required to obtain the advanced level (A/L) qualification in the area they intend to pursue degree programmes.
The advanced level examinations are always very tough, with the result that only the very brilliant are able to get admitted into the universities.
Generally, the degree programme lasts for three years.
There are, however, some professional programmes which take four or more years to complete just as in Nigeria where most professional degree courses now last for a minimum of five years.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Are there any similarities/differences between Nigerian and UK University admission requirements?
Discuss 4.0 CONCLUSION Higher Education in Great Britain is a very extensive business involving the religious missionaries, private individual, organisations and the government.
While there are some universities dominated by the elite and the professional like the “Coxbridge” universities, there are several others – the university colleges of the newer university of London which opened its doors to many more aspirants for higher education.
Many changes have also taken effect with the result that many immigrants and foreign students now have easier access to higher education.
Finances and management have also improved considerably especially with the establishment of comprehensive schools and many more polytechnics.
The demand for higher education has increased the quantum of money for the management of the universities and all degree colleges of education.
The result is that, expenditure on education takes a very high percentage of the national budget unlike what happens in Nigeria where only a paltry and very insignificant percentage is allocated to education.
5.0 SUMMARY Higher education system in the United Kingdom has been shaped by the national quest for excellence in all its ramifications.
The major objectives were the production of high level manpower especially for 68 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS the rapidly expanding industrial sector where Britain has been a key player and an exemplary leader for centuries.
Funds are generously provided for and very judiciously managed by the various organs which have been appointed to do so.
There are all kinds of academic programmes from the bachelor’s degree through to the postgraduate programmes including certificate professional courses.
Standards are very high in all aspects whether in terms of entry qualifications, curriculum content, personnel and all other areas with the result that the opportunity to study in Britain is the desire of all ‘lovers’ of good education worldwide.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What are the major objectives of higher education in Britain?
2.
Is there any difference between British and American Universities in their structural organisation?
3.
Describe some sources of finance for British higher education.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ballantine, J.H (1989).
The Sociology of Education: A Systematic Analysis, (2nd Ed).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc. Hans, N. (1982).
Comparative Education: A Study of Educational Factors and Tradition.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Homes, B. in Ajumobi, S.A. & Irowi, U.M.O.
(Eds) (1990).
Comparative Education for Nigeria.
Lagos: NERDC.
King, E.J.
(1979).
Other Schools and Ours: Comparative Studies for Today, (5th Ed).
London: Hold Rinehart and Winston.
Odor, G.O.
(1997).
“Education in Great Britain” in Education in Foreign Countries: Lessons for Policy Planning and Practice Vols 1&2 Nwadiani, Mon (Ed.)
Benin City: (NSEP).
Oroka, O.
(1998).
(Ed) Readings in Comparative Education.
Port Harcourt: ABE Publishers.
Postlethwaite, T.N.
(1988).
(Ed).
The Encyclopedia of Comparative Education and National Systems of Education.
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
69 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 2 HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 An Overview of the American Education System 3.1.1 The Background to American Education 3.1.2 The Philosophy and Objectives of American Education 3.2 The Structure of the American Education System 3.3 Administration and Supervision of Educational System 3.3.1 State and Federal Responsibility 3.3.2 Financing Education 3.4 Training of Educational Personnel-Teachers and Other Officers 3.4.1 Teacher Education 3.5 Curriculum and Pedagogy 3.5.1 Specialised Academic Areas 3.5.2 Examinations and Certification and Research 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Generally described as a “nation on wheels”, the United States of America is unarguable the “greatest” nation in the world with the ranking of a first in a majority of all international indices.
It is a land of opportunities and where almost “everything” is possible.
The wheels on which America is being propelled are so fast that within a relatively short period of 224 years after independence, “God’s own country” has popularly referred called has effectively conquered racial prejudice by the popular election of an African American as her president.
Education is unarguably the biggest single enterprise in the United States of America and very intricately linked to the dictates of the community it serves.
The American school has for a long time been an extension into the future of the working community itself, with plans for satisfactory employment and a purposeful life.
The literacy rate is very high.
Basic education is compulsory nationwide, public primary and secondary education is free.
In other words, education is the concern of both private and public stakeholders.
The public school is generally a 70 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS centre of public interest closely associated with parental support.
As the children mature, they are encouraged and initiated into the American lifestyle in very pragmatic ways.
Whatever they study or learn is given a practical and social perspective.
Contrary to the European and what Nigeria inherited from her colonial masters, the American educational outlook at any level exhibits a two-fold emphasis: practice in skills directed towards visible and practical outcomes and a suggestion that manipulation enjoyed have a near-absolute merit in themselves.
Regard for knowledge is generally limited to its instrumental value in as much as it provides some solution to some human problem.
Education is heavily decentralised.
In fact, the constitution of the United States of America categorically made no provision for education par-se.
Contrary to the Nigerian pretences over fiscal federalism in education, each of the 50 states of the USA exercises enormous freedom and autonomy in the provision for the laws, compulsory schooling, selection and admission of students, curricular, teacher training and recruitment and financing.
Local initiatives are also available for the cities, districts, counties and other local communities.
The Tenth Amendment was specifically entrusted to the separate states and the people whose powers are not reserved for the federal government.
Higher education in the United States of America takes off from the several post-secondary junior or community colleges whose number had continued to increase along with the rate of increase in student enrolment of over 13 million in the 1980s.
There has been no consensus about the expansion rate in higher education.
Figures from the US Office of Education have generally conflicted with figures even from the Carnegie Commission on Higher Education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • narrate the background to American education • state the objectives and philosophies which have driven the American Education • describe the structural pattern of higher education in the United States of America • outline the administrative pattern of higher education in the United States of America • describe the procedures for training personnel of the American education • describe the content of the curriculum.
71 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 An Overview of the American Education System 3.1.1 Background to American Education All levels of education in the United States of America have been greatly influenced by her history, geography and demographic disposition.
The United States of America was colonised by Great Britain and obtained independence in 1776 under her first president, George Washington.
Originally, the territory was inhabited by native Indians who were quickly overtaken by a successive wave of immigrants from Europe especially Great Britain, Germany, the Scandinavia and later from the East and Central Asian countries.
Then, there were some minority descendants of slaves who were exported from Africa into the South and Central United States.
With an estimated population of over 320 million in 1995, one quarter of which live in rural areas, the United States of America has very large cities such as, New York, Washington D.C, Detroit, Chicago, Los Angeles, and many others.
There is, therefore a great diversity across the length and breadth of the United States of America which resulted in some states not being able to adequately provide education and other life-enhancing conditions for their citizens because of limited resources.
Yet, some states have almost more than enough.
For instance, while California and New York are overflowing with excess population, Alaska and Rhode Island are yearning for people to occupy the territory.
Even though family size has been on the decrease from 3.61 persons in 1970 to 3.37 in 1977, and 2.65 persons in 2000 to 2.41 persons in 2007, the number of school-age children of seven to 11 years, who live with single-parent, is on the increase and this has continued to create some intractable educational problems in terms of unstable or irregular attendance at school, regular disruptions in children’s schooling regimes and some other family related social problems.
The 50 states structure is founded on the 1787 federal constitution, with each state having some constitutional autonomy over its legislature, the judiciary and education.
In fact, while each state takes full responsibility for its education, it, in turn, delegates much of the educational responsibilities to the counties, the districts, the cities and local communities.
Records indicate that New York City alone has more educational institutions than the whole of Denmark.
Almost in all states, there is usually a corresponding private (church/business associated) sector which complements state efforts in educational provision.
There is, however, a clear separation between the church and state.
There are State Boards of Education, just as in Nigeria.
There are also education commissioners at the state levels and school superintendents and supervisors down the line.
72 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS About half of the school systems in the United States of America benefit from the nursery school systems; the head start or disadvantaged children are also being financed through federal support.
Elementary schools generally provide for ages six to twelve or six to fourteen with variations from state to state or district to district.
The secondary or high school phase generally commences in grades seven and eight.
The high school is usually divided into “junior” and “senior” with the curriculum emphasising the core subjects of English, Social Studies, Mathematics, Science and Physical Education.
Some foreign language (usually French or German, since English is the medium of instruction), Fine Arts or some pre-vocational training are generally included as electives.
In some schools in well-organised states, like New York, some of the school subjects may be grouped into elementary, intermediate and advanced levels especially with the prospect for post-secondary education studies.
There, is therefore, a very high demand for higher education which has a wide range of possibilities especially for career prospects.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Why is the United States of America generally described as a “nation on wheels?” 3.1.2 The Philosophy and Objectives of American Education Because of the great diversities which characterise the American society, educational provisions have been deliberately designed to provide a wide range of experiences for all American citizens.
The main objectives of education therefore, have been general enlightenment and knowledge for everybody through equalisation of the opportunities for all.
The task of nation building has often been regarded as the responsibility of everybody.
In order for everyone to make his/her contribution in the overall development of the American society, every citizen had to be provided with the kind of education that will enable him or her to do so.
Emphasis is generally on the acquisition of some demonstrable skill and competence in a very comprehensive manner – hence the concept of comprehensive schools.
There is also an ideological of an education that will facilitate problem-solving, a practical education that “works”.
This was the basis for the Watsonian pragmatic philosophy of the American education.
Education has been designed by the Americans as a tool for enhancing the general well - being of man and the economy.
73 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.2 The Structure of American Education System The usual pattern for higher education in the United States of America, as in many other nations, is to provide four years of undergraduate programme in a college.
This is similar to the Nigerian undergraduate programmes of four years for most courses in the liberal arts, social sciences and pure sciences.
In the United States, the four year undergraduate programme may be followed by professional graduate school work for a minimum of one year.
While a Bachelor of Arts or Science B.A.
or B.Sc lasts for four years, a master’s degree (MSc) could be obtained within a year and a doctorate degree (PhD) in two or more years.
The training of teachers also takes place in the colleges some of which are integral components of the universities.
Some universities go by the name ‘college’ – as in Teachers College in Columbia.
More advanced work at the graduate level is generally more research-oriented as opposed to the undergraduate work which places much emphasis on attendance at lectures and the credit hours accumulated by semester/session.
There is an elaborate system of assessing suitability for college and university entrance which usually depends on the acceptance of agreed standards by associations of colleges and universities.
The Educational Testing Service in Princeton, New Jersey, College Entrance Examination Board and some other ones, are independent organisations which standardise the disparities between various university and college admission seekers or applicants.
Higher education degrees in the United States of America are often compared with similar degrees in the United Kingdom and Germany and Nigeria.
The America universities at Yale, Harvard, Princeton or Stanford and some other notable ones are magnificent universities by any standard.
That is why American degrees are acceptable worldwide.
They often have a very sound and researching curriculum.
The great technological universities like the MIT are models for the world.
Many other research institutes and universities have outstanding specialist departments that attract the cream of American and academicians from all over the world by their incomparable resources.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 Describe the general structure of the education system of the USA.
74 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.3 Administration and Supervision of Higher Education 3.3.1 State and Federal Responsibility Education is a big business in the United States of America.
Both private and public bodies are deeply involved in the administration and financing of education at all levels.
Until now, education was historically considered a state and local responsibility, now, all hands are on deck for its collective running and financing.
The federal government, for example, provides funds for research in higher education.
Since 1980, the Federal Department of Education headed by a secretary of cabinet rank, has been responsible for the execution of government policy in most educational matters.
The establishment of this department has consolidated a number of educational responsibilities distributed among several federal agencies and reflected the growth over previous years of federal legislation and financial investment in education.
The 50 states discharge their administrative responsibility for education along broadly similar lines.
Generally, board members of education who are either appointed or elected formulate educational and budget policies.
There is also a State Department of Education which is headed by a Chief Administrator.
The officer is responsible for the provision of education at all levels for all citizens of the state.
The other responsibilities of the State Education Board developing curriculum, monitoring graduation requirements, teacher certification and service conditions, as well as school financing.
Most states have a separate board which takes responsibility for public higher education and for licensing of private colleges and universities.
As in Nigeria, higher education in the United States of America is managed by a president who is generally appointed by a board of trustees.
In all the universities, faculty has major responsibility for the educational programmes and selection or appointment of academic staff which is subject to the approval of the general university administration.
Higher institutions are also, usually subject to peer review by accrediting organisations set up by the appropriate authorities.
3.3.2 Financing Higher Education in the United States of America Financial responsibilities of higher education in the USA are cooperatively borne.
Between 1980 and 1990, the financial or tuition costs per annum for undergraduates soared above the previous averages of $20,000 at private colleges and $15,000 at state colleges.
Because of this steady increase in costs to all stakeholders in education, there has 75 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS been a raging controversy about the need for more government is involvement through outright scholarships and grants.
In response to this, over 60 per cent of the entire costs of students’ part-time jobs on campus are now being shouldered by the federal government.
Government scholarships are also readily available to deserving undergraduates even up to the doctoral levels.
Revenues are sourced mainly from counties and other local sources in form of real estate and state taxes amounting to about 55 per cent of the funds.
The balance is generally provided by the federal funds.
Federal grants were approximated to about $60.7 billion in the 1990s– especially in all areas of higher education, vocational-technical schooling and continuing education for the adult folks.
Generally, governments are the largest sources of funds for public higher education while tuition fees and charitable contributions provide the major income for private institutions.
It was estimated that over half of all students in higher institutions including foreign students receive some financial aid in form of scholarships, partial or complete fee remission, or long-term, low interest loans.
Undergraduates and graduates usually supplement their resources with part-time and long vocational employment.
This is because after age 18, most parents hands-off responsibility for their wards when the children might have attained 18 years of age.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 Are there any areas of overlap between the states and federal authorities in their higher educational responsibilities in the United States of America?
3.4 Training of Educational Personnel-Teachers and Others 3.4.1 Teacher Education Teacher education in the United States of America is a very professional enterprise.
Every teacher would have to be educated and trained in a four-year teachers’ college, state college or college of education on a university campus.
American Colleges of Education, unlike the Nigerian, Colleges of Education, are recognised as university and award university-style degrees.
In all American teacher education programmes, a great deal of study time is usually allocated to pedagogy and behavioural/learning problem solving.
In-service training for teachers has been an important feature of the American teacher education programme.
Many school districts require teachers to spend part of the school vacation time in schools or other 76 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS centers’ updating their skills in pedagogy – competency – based teacher education programmes which are widely provided in many summer schools or university campuses.
A period of supervised teaching practice is a compulsory requirement for teacher certification or license in the United States of America.
3.5 Curriculum and Pedagogy 3.5.1 The Organs involved in Curriculum Development The development of curriculum and teaching has been greatly influenced by the great diversities which have characterised the American society.
It can be said that, there is no what can safely be described as official national curriculum.
State departments of education make curricular prescriptions with varying degrees of room for specifics.
Every stakeholder is somehow involved in the process of curriculum development – that is, subject specialists, school administrators, professors of various disciplines in education, public interest groups, producers and sellers of textbooks, teachers’ organisations, parents and business organisations (employees) are all involved at different levels.
The Educational Testing Service is equally deeply involved in the process.
3.5.2 Examinations, Certification and Research Standards are generally maintained at the local districts and state levels; even though there are no examinations for high school diplomas; attendance and satisfactory record of school achievement are determined by the district or some other officials.
High school graduation is usually sufficient to secure admission to state colleges in very many states, but some states require success in some public examination conducted by the College Entrance Examination Board and the Educational Testing Service.
Their test results are used across the United States of America for admission into the universities and colleges.
The American higher education system has a very strong research background; the federal government is at the forefront of funding research.
Others include the states, private foundations, universities and colleges.
There is a National Institute of Education with a network of regional research and development laboratories and facilities for the assessment of school achievement.
There has been a considerable growth, quantitatively, of educational research in the United States of America with most educational and developmental decisions emanating from numerous applied research results.
Attention has traditionally been focused on the education of special groups like the socially and economically disadvantaged groups, the handicapped and others.
In 77 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS spite of all these efforts many challenges still pose lot of problems for the American government.
These include the problems of minorities, immigrants and the equalisation of opportunities for all.
4.0 CONCLUSION Higher education in the United States of America has attained tremendous strides in all respects –in science and technology; commerce and industry as well as professional education.
In many nations of the world, it is always a pride for any citizen to have benefitted from the American educational experience.
American education has resulted in breakthrough in several areas of human endeavour – telecommunications, medical sciences especially in human cell cloning, genetic engineering and many more.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the American higher education has been considered.
It looked at the background factors which have shaped the pattern of education at all levels with particular reference to higher education.
It also examined the philosophy that guided the formulation of the educational goals and practices.
It was observed that the structure is not very different from what obtains in many parts of the world including Nigeria.
This unit showed the very comprehensive nature of the American teacher educational programme as well as the curriculum development system.
The various examinations and the agencies responsible for the examinations were also discussed.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 The United States of America has been described as a “nation on wheels” essentially because of the very unique ways in which she carried out her developmental processes.
A nation that took off as an agglomeration of disparage immigrants suddenly found herself strongly united even in plurality or diversity.
The pace of development was as if she was being propelled on wheels.
Very speedily the rail, roads, the automobile, mass production centres and mass communication industries were sprawling.
Education, which is the biggest single business in the United States of America has been responsible, in a large measure for these spectacular developmental strides.
The same education which is also on wheels, is open to all kinds of influences of the American dream – groups and individuals, the state, the local counties and communities.
On the political front the wheels have propelled her so fast that in the 21st century, a minority black American of Kenyan paternal lineage has been popularly and democratically 78 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS elected the 44th president of the United States of America – an actualisation of the dream of the Rev.
Martin Luther King Jnr.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3 The United States of America exemplifies almost the very extremes of policy decentralisation in education.
Even though there are national standards which are strictly enforced or adhered to, there is a wide latitude of autonomy in educational policy initiatives.
Counties are free to evolve and manage their educational systems.
In the same way, states are almost independent of the federal government in educational matters.
In curriculum, teacher education, instruction, educational administration and financing, there is a great deal of autonomy between the states and the central government.
However, there are areas of overlap between the states and the federal authorities especially in financial matters.
Some state institutions enjoy some considerable financial support from the federal government.
Even in the general objectives and philosophical bases for education, there are a lot of spill- overs from the national goals to the states and counties and communities.
There are also some overlapps in the strategies for the professional preparation of teachers.
Some evaluation/testing agencies like the Educational Testing Service in Princeton, New Jersey or the Graduate Records Examination agencies are also veritable clearing houses for all states and the federal educational authorities.
Therefore, there are a lot of overlap between the states and federal authorities in their educational responsibilities.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What historical antecedents influenced American education most?
2.
Outline the major objectives of the American education system.
3.
What is the structure of higher education in the United States of America?
4.
How is higher education administered and financed in the USA?
5.
Describe the professional content of the American teacher education programme.
6. Who are those responsible for the development of the curriculum in the American education system?
79 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Hans, N. (1959).
Comparative Education.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Iwuama, B.C.
et al (eds) (1992).
Comparative Education: A Functional Approach.
Agbor: Central Books Ltd. King, Edmund J.
(1979), Other Schools and Ours: Comparative Studies for Today, (Fifth Edition).
London: Rinehart and Winston.
Postlethwaite, T. Neville (ed).
(1988).
The Encyclopedia and Comparative Education and National Systems of Education.
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
80 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 3 HIGHER EDUCATION IN FRANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in France 3.2 Structure and Organisation of Higher Education in France 3.3 Management and Supervision of Higher Education in France 3.4 Funding of Higher Education in France 3.5 Academic Programmes: Admissions and Certification Processes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION France, like the United States of America or the United Kingdom, is also a developed country and one of the ‘world’s powerful countries.
It has a very highly developed and industrialised economy skillful and well educated workforce.
The standard of living in France is equally very high along with the per-capital income for the average French citizen.
The literacy rate is equally very high, almost as high as that of the United Kingdom with 99 Per cent.
France is essentially a society with a long history of conservatism and a determined quest for intellectualism and excellence in almost all aspects of the French life.
The French society has therefore been traditionally characterised by motley of paradoxes or contradictions.
There are opposing philosophies, educational ideals and practices and lifestyles which have called to question the long cherished tradition of the equality of man.
For instance, however, the French slogan for egalitarianism is clearly populist and socialist in concept, the avowed quest for elitism is a clear demonstration of the discriminatory and capitalist bourgeois ideology all of which are irreconcilable.
The concept of the ‘Great Schools’, for example, is clearly a negation of the egalitarian principle.
The classical cultural assimilation policy which is very evident all over the French colonial territories and in continental France is a reflection of the traditional metropolitan France which is evident in thought, speech, dressing, behaviour and taste.
81 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS What may be regarded as the French educational system of today has its origin from the French Revolution of the Napoleonic era of the 18th century.
Before the French Revolution, all life activities revolved around the Catholic Church which dominated both private and public life.
For example, as far back in the 13th century, 1215 precisely, the first university in France had already been established in Paris with four basic faculties of Theology, Common Law, Medicine and the Liberal Arts.
Other universities of the Pre-Revolution period included the Universities of Toulouse (1229), Montpellier (1289), Orleans (1306) and Grenoble (1339).
All of which were very conservative and dogmatically religious in orientation and organisation.
This is not different from the situation in Nigeria where religious missionary influences were dominant in the socio-political and religious life of Nigerians before and immediately after independence.
The philosophical thoughts of great French thinkers such as Rousseau, Voltaire, and Montesquieu have greatly influenced the developmental direction of the French society.
The classical discourse or the origin of inequality in Rousseau’s Emile of (1762) has had tremendous influence on the formulation of the educational and political philosophies of modern day France (Osazuwa 1998).
One of the products of the French Revolution was the creation of the ideals of equality, human rights and freedom of persons all expressed in the national motto of “liberte, egalite, fraternite” which are applicable all over the French territory.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • state the historical factors which have influenced the French educational philosophies and objectives • explain the structural disposition of the French higher education system • identify the various authorities of higher education in France • categorise the various sources of funds for education in France • list some of the academic programmes and their entry requirements at the higher educational level.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in France In spite of the elitist nature of the 13th century ancient universities, one general objective which the French have consistently pursued is that of general knowledge, which is expressed in the philosophy of “Culture 82 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Generale”.
By this idea, the French man who has passed through an educational system is expected to know “some significant thing” about everything – a kind of broad-based education which comprehensively prepares the individual for a useful and productive life.
There were several conflicting expectations as a result of the fall-outs of the revolution.
For instance, in the primary level, school was free, compulsory and non-denominational, two parallel systems operated – the municipal public schools, and the “small classes of the public high schools (the Lycees) which were mostly attended by the children of the upper class who look down on the public schools.
The Lycees were specially designed to train the elite just as in the UK Eton or Harrow and the Nigerian Kings or Queens Colleges.
The disdain for manual work worked against the early development of vocational education just as we have experienced in Nigeria where vocational and technical education is just finding its bearing.
Other basic philosophical signposts of the French education system according to Osazuwa (1998) include egalitarianism, state control, elitism and intellectualism.
As pointed out earlier, the French society provides a number of contradictions.
Despite her national motto of equality, liberty and fraternity which promote egalitarianism, there is still increase in private elitist schools for the bourgeoisie.
Since the revolution, the church appeared to have been stripped of its former powers and control over education especially with Napoleon’s 1795 scrapping of the church controlled universities and replacing them with state controlled universities, colleges and faculties headed by a grand master based in national capital in Paris.
In line with the principle of intellectualism coupled with that of the “culture generale” of higher education in France is the goal to produce men and women who are intellectually alert, logical and comprehensive.
Classical disciplines like Latin, Greek and some other foreign language dominate the middle level curriculum.
3.2 Structure and Organisation of Higher Education Universities in France number over 70, with about 13 of them concentrated within metropolitan Paris.
Two structural patterns of university education are discernible in France – the short-term training in Science and Technology and the conventional university education.
The University Institutes of Technology run two-year technological programme leading to the award of University Diploma in Technology.
83 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Others include Diploma in Scientific and Technical Studies and Advanced Technicians Certificates all within the university system.
The conventional university system is like the Nigerian model lasting between three and seven years.
The award of university degrees is riddled with obvious discriminatory practices.
Traditionally, doctorate degrees are of three types in France.
The doctorat d’ Etat (State or National, the doctorat du troisieme cycle (third cycle) and the doctorat d’universite as the lowest in rank order.
Typically, the university system is organised into three stages or cycles.
First Cycle (Premier) – two years for applicants with the Bacc or the Advanced Level Certificate.
This is very much like the Nigerian Higher School Certificate of old or even the Advance Level General Certificate in Education (GCE).
On completion, the successful student is awarded the Diploma in the General University Studies – covering multidisciplinary concerns of Law, Sciences, Economics, Administration, Social Sciences, Arts, Language Arts, and Theological Studies as Option ‘A’.
Then Option ‘B’ disciplines include those for the Diploma in Scientific and Technical Studies such as Applied Mathematics, Social Sciences, Sciences, Economics, Technology, Physical and Sports Science.
Second Cycle (Deuxieme) – covers one to two years duration for holders of the first cycle qualifications, that is, Diploma in General University Studies or Diploma in Scientific and Technical Studies.
It is a specialisation level for professional training leading to a first or masters’ degree on successful completion.
Third Cycle (Troisieme) – essentially the doctoral level of study-open to candidates with masters’ degrees.
According to Mokwenye (1996), the first year of the doctoral programme prepares the students for an M.Phil degree and, depending on his performance; he may be allowed to proceed to write a thesis for the Ph.D. degree.
In addition, the candidate’s final admission into the thesis programme will also depend on the candidate’s the consent of a full professor and his willingness to supervise his/her work.
It may take between two and four years to complete a thesis in France.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 1.
What are the similarities between France and the Ukor Nigeria in religious influence on education?
2.
Describe the main characteristics of the three cycles of university organisation.
84 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.3 Management and Supervision of Higher Education in France For all good intents and purposes, education in France is highly centralised.
No other body administers or controls education in France except the Ministry of Education in Paris which is headed by a minister.
Other tiers of government are the academy or municipal.
For the universities in particular, there is the Secretary of State for universities and the University Consultative Committee who translate and operate policies handed over by the minister.
In recent times, however, there are visible moves towards decentralisation of university administration with the emergence of Regional Academics, Teaching and Research Units headed by Rectors.
3.4 Financing of Higher Education in France France government, in line with its policy of egalitarianism and intellectualism allocates as much as 20percent of her annual budget to education funding.
There are other financial support services for the education system and individual students.
This centralised system of funding allows for uniformity and standardisation of the entire educational system.
Even with the provision of facilities, the policy of centralisation is still very evident – especially in the physical disposition and the facilities to be found in institutions.
Tuition fees and other charges in France have remained banned or minimised where they still exist, to the extent that North America and her European neighbour have always wondered why Lons France pays for her educational services when university students pay little or nothing.
3.5 Academic Programmes: Admissions and Certification Processes There are both polytechnics and convential universities in France.
Most of these polytechnics are attached to the universities.
They offer degree programmes in Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics and Engineering at bachelors, masters’ and doctoral levels.
Admission into the various higher institutions is guided by clear-cut guidelines which ensure very high standard, equity and fair play for all French citizens.
The Advanced Level Certificate is basically the entry requirements for university education.
As in the Nigerian University Matriculation Examination (UME) and the Post-UME, some specialised higher study programmes require some competitive entrance examination.
Admission statistics 85 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS indicate that of the 1,150,000 university students in France in 1990, the various disciplines were distributed as follows: Table 3.1: Academic/Professional Disposition by Percentage Law and Social Sciences 17.2% Pure Science 12.6% Arts 25.0% Dentistry and Medicine 13.2% Pharmacy 3.4% Technology 6.4% Others 22.2% 100% Source: Mokwenye in Nwadiani (1996:116) 4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, it must be pointed out that France has largely succeeded in her stated educational goals.
But her ambition of providing equal education for every citizen has been faced with a myriad of problems.
There has been embarrassing mismatch between the products of the education system and the productive sector.
This has led to increase in unemployment rate.
The uncontrolled expansion which accompanied the liberalisation policy of the post revolution era has led to the inability of the system to match quality with quantity just as we are experiencing in Nigeria.
The French government is also faced with financial problems which have brought about poor education standard.
Osazuwa had observed that France, Mexico and (Nigeria in the oil-boom era) have experienced similar crises of infrastructural decay in higher education because of uncontrolled expansion.
5.0 SUMMARY From the foregoing, we can observe that France has succeeded in maintaining a steady tradition in the core of her educational vision.
It has been able to provide some basic education and saleable skills to the citizens in spite of all the problems.
The problems, changes or reforms which have characterised the educational system of France are not necessarily peculiar; some of them may be identified in developing societies where rapid developmental changes are occurring.
In spite of the conservative and elitist tendencies which we have identified in the French higher education system, there is, however, no doubt that the French educational typology provides some broad-based and 86 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS comprehensive blueprint which many nations can adapt for improvement in their own systems.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State the influence of the French Revolution on the development/reforms of higher education in France.
2.
Why is the French higher education so structurally fractionalised?
3. Who manages and controls higher education in France?
4.
Itemise the various sources of funds for higher education in France.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Boyd, W. & King, E.J.
(1975).
The History of Western Education.
London: Adam and Charles Black.
Hans, N. (1982).
Comparative Education: A Study of Educational Factors and Tradition.
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
King, E.J.
(1979).
Other Schools and Ours: Comparative Studies for Today, (5th Ed).
London: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Mokwenye, C.O.
(1996).
“Education in France”.
In Nwadiani, Mon.
Education of Foreign Countries: Lessons for Policy Planning and Practice.
Benin City: NSEP.
Pp110-120.
Osazuwa, S.E.
(1998).
“Education in France” .In Oroka, O.
Readings in Comparative Education, (2nd Ed).
Port Harcourt: Abe Publishers.
Pp.49-59.
Postlethwaite, T.N.
(1988).
(Ed).
The Encyclopedia of Comparative Education and National Systems of Education.
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
87 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 4 HIGHER EDUCATION IN GERMANY CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 General Overview of Education in the Federal Republic of Germany 3.1.1 Historical Background to Education in the Federal Republic of Germany 3.1.2 Goals of the Educational System 3.2 General Structure of the Educational System 3.2.1 Formal Education System 3.2.2 Non-formal Education System 3.3 Administration and Finance of Education 3.3.1 Public Expenditure on Education 3.3.2 Private Expenditure on Education 3.4 Staff Training and Development 3.4.1 Teacher Education 3.4.2 Training other Educational Personnel 3.4.3 Other Educational Issues (Problems) 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Germany is a country in Central Europe whose history shows that it was occupied by many states – for about 74 years (1871-1945) before it was divided into the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic after the Second World War, with Berlin as its capital city.
Politically, Germany has had to cope with the realities of the recent unification of the East and West in 1990 after nearly four decades of East/West Cold War in almost all aspects of life, including education.
Unfortunately, even after the political unification, rather than reflecting a mix of both state systems, Germany largely presents a continuation of the West German socio-political and economic system where the West German chancellor holds sway as the head of government.
As in Nigeria, Germany has a bicameral parliament – the Bundestag (Lower House) and Bundesrat (Upper House).
The 1949 Basic Law of Germany grants every German citizen the right to self-fulfillment including education.
The goal of education policy is 88 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS therefore to provide such citizen with opportunities to grow personally, professionally, and as a citizen, in accordance with his or her abilities and preferences.
All educational institutions are co-educational and free up to the secondary school level with only very nominal fees of between DM 35-DM60/semester.
The high school which in Germany is referred to as Gymnasium begins as soon as the student completes the Grundschule.
On successful completion of the Gynasium programme which is not career specific rather essentially academic, the student is qualified to study at the university.
The Gesaintschule is another route to the University for Higher Studies in the German educational system – after the candidate has passed the qualifying examination for studying at the university level.
Very much like the Nigerian University Matriculation Examination (UME), the German Allgemeine Hochschulreife or Abitur is the open-sesame to a German university.
With increase in the demand for higher education, very strict selection criteria have been introduced in order to ensure that the best materials are admitted into the universities.
As far back as the late 1980, the numerous quota system and restrictive clauses which were exclusively meant for the field of medicine are now being extended to other fields of study.
The German education system has often been praised for its unique ability to provide quality general education combined with excellent specific training for professional or skilled occupation through the Berufschulen or vocational or intermediate technical schools (ITS).
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • outline the general overview of the German educational system • state the main goals of the education system • describe the structure of the formal and informal education system • identify the various sources of finance for the administration of education in Germany • explain the various ways in which staff are developed for the education system.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 A General Overview of Education in Germany 3.1.1 The Historical Background of German Education The German educational system has been greatly influenced by both the political, social and demographic circumstances of the nation.
The Republic of Germany was founded in 1949 with two states which 89 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS attained full sovereignty in 1955.
The World War in Germany has led to the shortage of educational resources especially in higher education.
There were also the East and West antagonisms following the division and the attendant cold war between them.
By the 1960s when the effects of the losses from the war years had subsided, there was a reawakening in the mood of progress and self-confidence and the challenge of economic and social modernisation.
The following decade witnessed a renewed emphasis on internal affairs and reforms especially in education where emphasis shifted from elitism to mass education.
The German education system was therefore neatly differentiated for students mainly on the basis of individual abilities.
For instance, children enter the Grundschule at an early age, then remain there as a group till the fourth grade.
After the Grundschule, at about 10 years of age, the German school system commences tracking of students into the different abilities and interests cohorts.
This is, however, without prejudice to the traditional three-tiered secondary school system.
The traditional values of family life in the typical German culture included a mother, who had to stay at home for her children rather than working outside the home.
3.1.2 Goals of the Educational System in Germany The general purposes of German education are set out in the legal frameworks of the constitution of the Republic.
In specific terms, there is a general dichotomy – the goals of the education concerning the individual students, their abilities and interests; and the goals of education as they concern the state in terms of social, political and cultural/economic commitments.
There is a very committal effort and emphasis on the ability of education in the development of the individual German citizen and personality.
The autonomy of the individual student with regard to his or her particular abilities, motives, and interests are of utmost importance as prerequisites for the educational development of the future German adult.
There is no discrimination whatsoever in these provisions in terms of sex, social status, religious persuasion and even racial disposition.
With emphasis on the basic tenets of democracy, freedom and tolerance, there is therefore a shift in emphasis from the people “our people”, “the homeland” or “the fatherland”, to a new commitment to the Federal Republic of Germany.
Similarly, ecumenism has taken over the erstwhile denominational affiliations and loyalties, in the concept of a transcendental comparative spiritual authority.
Secularised ethical instructions are fast replacing the orthodoxy of the traditional religionists.
The curriculum has also been modernised in line with new 90 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS schools whose reforms have brought about in line with the academic disciplines.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 What are the goals of education in Germany?
3.2 General Structure of the Educational System 3.2.1 Formal Education System At the lowest rung of the educational system structure is the pre-school system.
Here, the German government virtually has no influence over the education system.
They are run solely on voluntary basis, by private individual proprietors who include churches and some other welfare agencies.
The primary level of German formal education system is structured as well.
The first four grades are immediately followed by another two years stage of orientation.
The secondary school level also has three structures or types.
There are Hauptschude with nine-10 grades whose graduates proceed to the part-time vocational schools and apprenticeship.
Secondly, there is the Reaschule, also with about 10 grades covering more academic oriented disciplines.
Its graduates proceed to full-time vocational schools and may also proceed into the polytechnic.
The third and final secondary school typology is the Gymnasium.
Here, the orientation is essentially academic.
The graduates, on the attainment of the Abitur proceed to the universities.
At the higher education level, the polytechnics and colleges dominate with 22 percent of all higher level candidates.
The universities absorb as much as 65 per cent of the cohort.
Sometimes, apart from the Abitur qualification, the universities also accept some graduates of the polytechnics and colleges – for shorter periods for graduation than for Abitur certificate holders.
Engineering, technology, administration and welfare are some of the curriculum specialisation.
Private universities are very few because of the existence of enforceable laws compelling them to maintain prescribed standards.
3.2.2 Non-Formal Education System There are various types of non-formal educational provisions for the general public – Volkschochschulen in all communities both local and urban.
Some religious groups organise non-formal educational programmes exclusively for their members.
Similarly, some commercial groups or companies and establishment organise non-formal, work- related educational programmes for their workers.
Some government agencies also organise some political non-formal education for members 91 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS of the society.
With the support of the Federal Labour Administration, on-the-job re-training programmes are organised from time to time for all classes of German citizen.
3.3 Administration and Finance of Education 3.3.1 Public Expenditure on Education Records indicate that about 30-percent of higher level students receive financial aid from government.
Generally, financial costs are shared between the federal and state governments.
While the states are responsible for personnel expenditure and a large part of construction and equipment costs, the federal government concentrates on research and construction and equipment at the tertiary level.
All funds come from general taxes.
3.3.2 Private Expenditure on Education There is a Standing Conference of Ministers of Culture which coordinates all educational administrative matters between the states.
There are also State Education Authorities, like the Nigerian State Boards of Education, which control the local education authorities As well as decide on matters concerning the syllabus and other educational materials.
The universities enjoy some degree of autonomy in administration, curricular and the award of academic degrees to deserving graduands.
The chambers of Commerce and Industry take responsibility for the training of the vocational staff outside of the school system.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How is education administered and financed in Germany?
3.4 Staff Training and Development 3.4.1 Teacher Education Teachers for the lower levels – primary and secondary are trained at the colleges, but teachers at the level of the Gymnasium have to train at the university level and obtain degrees in particular areas of specialisation.
The professional training in pedagogy is generally school-based through a series of seminars and part-time teaching under the supervision of 92 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS experienced senior teachers.
However, since the late 1970s most teacher training colleges have been integrated into the university systems.
3.4.2 The Training of Other Educational Personnel The universities also organise courses for the senior staff in the personnel areas of the university and even in the civil service.
Craft Associations and the Chambers of Commerce in collaboration with the vocational colleges also provide training for administrative personnel.
Similarly, the apprenticeship system is another very active forum for the training of personnel for many areas outside teaching.
3.4.3 Other Educational Issues and Problems There has been a setback in educational system, especially at the lower levels, since 1980.
The many reforms in the education sector have created problems of attrition in many areas of the labour market.
Many people are resigning from their job to further their studies in higher education.
Hence, there is the problem of oversupply of highly qualified personnel since the labour market is not expanding the same rate at which higher education is expanding.
One other serious problem is the challenge to the traditional concept of modernisation by some ideologue who oppose education and research and who are also a threat to any new initiative in education.
They were outright conservatives.
4.0 CONCLUSION The German education processes has been shaped and greatly influenced by the socio-economic and historical antecedents of the nation.
The resolve to modernise and catch up with the rest of Western Europe following the devastating effects of the World Wars led to very drastic reforms in all sectors including education.
Germany, therefore, adopted a combination of approaches to execute its educational objectives of providing education for all Germans at the earliest possible time.
There was, therefore, cooperation between the states and the federal government on the educational sector.
Funds were allocated generously from the national taxes and private organisations.
In spite of the problems facing German education system, there are hopes for a very bright future equal education opportunities for all and sundry.
93 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 5.0 SUMMARY The goals of education were clearly spelt out in the 1949 Basic Law of Germany.
All citizens have inalienable rights to education which is to make them professionally competent in their chosen fields.
German universities exercised a great deal of autonomy especially in the determination of curricular/academic disciplines and the award of degrees to those who are qualified.
The training of staff is a joint responsibility of all stakeholders in education.
Prospective teachers were closely supervised by head teachers until the necessarily pedagogical skills have been imbibed by the trainee teachers.
In recent times however, the teacher training colleges have been integrated into the mainstream of higher education in the universities.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 The goals of education in Germany are entrenched in the basic democratic tenets of freedom and tolerance.
Essentially dualistic in nature, there are both individual and societal educational goals.
At the individual plane, education is specially designed to prepare the German youths for their adult roles in the German society.
To that extent the education system is expected to inculcate in the youth the cherished societal values and attitudes.
On the basis of their interests and abilities, the education is designed to equip the youths with the appropriate skills.
At the societal level, the goals of education include the transformation and general betterment of the society both socially, politically, economically and even culturally.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the socio-political and historical background which shaped the German education.
2.
List the main goals of the German education.
3.
Describe the formal and informal characteristics of education in Germany.
4.
Identify the major sources of funds for education in Germany.
94 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Iwuama, B.C.
; Aluede, R.O.A.
; Nweke, R.A. & Okonkwo, Chika (1992).
Comparative Education: A Functional Approach.
Agbor: Central Books Limited.
King, Edmund J.
(1979).
Other Schools and Ours: Comparative Studies for Today, (Fifth Edition).
London: Rinehart and Winston.
Postlethwaite, T. Neville.
(1988).
(Ed).
The Encyclopedia of Comparative Education and National Systems of Education.
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
95 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS MODULE 4 HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES Unit 1 Higher Education in Nigeria Unit 2 Higher Education in South Africa Unit 3 Higher Education in Brazil Unit 4 Higher Education in China UNIT 1 HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in Nigeria 3.2 3.1.1 Policy Initiatives of the Federal Government 3.3 Structure and Organisation of Higher Education in Nigeria 3.4 Management and Supervision of Higher Education in Nigeria 3.5 Funding of Higher Education in Nigeria 3.6 Academic Programmes, Admissions and Certification Processes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION As an independent nation, the Federal Republic of Nigeria was established on October 1, 1960.
With an estimated population of over 150 million people, Nigeria has over 300 ethnic groups with distinct linguistic and dialectical arrangements.
The choice of English as the official language is explained by her historical colonial antecedents and this has effectively influenced her educational policy, especially higher education which is closely connected with the history of the colonial administration in the early part of the 19th century.
According to Taiwo (1980:88) in August 1943, the Asquith Commission was appointed to: • consider the principles which should guide the promotion of higher education, learning and research and the development of universities in the colonies; and to explore means whereby universities and other appropriate bodies in the United Kingdom 96 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS may be able to cooperate with institutions of higher education in the colonies in order to give effect to these principles.
This was immediately followed by the establishment of the Inter- University Council by the colonial government for higher education overseas otherwise known as the Elliot Commission.
It must be pointed out however, that before now, the Yaba Higher College had already been established in 1932 and became fully operational in 1934.
As the need for higher education in the colonies increase, it was recommended that universities should be established immediately as colleges of the University of London.
Educational facilities were also to be provided in the university colleges for the much needed secondary school teachers alongside a curriculum covering the fields of Arts, Sciences and vocational subjects.
Research work was also to be facilitated in higher education.
This was why, in 1948, the University College of Ibadan (now University of Ibadan) was founded.
About the same time, similar colleges were reportedly opened at Legion in the Gold Coast (now Ghana) and at Makerere in Uganda, - all of them being British colonies.
It was reported that the nucleus of the foundation students of the University College Ibadan were the students (148 of them) who had been successful in the entrance examination of 1947, into the Yaba Higher College in the Lagos colony.
Shortly before independence in 1960, Sir William Hamilton-Fyfe had recommended a Territorial College for Nigeria – covering the area of technical education and the training of technical teachers and manpower for the industry and commerce.
The result of the recommendations was the establishment in each of the regions, of The Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology simultaneously at Ibadan, Zaria and Enugu respectively.
Immediately after the 1960 Ashby Report, popularly referred to as Investment in Education, it was recommended that the Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology should be integrated into the university system of Nigeria.
The University College, Ibadan did not attain its autonomy until December 27, 1962 with the University of Ibadan Act of 1962 and Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, president of the Republic was the visitor.
While the universities of Ibadan and Lagos were established as federal universities (and they still are) others, which were later taken over by the federal government, were initially regional universities (Taiwo, 1985, Fafunwa, 1991).
The University of Nigeria, Nsukka was therefore established on October 7, 1960, integrating the facilities of the Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology at Enugu as its campus.
97 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Buoyed by the Ibadan and Nsukka success stories, other states in Nigeria became frenzy with the quest for university education.
Therefore in 1962, three autonomous universities sprang up simultaneously – the University of Ife at Ile-Ife – (now Obafemi Awolowo University) on June 30, 1962, The University of Lagos, October 1962 and the Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria on October 4, 1962.
The Ahmadu Bello University incorporated the Zaria branch of the Nigerian College of Arts, Science and Technology, the Ahmadu Bello College in Kano (later Bayero College), the Institute of Administration, Zaria, the Institute for Agricultural Research, Samaru, and the Veterinary Research Institute at Vom.
Eight years after, the sixth university – the University of Benin (formerly Midwest Institute of Management and Technology) was established in 1970.
That is the genesis of higher education in Nigeria.
It is however gratifying to note that as at today, Nigeria can boast of about 102 governments approved universities, 27 of which are federal 34 states owned and 41 privately owned.
As at Jan. 2009, the 102 Nigerian universities had a total of 99, 464 staff strength 27,394 academic staff and 72,070 non-academic staff.
The entire students’ population stood at 1,096,312, constituting about four percent enrolment rate.
On a comparative basis, while Nigeria has only four percent of her population enrolled in higher education, India has seven percent, Indonesia 11percent, Brazil 12percent while South Africa has as much as 17percent of her population enrolled in higher education.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • outline the philosophy and objectives of higher education in Nigeria • graphically illustrate the structure of higher education in Nigeria • describe the organs for the management and funding of higher education in Nigeria • list the academic programmes and their entry qualifications.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in Nigeria As contained in the revised (1998) edition of National Policy on Education, the overall philosophy of Nigeria is to: 98 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS (a) live in unity and harmony as one indivisible, indissoluble, democratic and sovereign nation founded on the principles of freedom, equality and justice; (b) promote inter-African solidarity and world peace through understanding (FRN 1998:7).
Arising from these broad philosophical declarations are the five cardinal educational goals of Nigeria which have been endorsed as the necessary foundation for the National Policy on Education.
They include the building of: (a) free and democratic society (b) a united, strong and self-reliant nation (c) a great and dynamic economy (d) a just and egalitarian society and (e) a land full of bright opportunities for all citizens.
Eric Ashby had rightly classified the business of education and the establishment of the foundational universities as “investments”.
Human development economists have also classified education as “investment in human capital”.
The success of the federal government’s educational initiative was hinged on proper planning, efficient administration and adequate financing.
The government had therefore stipulated in the National Policy blueprint that the objectives of the planning, administrative, inspectorate, supervisory and financial services in education are to: (a) ensure adequate and effective planning of all educational services (b) provide efficient administrative and management control for the maintenance and improvement of the system (c) ensure quality control through regular and continuous supervision of instructional and other educational services (d) provide adequate and balanced financial support for all educational services.
3.1.1 Policy Initiatives of the Federal Government As part of the policy initiatives of the Federal Government of Nigeria, the blueprint clearly states that the Federal Ministry of Education shall be responsible for: (a) enunciating a National Policy on Education (as contained in the document under reference) (b) setting and maintaining uniform standards (c) coordinating educational practices in Nigeria (d) establishing a Federal Inspectorate Service 99 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS (e) planning and research on a national scale (f) acquiring, storing and disseminating national educational data (g) coordinating non-formal education including adult education vocational improvement centres, correspondence centres, etc.
(h) coordinating educational services (i) coordinating international cooperation in education (j) coordinating national school examinations, testing and evaluation (FRN, 1998:43) Before the federal government issued the National Policy in 1976, a number of steps had been taken.
For example, a National Curriculum Conference was conveyed in 1969 during which opinions and contributions of experts, professionals, tradesmen, even market women and men including parents, students and all other stakeholders in education were sought through memoranda.
The result was the publication of the National Policy on Education whose imprints are evident in the graphically structured educational system of the 6-3-3-4 of the Universal Primary Education which has now been replaced with the Universal Basic Education, (UBE) since the 1999 democratic governance.
3.2 Structure and Organisation, Organisation of Higher Education System in Nigeria Generally the structure of education in Nigeria, as in almost all nations of the world is primary, secondary and tertiary which in the 1998 Revised National Policy on education is graphically designated as the 6- 3-3-4 system.
The first two tiers of the structure have been effectively taken care of by the 1999 Universal Basic Education (UBE).
At the higher education level, the organisational structure is a little more complex as all shades of higher institutions are involved in the training of high level workforce for the nation’s economic development.
The conventional universities compare very favourably with the Western countries in terms of duration of a degree programme.
In Nigeria, most undergraduate programmes last for three or four years sometimes, five years, depending on individuals’ course of study.
Other institutions involved in higher education training include Colleges of Education, Agriculture, Technology, Polytechnics, Advanced Teachers’ Colleges, Schools of Forestry, Surveying, Aviation, Marine Technology and many more.
They all award one form of Diploma or Certificate which are tenable at the middle level of the various sectors of our economy.
100 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.3 Management and Supervision of Higher Education in Nigeria The inspectorate and supervisory responsibilities of the federal government are based on the National Minimum Standards against which the available human and material resources for education are weighed.
Decree 16 of 1985 specifies the appropriate authorities which the federal government has empowered to carry out the inspectorate and supervisory roles on its behalf.
For higher education, which is our concern in this unit, the following agencies have been set up: the National Universities Commission (NUC) which is responsible for the control and supervision of the universities; the National Board for Technical Education (NBTE) responsible for the control and supervision of technical education; the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) charged with the control and supervision of colleges of education.
During inspection, the administrative and political officers on behalf of the Federal Ministry of Education maintain regular scheduled contacts with the various institutions which have been assigned to them.
In this process, the officers control and coordinate the activities of the teachers and students, guiding them in line with the approved minimum standards.
The supervisory role of the federal agencies involves ensuring efficiency and effective management of both human and material resources through the combined processes of advice, guidance, encouragement for the stimulation and improvement of the entire educational system.
For the universities in particular, the National Universities Commission carries out its responsibility through regular periodic accreditation of all academic programmes and the facilities with the staffing disposition.
3.4 Funding of Higher Education in Nigeria Education is a very expensive venture, and because of its irreplaceable contribution to national development, its development has often been regarded as very urgent and imperative.
In fact, as far back as 1952, before political independence, Awokoya, who eventually became the Minister of Education in Western Region of Nigeria, had declared that the urgency of educational development requires that education be treated as a national emergency, second only to war.
Nigerians are so thirsty for education that they are prepared to go to any length in order to acquire it.
According to Imogie, (1998), call any structure a school, college or a university and locate it anywhere – and in no distant time, Nigerians will enroll and be ready to pay anything in order to be educated.
This has resulted in the uncontrollable phenomenal expansion 101 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS in the education sector with the attendant results of poor infrastructure arising from poor funding.
Education is constitutionally classified under the concurrent legislative list, which means that funding is a collective responsibility of all levels of government – the federal, state and local governments.
For higher education particularly the federal government has been a major source of funds.
The same is true of the states.
In the last twenty years, the Academic Staff Union of Universities (ASUU) in Nigeria has had a running battle with successive administrators (military or civil) over the issue of poor funding (Omatseye and Omatseye 2008:138).
In the face of all this, the question that readily comes to mind is, whose responsibility is it to adequately finance education?
In order to answer this question, there is the need to look again at the provisions of the law.
According to Nwagwu (2002:9), Nigeria is signatory to the United Nations’ Charter on Declaration of Human Rights which includes the Right to Education.
This right specifically required that everyone by right, should be provided with easy access and equitability to higher education on the basis of merit.
One way in which a nation can sincerely, carry out this declared objective is through robust funding of education.
The sources of such funding may include: (i) Direct government budgetary allocation (ii) Endowments/chairs (iii) Foreign grants/loans (iv) Fees/levies/development (v) Revenue generating ventures (internal) (vi) Trust funds (such as ETF, PTF) (vii) Philanthropic contributions (viii) Alumni/Community Donations (Ibadin 2004) One of the problems which higher education has repeatedly faced in Nigeria is the issue of judicious administration of funds.
Many fund administrators of higher institutions have been infested with the “Nigerian cankerworm” of unbridled corruption of the highest order.
University funds have been managed wrecklessly without due regard for accountability.
As Nwagwu rightly observed, these declarations and lofty intensions towards popular education were more honoured in the breach than in their observance (Nwagwu 2002:10).
For example, in a democratic dispensation, the National Assembly cannot reasonably be sidetracked in matters of the legal and judicious administration of public funds.
But 102 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS unfortunately, the 1999 Universal Basic Education (UBE) of 9-3-4 policy was announced in 1999.
The bill was sent in the year 2000 to the National Assembly where it was delayed for two years before it was finally passed in the year 2002.
The implication of this is that, the administration of funding was not part of the original planning.
Presently, the funding of the UBE, especially at the higher education level, is still a political issue as evident in the present impasse between the federal government and the Academic Staff Union of Universities (ASUU) in which the federal government is insisting that it cannot sign an agreement which will “illegally” compel states to pay what they are not by law required to pay (Nwagwu 2002).
Another thorny issue in fund administration is the federal government’s policy of free tuition in all federal tertiary institutions.
This policy appears to be a political gimmick.
The federal government is still faced with the problem of inadequate fund at lower levels of education hence, its inability to implement tuition-free policy at higher education.
3.5 Academic Programmes, Admissions and Certification Processes Since the inception of the first higher institution in Nigeria – the Yaba Higher College in 1932, various kinds of academic programmes have come into existence.
Many degree programmes which the pioneer elites had to travel abroad for were being offered in Lagos.
When university of Ibadan came on scene in 1948, many more programmes were introduced both in the Sciences, Arts and Social Sciences, Medicine, Agriculture and others.
The bachelor’s degrees were awarded on completion of the prescribed courses or programmes.
Admission was based on the attainment of the Cambridge School Certificate at the prescribed level or the London General Certificate in Education at the Advanced Level.
Holders of the Higher School Certificate – (an equivalence of the Advanced Level Certificate were also considered for admission.
However, by the 1970s when many more universities came on board, it became possible to get into the university through the concessional entrance examination conducted by the individual universities for holders of the West African School Certificate and the G.C.E.
The Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) was later established 1970s to streamline the admission process for applicants into Nigerian universities.
And by the year 2005, many universities started to lose confidence in the University Matriculation Examination Scores of the JAMB; the Post-UME was therefore introduced to be conducted by 103 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS the respective universities for all those who have applied to them.
All kinds of sharp practices have continued to characterise the admission processes into Nigerian universities and it is hoped that with time, each university would be able to evolve full-proof admission strategies to select what can be described as real “university materials” for the over 100 universities in Nigeria.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the genesis of the Post UME in the Nigerian university admission policy.
4.0 CONCLUSION Higher education system in Nigeria is almost the largest in Africa even though none of the over 100 universities in Nigeria is ranked among the best ten globally.
Considering the problem which Nigeria has gone through as a nation – a thirty months civil war, over 29 years of military misadventure in governance; and above all, the cankerworm of corruption and ineptitude of the political class, Nigeria cannot be said to have failed educationally in spite of everything.
The problems which have characterised the organisation and practice of our higher education are not insurmountable.
If we are able to reposition our system and reorder our priorities quite clearly, the future is bright for Nigeria in view of the enormous resources (men and materials) which we have at our disposal.
5.0 SUMMARY Higher education in Nigeria is closely connected with the history of the colonial administration.
As stated in the national Policy on Education, the overall philosophy of education is to live in unity and promote inter- African solidarity.
Nigeria’s education system is hinged on the 6-3-3-4 system and supervised by different bodies.
Funding of Education in Nigeria is a collective responsibility of all levels of government although; federal government has been the major source of fund for higher education.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE The need for a Universities Commission was first mooted in the Ashby Report of 1960 and because there was just one university and one higher college at that time, there was really no urgency about the commission.
But when the regional universities at Nsukka, Zaria, Ife, Lagos and Ibadan were fully established, it became incumbent on government to 104 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS set up an agency to control and manage their affairs.
This was why in implementing the Ashby recommendations, the National Universities Commission was established in 1962.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
On what philosophy is the Nigerian educational system based?
2.
Describe the structure of the Nigerian higher education System 3. Who manages higher education in Nigeria?
4.
What are the admission problems in higher education in Nigeria?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Ballantine, Jeane H. (1998).
The Sociology of Education: A Systematic Analysis.
Englewood Cliffs: N.J. Prentice-Hall Inc. Egonmwan, J.A.
(2002.)
“Refocusing Education in Nigeria: Philosophy and Policy Issues” in Refocusing Education in Nigeria: A Book of Readings.
Oriaifo, S.O.
et al (eds) Benin City: Da-Sylva Influence.
Fafunwa, A. Babs (1991).
History of Education in Nigeria.
(New Edition).
Ibadan: NPS Educational Publishers Ltd. Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
The Politics of Education Policies in Nigeria.
Fac.
Of Educ Lecture Series, No.1.
University of Benin, Benin City.
Nwagwu (2004).
“Laws and Decrees in the Nigerian Education” in Organisation and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Nwagwu, N.A.
et al (Eds) op.cit.
Okebukola, P. (2002).
The State of University Education in Nigeria.
Abuja.
National Universities Commission (NUC).
Omatseye, J.N.
& Omatseye, B.O.
(2008) Going to School in Sub- Suharan Africa.
Westport: Greenwood Press.
Taiwo, C.O.
(1985).
The Nigerian Education System: Past Present and Future.
Lagos: Nelson Pitman Ltd. 105 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 2 HIGHER EDUCATION IN SOUTH AFRICA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in South Africa 3.2 Structure and Organisation of Higher Education in South Africa 3.3 Management and Supervision of Higher Education in South Africa 3.4 Funding of Higher Education in South Africa 3.5 Academic Programmes, Admissions and Certification Processes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION South Africa is a nation which readily evokes both sentiments and resentment.
Sentiments, in sympathy with the natives for their unity resolve to free the South Africans from the shackles of the criminally obnoxious apartheid policy.
While resentment is in condemnation of the forceful imposition of the repressive policy.
It is therefore impossible to commence any discussion on South Africa without starting from the repressive policies of the over four decades of the apartheid regime which had held the nation hostage – in spite of the natural endowments of the region.
South Africa occupies a land area of about 1.2 million square kilometers (or 472 sq mls) which houses a population of 44,334,136 human beings made up of: Blacks - 79 percent Whites - 10 percent Coloured - 8 percent Asiatics - 3 percent (2001 pop.
Figs) Officially, there are eleven languages spoken in South Africa with English being the most spoken language.
The African languages include Afrikaans, Zulu, Xhosa – (which was popularised by Makeba’s music), Ndebele, Pedi, Sotho, Swazi, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda and others.
106 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Despite her racial problems, South Africa is about the most developed country technologically in sub-Saharan Africa with a literacy rate of about 86.4 percent.
However, a closer look at the black population shows a close semblance of the high level of illiteracy commonly found in other African countries because only very few South Africans can afford the very high cost of education.
Education was one way in which the apartheid regime thought it could control the South African blacks.
Even “A Bantu Education” was intended to maintain the obnoxious white supremacy and provide a permanent source of semi-skilled, but cheap labour and arrest the civilising influence of western education on blacks.
By this special Bantu educational ideology, the blacks were to be brain-washed to a point of accepting their inferior status.
To this end, apartheid regime education has to be based on the culture and background of the natives themselves in their tribal homeland so that it can create relationships of inequality/superiority between Europeans and non-Europeans.
Many of their educational policies were violently resented by the Africans, for example, the Bantu Education Ministry’s creation of special schools for the children of black chiefs – and councilors to ensure that their people were perpetually kept under control.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • correlate the educational philosophy and goals with the apartheid policy of South Africa • outline the structure and organisation of higher education in South Africa • described how higher education is managed and funded in South Africa • identify the available programmes of higher education in South Africa.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in South Africa … Almost half of the students enrolled in higher education worldwide were in developing countries.
(Even now, at the close of 2009), how much enthusiasm for higher education has been translated into meaningful development has yet to be seen in many African countries.
(Nigeria now has 102 universities).
China’s and India’s rising fortunes in recent times (with “Asian tigers”) are good news.
Hopefully, Africa 107 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS may yet have her place in the sun.
(Bower, 1994, Omatseye and Omatseye, (2008:156).
South Africa is essentially a capitalist country and has a leading economic power within the African regional context, the basic philosophy guiding higher education in South Africa is for education to reproduce wage labour (cheap labour if you like) for the monopoly – capitalist economic systems.
While the majority black citizens expect education to serve as a primary agent of social change and upward mobility, there are very serious strings tied up around the processes and many booby-traps which prevent the majority from benefiting from these laudable objectives.
It is a common knowledge that no matter how well intentioned, the principles of capitalism and egalitarianism are mutually exclusive or at best, strange bed fellows.
Although, the South African government appreciates in principle the need for easy and increased access to tertiary education or the purpose of justice and equity for the black population, yet, its efforts have not attained the desired goals.
For example, Herman (1995) reports that in 1985, the number of blacks in universities was 39,700 as against 141,000 white students.
This will not be surprising at all if one remembers the historical antecedents of the development of higher/university education in Southern Africa in relation to the Apartheid policy.
Aluede (2007:85), reported that the establishment of the South African College at Cape Town in 1829 exclusively for European descendants was the genesis of tertiary education in South Africa.
The philosophy of ethnic/education plurality was very vigorously pursued in all parts of South Africa.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE How sincere was the Apartheid require in her egalitarian philosophy?
3.2 Structure and Organisation of Higher Education in South Africa Generally, the structure of the South African education is very much like the 6-3-3-4 education system of the National Policy on Education in Nigeria.
The structure requires that after the senior secondary level, the student spends four years for a bachelor’s degree in a university, except in such professional areas as medical, engineering, pharmacy and others which require then four years.
There are number of technical colleges (technikon) which run degree status programmes and award all kinds of diploma certificate and other qualifications acceptable in the capitalist industry economy.
The Vocational Education Act of 1955 had placed tertiary education under the control of the Ministry of Education, Arts and the Sciences.
In 108 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 1965, the University of Port Elizabeth was established for Afrikaans, and again in 1967, the Rand Afrikaans University was established.
The desire of the African National Congress (ANC) to redress the persistent inequalities in higher education has been stifled by other socio-economic obstacles.
Some blacks are not financially capable to pay their way through good quality secondary education which would qualify them for higher studies.
For instance, NEPI 1993 report indicates that while 51 of every 1000 white students were in the universities, the number for Indians, Coloureds and Blacks remained at 35, 13 and nine respectively.
The number of non-whites in Historically Black Universities (HBU) has dramatically improved, only one percent of blacks can still secure places in Historically White Universities (HWU) since the 1990s.
There are about 23 universities in all with many affiliated colleges and technikons.
Under the ANC framework of the Thabo Mbekian regime, the three – university system – African Languages, English Language and Rural Black universities – under the Coordination of the National Commission of Higher Education (NCHE) is responsible for planning and integrating programmes to facilitate the equalitarian principles for all South Africans.
3.3 Management and Supervision of Higher Education in South Africa The government of South Africa has always functioned in such a way that put the black majority at very grave disadvantage in all spheres of life.
Even in the management of education from primary through secondary and to the tertiary level, the discriminatory policy has always been brought to bear on the system.
All the committees, commissions or boards were usually composed and skewed in favour of the white minority.
However, with the 1994 miracle of majority rule, many political changes were ushered in.
The 1996 Constitution now made substantial provisions for the organisation and management of higher education at the national level (rather than the provincial level) for the universities and the technikons.
In Nigeria, there is a Committee of Vice-Chancellors (CVC) which works hand in hand with the National Universities Commission (NUC) and the Federal Ministry of Education in Abuja.
They all facilitate the management of the federal universities.
In a similar way, the Ministry of Education has the overall responsibility for educational management and funding.
However, there are agencies and other government bodies, government departments, commissions charged with the formulation/implementation of vital educational policies.
Of great significance is the South African Universities’ Vice- Chancellors’ Association (SAUVCA) and the Committee of Technikon 109 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Rectors headquartered in Pretoria.
This body, like Nigerian NUC, works with the South African National Commission of Higher Education (NCHE).
The Omatseye (2008:157) reports that the recent change from polytechnics to universities in the United Kingdom and Australia would seem to have influenced the affiliation of South Africa’s fifteen technikons to some universities.
Similarly, the technical colleges (over 120) are being seriously considered as a pool of potential higher education materials to raise the sagging enrolment in the technikons with the accompanying upgrading of the staff to university level.
3.4 Funding of Higher Education in South Africa By any measure, South Africa is not a poor country.
What has however impoverished the majority of black South Africans has always been the Apartheid policy of government which was internationally abhorred and nearly isolated by all progressive governments worldwide.
The negative effects of this policy have been overwhelming in all areas of life including education funding.
As in many countries, except perhaps in the United States of America where education funding is highly decentralised, the budget for education is adopted at the national level and disbursed to the provinces and the various organs.
Aluede (2007:87) reports that as at 1996, public expenditures on education in South Africa amounted to 7.9 percent of the gross national product.
By the 1999-2000 financial year this percentage fell to 6.5 percent – amounting to about R46.84 billion ($1=R7) or 21.3 percent of the total government budget for that year.
Of this amount, about 16.6 percent was allocated to the universities and the Technikons including a National Student Financial Aid Scheme.
It must be noted that in spite of the collapse of the Apartheid regime, its vestiges are still serious forces to contend with especially in the black settlements where poverty is a household phenomenon.
For instance, Asian education is exclusively and centrally controlled and financed through the Department of Indian Affairs (DIA).
Rural blacks did not have such a body, except in recent times.
3.5 Academic Programmes, Admissions and Certification Processes The Republic of South Africa is an industrialised country with a very buoyant capitalist economy.
As a multicultural and plural society South Africa comprises Europeans, Asians and other African native.
Hence, the provision of labour (skilled and educated) is a serious issue because of the discriminatory racial policy.
The academic programmes of the 110 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS higher education system are designed to meet the various needs of the industry and the bureaucracy.
There are, therefore, academic programmes in the Arts, the Sciences, Social Sciences, Medicine and all Allied medical areas, Engineering and Engineering Technology.
Bachelors, masters’ and doctorate degree programmes are available in all the institutions of higher learning.
For admission into degree programmes, matriculation requirements are clearly spelt out and are comparable to what obtains in most developed countries.
For example, candidates with a Senior Certificate (or Matriculation) are admitted either for diploma courses in any of the universities or diploma and certificate courses in the Technikons, Advanced Teachers’ Colleges or some other tertiary level institution.
Out more than 10 universities (exclusively for whites previously before 1994), five conduct lectures in Afrikaans, four in English and about one or two in both languages in a mixed grill.
The University of South Africa in Pretoria is most progressive and very much like the Open University culture.
It teaches several of its courses through correspondence and serves all groups regardless of race.
The University of Cape Town pioneered higher education with its establishment in 1829.
Since then, there have been many more universities for both whites, non-whites and mixed.
The University of Vista in Pretoria is primarily for continuing and part-time studies.
The University of the Western Cape, chartered in 1970 is essentially for coloured groups and for Asians including Indians.
There is the University of Durban as well as Westville.
The condemnable racial inequality was even extended to gender and educational bias.
The fields of science and engineering have remained skewed in favour of males.
Records indicate that engineering had between 97 percent (white) and 94 percent (black) male students.
In the Computer Sciences, male enrolments for all racial categories stood at 65 percent.
In the Health Sciences however, (mainly nursing and paramedical education) more females are represented.
Generally, it has been observed that South Africa, in spite of its developmental strides, has not measured up to the expected levels in engineering education.
For example, Omatseye (2008:159), quoting (SECA 1989) reports that while Japan has produced 500 engineers per million, and Australia 220 per million, South Africa has graduated only 35 per million for the same period.
On the whole, South Africa is by far ahead of all other African nations especially in technology education, level of industrialisation, large scale mechanised farming and manufacturing.
111 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 4.0 CONCLUSION Higher education, as in all other sectors of the South African society, has been subjected to the same prejudice which the racial and economic disposition suffered.
However, looking at the current level of development in almost all sectors of the South African economy, especially with the prevailing favourable democratic climate, there is much to hope for in the fortunes of higher education.
5.0 SUMMARY It is clear that the picture of the entire educational system and higher education in particular has been a product of the over forty years of a very repressive government, policy of racial discrimination.
One would have expected that with the first university established over 180 years ago, higher education would by now be at the back and call of any citizen at the least cost to the beneficiary.
But unfortunately, it has not been so.
It is hoped that as South Africa proceeds into the second half of the second decade of her political independence and majority rule under the Jacob Zuma administration, more doors would be opened to many more blacks in the black homelands and in Soweto.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe the ways in which the racial policy of government has beclouded the educational policy formulation in South Africa.
2.
Outline the structure of higher education including the technological education in South Africa.
3.
How is higher education managed and funded in South Africa?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Badat, S. (1995).
“Educational Politics in the Transition Period” in Comparative Education.
31, No.2 Nwagwu, N.A.
et al (2007).
Readings in Comparative Education.
Benin City: Yuwa Concept Nig.
Ltd. Okonkwo, C.E.
(1988).
Introduction to Comparative Education.
Owerri: Totan Publishers.
Omatseye, J.N., & Omatseye, B.O.
(2008).
Going to School in Sub- Saharan Africa.
Westport: Greenwood Press.
Postlethwaite, T.N.
(1988).
The Encyclopedia of Comparative Education and National Systems of Education.
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
112 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 3 HIGHER EDUCATION IN BRAZIL CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Contents 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in Brazil 3.2 Structure and Organisation of Higher Education in Brazil 3.3 Management and Supervision of Higher Education in Brazil 3.4 Financing Higher Education in Brazil 3.5 Academic Programmes, Admissions and Certification Processes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Brazil is a country in South America.
It covers almost 50 percent of the total land area of South America and the fifth largest country worldwide covering a total land area of about 3,300,170 square miles.
The Republic of Brazil gained her independence as far back as 1822 from the Portuguese whose language, (English, as in Nigeria) is the official and dominant one, with Spanish, English and French languages competing very favourably among the estimated population of 172.9 million.
Because of the long stretch of the coverage by landmass – stretching from the Caribbean and tapering mirrowly far down to the south, there are striking disparities all over the country in economics, standard of living and culture.
Some authorities exaggeratedly refer to “two Brazils” all in attempt to call attention to the socio-economic disparities between the regions.
The effects of such interregional differences have been very evident in the educational system where some regions are underserved by qualified teachers because the great distances to be covered by the professional distributive network.
However, modern urbanisation and communication systems have since the 1980s broken the barriers with all the remote areas being covered by a complex network of roads, television receivers and large number portable radios.
The pace of development which started towards the middle of the 19th century in Brazil was facilitated by the influx of immigrants from Portugal, Italy, Spain and Germany all of which quickly integrated with the erstwhile plantation slave workers of African descent to build a strong foundation for the urban type manufacturing industrial complexes.
Many cities, 113 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS therefore, sprang up as the industries expanded.
As would normally be expected, the education sector benefitted tremendously from these economies of scale.
The acquisition of education was (as it still is) an effective means of social mobility in the Brazilian socio-political and economic milieu.
For example, a college diploma was what any young Brazilian of any creed needed to be in the mainstream of the economy.
In fact, a bachelor’s degree in law was a kind of passport which opened doors to any Brazilian youngster into the highest social, administrative and political spheres.
Migration is a factor to contend with in the Federal Republic of Brazil.
Records indicate that in 1980, about 40 percent of the inhabitants lived far away from home towns with the nine metropolitan regions containing as much as 29 percent of the total population.
The 9 metropolitan regions comprise 23 states, three territories and one federal district.
Very well drained by the Amazon River and its numerous tributaries, the major cities which have been the receiving centres for the millions of immigrant workers and the educated folks include Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Brasilia, Salvado, Recife, Belem, Santarem and Manaus.
The dominance by Portuguese language and the Roman Catholic religion all facilitate interpersonal relations which promote educational development.
Salary for workers and educational qualification has been found to correlate positively with the result that the quest for education is very high.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • outline the philosophy and objectives of higher education in Brazil • explain the structural pattern of higher education in Brazil • identify the pattern of organisational control of higher education in Brazil • list the major sources of funds for higher education in Brazil.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Philosophy and Objectives of Higher Education in Brazil The history of education in Brazil dates back to the mid-sixteenth century when the (company of Jesus) – the Jesuits established the first elementary school in Salvador.
Educational development nearly followed the process of the arrival of the Portuguese, the Italians, the Germans and the French all of who brought with them the civilizing 114 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS influence of western education.
Indeed, the education was intended for a selected and privileged people in the new territory.
It was only in the early 19th century that the liberalising influences were extended to education to create consciousness and self realisation in the newly colonised Brazilians.
This pioneering effort was by no less a personality than the Portuguese royal family of King Joao VI.
He established very many educational institutions including the very first university of the state of Bahia that is, in the city of Rio de Janeiro.
Right from the independence period in 1822, education was regarded as a “universal right and duty of the state” towards the citizens.
Towards this goal, the system was tailored to create a professional workforce for the rapidly industrialising society.
The schools thus became vehicles for personal development and social change – a movement away from the traditional literary and humanistic curriculum orientation of the Jesiuts.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Describe the origin and the typology of education in Brazil.
3.2 The Structure and Organisation of Higher Education in Brazil The Brazillian educational system has a very complex structure especially at the lower levels.
There are the traditional pre-school and kindergartens for ages two to three and four to six respectively.
This is followed by a compulsory eight grade seven to14 cycles, the 15-18 for secondary and preparatory for higher studies.
The secondary level has different tracks and orientations – academic, normal, commercial, industrial and agricultural.
The academic and the normal tracks prepare the recipients for higher studies in the universities and teacher education programmes respectively.
Through the Ministry of Education and Culture (MEC), the federal government takes full responsibility for education along with the states and the municipal governments.
Exclusively, the federal government, as in Nigeria, is in charge of the federal universities, the middle school, technological education and the technical/agricultural high schools.
Of the 127 universities in Brazil, 68 are managed and financed by the federal government.
There are over 800 other institutions of higher learning.
There are several organisations which participate actively in educational programmes at all levels.
The Youth and Adult Education Foundation (YAEF) has been very active since the mid-eighties.
The same can be said of several Public and Private Radio and Television Networks, University Extension Projects and the Open University courses of the University of Brasilia which effectively started in 1982.
115 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.3 Management and Supervision of Higher Education in Brazil In spite of the interregional disparities, the federal government, through legislation, provides standard benchmarks for a centralised educational administrative structure.
In particular, the 1971 Education Reform Law itemised national requirements for all levels including higher education.
Unlike the American system, the Brazillian higher education allows for specialisation right from the point of entry into the higher level education.
Students opt for law, medicine, engineering as they enter the university just as in Nigeria.
Even the private universities have to fall in line with the federal benchmarks.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 How are standards ensured in the management of higher education in Brazil?
3.4 Funding Higher Education in Brazil Generally in Brazil, the sources of funds for financing education are: taxation, income taxes deducted from various sources, lottery, government grants, and private contributions.
For example, the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations have since 1950 been making grants available for Brazilians graduate students studying in the United States of America.
However, the 1988 Constitution of Brazil made education funding the direct responsibility of the federal government in which it is expected that such education would be for the total development of the individual including his/her preparation to fully exercise the rights of citizenship and to qualify for work.
Every year, the federal government is by law, required to allocate nothing less than 18 percent of government’s planned public expenditures on education.
By rule, the share contribution towards education funding is: federal – 20 percent, the states – 50 percent, the municipalities 30 percent.
As in the Nigerian Education Tax Fund from private organisations operating in Nigeria, the Brazilian governments demands the ‘salario educacao’ (education salary) from companies, Brazilian universities enjoy didactic, scientific and administrative and even financial autonomy as they benefit from government and private financial support.
116 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.5 Academic Programmes, Admissions and Certification Processes While “fundamental education” is provided at the first level, the second level encourages “vocational education” and at the third level, the institutions streamline into the conventional curricular subjects of the Sciences, Literary Studies, professional courses in the Social and Management Sciences.
There is a Federal Council on Education which generally determines a nationwide “Core Curriculum” with enough room for local variations to meet immediate peculiarities of the localities.
There is a very competitive federal supervised entrance examination into the 68 public universities which is very much like the Nigerian University Matriculation Examination It is called vestibular.
Just as the lower levels of education are in tracks of academic, normal, commercial and so on, in the same way, higher education careers are integrated into blocks as follows: Gencias Biologicas e Saude - Biological and Health Sciences Gencias Humanas e Terra - Exact Sciences Gencias Humanas e Sociais - Human and Social Sciences Gencias Sociais Aplicada - Applied Social Sciences Engenharcias e Technologias - Engineering and Technologies In recent times, individual universities have started organising their vestibular with attention to the secondary school grades which were never taken into consideration for admission to universities.
4.0 CONCLUSION The Federal Republic of Brazil is a large country – about the fifth largest country in the world.
According to Medeiros (1988), the Brazilian society has been marked by a tradition of tolerance, an unhurried pace of life, indifference to ethnic barriers and a very good measure of pleasure seeking individualism among a well-integrated peoples of all origins and colours.
This situation has fostered development and progress in all sectors including education and industry wherein they have advanced relatively above many other developing nations.
5.0 SUMMARY In summary, it can be said that there is much to learn in the Brazilian experience by other developing nations.
The very innovative ways in which the Brazilian government has tackled the urban/rural differentials through extensive educational mediation using the radio and television networks recommends itself to other nations.
In fact, the National 117 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Commission for Nomadic Education in Nigeria is effectively using the radio medium to execute the education programme for nomadic cattlemen/women and children.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Make an outline of the major goals of the Brazilian higher education.
2.
Draw a chart to illustrate the structural pattern of the Brazilian education system.
3. Who controls education in Brazil?
4.
What are the major sources of fund for education in Brazil?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Freire, P. (1990).
Pedagogy of the Oppressed.
New York: The Continuum Pub.
Coy.
Translated by Myra Bergman Ramos.
Haar, J.
(1977).
The Politics of Higher Education in Brazil.
New York: Praeger Publ.
Laverhass, L.H.
(1981).
Education in Latin America.
Boston Mass: G.H.
Hall.
Nwagwu, N.A.
et al (2007).
Readings in Comparative Education.
Benin City: Yuwa Concept Ltd. Skidmore, T.E., & Smith, P.H.
(1984).
Modern Latin America.
New York: Oxford Univ.
Press.
118 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 4 HIGHER EDUCATION IN CHINA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Background to General Educational Policy in China 3.1.1 Historical Development of Higher Education in China 3.1.2 Educational Policy and Principles 3.2 Structure and Planning 3.2.1 Modernisation and Goals of Higher Education 3.2.2 Types of Higher Education 3.2.3 Examinations and Entry Requirements 3.3 Administration and Finance in Higher Education 3.3.1 Scholarships and Loan Schemes 3.3.2 Educational Investments 3.4 Training of Educational Personnel 3.5 Curriculum and Research in Higher Education 3.5.1 Curriculum Programmes (professions/careers) 3.5.2 Adult On-line Education 3.5.3 Rural and Private Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Higher education in the People’s Republic of China has been selected for this unit.
Before the 1949 revolution, China was under a very repulsive oligarchical system whose feudalism held every Chinese down to a very oppressive level.
Access to the very basics of life were restricted to selected few and the overlords who “owned” the land.
The 1949 revolution however came with wide range reforms which opened the doors for every able bodied Chinese to aspire to the highest position which his intellect could carry him or her.
Through some revolutionary reforms in education, the process was directed to serve as drastic economic reconstruction with schools being made accessible to both workers and peasants.
The general education policy was to enable every Chinese who received the education to develop morally, intellectually and physically and become a worker with both socialist consciousness and a qualified person who is both “red and expert”.
Education was regarded as an integral component of the national developmental plan, economic and social development.
119 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Higher education was particularly geared towards the advancement of economic modernisation.
Since 1949, education has generated a series of intra party controversies leading to alignments and realignments.
Official educational policy has therefore often alternated between ideological imperatives and practical efforts to promote national development.
The cultural revolution ushered in priority interest in a universal education which was intended to remove the traditional barriers between rural and urban; workers and peasants; elite and the middle/lower classes and ultimately to foster social equality.
The People’s Republic of China recognised quite early the importance of science and technology in national development.
She also recognised quite early the superiority of the West in the areas of science and technology.
So, right from the mid-seventies, she developed an open door policy towards learning and effective borrowing from abroad all those elements which she considered important in her quest for educational development and modernisation.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • narrate the background history of how the People’s Republic of China formulated her higher educational policies and principles • describe how the structure of higher education was planned • state the strategies adopted by China in administering and financing her higher education system • describe how China trains the personnel (teachers and others) in her higher educational institutions • identify the career/professional orientation of the curriculum of higher education in China.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Background to General Educational Policy 3.1.1 Historical Development of Higher Education in China As in many developed and developing nations, the people of China have unflinching faith and a great deal of respect for the instrumentality of education for economic reconstruction and development.
They also have implicit faith in the ability of education to develop and inculcate the appropriate morals, intellect and even the physical environment of man.
120 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS The communist governments of the People’s Republic of China expect education to equip all Chinese youngsters with such skills that will make them successful and culture-oriented citizens.
The Chinese government regards education as a collective venture of both private and public stakeholders.
It therefore deliberately encourages a wide range of participation in all kinds of educational programmes for all classes of persons.
There are full-time, part-time and even on-line educational programmes.
There are also part-work, and spare-time schools which run a variety of educational programmes.
The overall purpose is to encourage learning in all levels of education that is, from primary through secondary, vocational and to higher education.
Because of the large population involved in the business of education, the government has adopted a combination of centralised planning at the top level and a decentralised administration at the lower levels.
Although, three basic structural categories are clearly identifiable in basic education secondary vocational education and higher education, David Surowski (2000) has however, classified the historical development of education in the People’s Republic of China into five major epochal periods.
The relevance of these periodic categorisations is informed by the comparatively long period of recorded Chinese history of over 3,500 years from the Zhoughua period through the feudal oligarchic to the revolutionary and finally the present age of the People’s Republic: • Pre-1840 (Imperial Education) • 1840-1949 (Opium War – PRC) • 1949-1966 (PRC – Cultural Revolution) • 1966-1976 (the Cultural Revolution) Chairman Mao • 1976-present (the Post-Mao Reform Period) The overthrown of the corrupt feudal capitalist regime in 1949 opened the windows into the world of education to all and sundry workers, peasants and children of all classes of people except children of the erstwhile landlords and bourgeois families.
The education which was provided was very practical and accessible with the simplification of many of the traditional Chine lexical characters for quick and easier learning of the alphabet and by training people in all kinds of skills they could use including the basic paramedical training for “barefoot docors” who provided Medicare and midwifery and instruction on some detestable traditional practices.
Because the government provided adequately for all those at the lowest rung of the society, it has received tremendous support from the majority of the “scum of society”.
This has enabled the government to execute all its revolutionary programmes.
121 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS During the Cultural Revolution, higher education which, during the first decade recorded tremendous boost, suffered great losses with the system almost shut down.
The result was a dire shortage of college graduates, academics, technicians, professionals and teachers.
The needs of society could therefore not be met.
It was only during the post-chairman Mao era that a new educational impetus started rearing its head-under Deng Xiaoping.
He recognised the importance of science and technology, and intellectual resources in meeting the goals of modernisation and raising the educational level of the population.
3.1.2 Educational Policy and Principles Higher education reflected changes in the political policies which cannot really be separated from the educational ones.
There had been, since 1949, a renewed emphasis on political reeducation, during which political ideological sloganeering had taken precedence over professional or technical competence.
This was why early in the Cultural Revolution era, several hundreds of higher education students abandoned their studies for the Revolutionary Red Guards Organisations chanting war songs in the streets of Beijing, Tianjin, Shenyang, Wuhan and Nanjing.
By the early 1970s, following the end of the revolution, enrolments into higher institutions fell drastically, because admission was now restricted to those who had political “god fathers” and those who had impeccable credentials from their work units.
There were objectively no stringent criteria for admission.
There was therefore a drastic decline in quality to a point where in 1975; university graduates were unable to read a book even in their own fields of specialisation.
This was similar to the Nigerian higher education situation in which university undergraduates who paraded very high UME scores, with which they were admitted, could not even write a good paragraph in the very basic area of their specialisation.
In China labour colleges for training agro-technicians and factory-run colleges for providing technical education for workers had to be established in addition to 88 institutions.
Key universities which were also provided with special funds, top students, faculty members and other support, and they recruited the most Academically qualified candidates were recruited without regard to family background or connection just like the Nigerian NUC’s removal of the Vice-Chancellors’ 10per cent discretionary admission quota which had been grossly abused before the resort to the Post-UME sanitiser.
In order to provide adequate education for its population, China’s policy evolved a wide variety of systems.
At the higher level of education, there were various institutions of higher learning consisting of regular colleges and universities, professional colleges and short-term 122 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS vocational universities.
In 2003, it was reported that the People’s Republic of China had as many as 1,552 institutions of higher learning with over 10 million registered students and about 720 professors.
Many other lesser universities have been merged with 100 key universities among which are the Universities of Tsinghui and Beijing.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 Which historical landmark helped to shape the higher educational policy development in the People’s Republic of China?
3.2 Structure and Planning 3.2.1 Modernisation and Goals of Higher Education The general educational structure of the People’s Republic of China is pyramidal, narrowing upwards towards the higher educational level.
Undergraduate programmes in universities or colleges in China generally require four to five years for completion.
In some cases, the programme may extend to five or six years, depending on the discipline.
In the People’s Republic of China, short-cycle professional training colleges last two to three years.
Postgraduate studies may be undertaken at two levels leading to the award of masters after two to three years of study, or a doctorate degree within two to three years study after the masters’ degree.
The instruction period in adult higher educational programmes corresponds to full-time university undergraduate programmes last for about five years while those corresponding to short cycle professional training colleges last for three years generally.
In 1980, the Standing Committee of the Fifth National People’s Congress passed the regulations regarding higher education degrees in China.
After that, the State Council in collaboration with the Ministry of Education established an Academic Degree Commission for the administration of awarding bachelors, master’s and doctorate degrees just as the Nigerian National Universities Commission does in Nigeria in her higher education administration and supervision in collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Education.
By the mid-eithies, in response to the very urgent needs of the Four Modernisation whose cornerstone was the higher educational training and research in science and technology, the Sixth Plenum of the Twelfth National Party Congress Central Committee of September 1986 adopted a resolution on the guiding principle, for building a socialist society which strongly emphasised the significance of the training of scientists and engineers.
Vast changes were therefore initiated to adjust educational opportunity, direction and content.
Universities and colleges 123 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS therefore, were able to choose their teaching plans and curricula; to accept projects from, or cooperate with other establishments for scientific research and technical development.
Chinese universities are also able to set up combinations which involved teaching, scientific research, and production; to make suggestion on the appointment and removal of Vice- Chancellors and other staff members; to take charge of the distribution of capital projects and funds allocated by the state; and to be responsible for the development of international exchanges.
This autonomy allowed universities to accept financial aid from work units and decide how the money was to be spent without any interference from the ministry of education.
The inter-regional departmental schools, by this newly acquired autonomy, came under the direct control and supervision of the higher educational institutions.
They could then allocate funds for their development and other staff’s welfare needs and bonuses.
3.2.2 Types of Higher Educational Institutions Education in China is the responsibility of the Ministry of Education.
Until 1985, education was somehow free up to the university level.
But since the abolition of free higher education in 1985, applicants to colleges and universities competed for scholarships on the basis of merit.
The educational horizons have been expanding since the 1980s.
There are higher educational institutions almost in all areas – business and commerce, engineering and science and the vocations.
Records indicate that by 2004, there were as many as 47,000 holders of the Master’s degree in Business Administration (MBA), over 9,000 students enrolled in Public Administration, about that same number in the medical schools, and so on.
In total, China had about 2,236 institutions of higher learning of various types in 2004, with over 20 million students – the largest in the world by UNESCO standards of the World Higher Education Report.
There are also several industrial universities and specialist colleges in such specialised areas as in Automation, Atomic Energy, Energy Resources, Oceanography, Nuclear Physics, Computer Science, Polymer Physics, Radiochemistry, Physical Chemistry and Biophysics.
3.2.3 Entry Requirements and Examinations Before the revolutionary reforms, entry into the higher educational institutions was essentially by sponsorship and patronage.
Education was based on godfatherism; universities were exclusively for the elite, feudal overlords and their cronies.
After revolution and subsequent educational reforms, the doors to higher educational studies were flung open with the entry requirements and admissions formalised and objectified through equal opportunity competitive entrance examinations 124 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS like the Nigerian UME.
Initially, in the 1970s, when higher educational institutions were re-opened, candidates for entrance examinations were expected to be senior middle-school graduates or the equivalents.
Administratively, each provincial level unit was assigned a quota of students to be admitted to key universities, a second quota of students for regular universities within that administrative division, and a third quota of students from other provinces, autonomous regions and special municipalities who would be admitted to institutions operated at the provincial level.
In many instances, studies were carried on side by side work experiences in the industry.
Cadres with at least two years working experience were recruited (based on good reports from the industry) for selected relevant academic/professional departments in a small number of universities.
There was also special consideration for minority candidates in disadvantaged areas and those who pledged and promised to work in the rural areas upon graduation.
Nigeria equally has a policy of a special admission quota for disadvantaged areas.
Available literature indicates that in July 1983, about 1.5 million candidates took the entrance examinations into China’s (over 900) colleges and universities.
This number rose to 1.6 million in 1984 competing for the 430,000 university places.
Out of this number, over 400,000 was meant for admission into liberal arts colleges, 88,000 in foreign language institutions and 15,000 for placement in sports universities and schools.
In 1985, there were approximately 1.8 million students who took the three day college entrance examination to compete for about 560,000 university and college places.
In the area of the liberal arts, candidates were examined on Politics, Chinese, Mathematics, Foreign Languages, History and Geography.
Science and Engineering candidates were examined on Politics, Chinese, Mathematics, Chemistry and Biology.
In some instances, instead of the traditional entrance examination, colleges and universities were allowed to admit students with good academic records but relatively low entrance examination scores.
Some colleges were even allowed to try an experimental student recommendation system-fixed at two percent of the total enrolment for regular colleges and 5 percent for teachers’ colleges.
As practiced in Nigeria, where individual universities set cut-off marks for the various degree programmes in both the UME and Post-UME, the Chinese authorities established a minimum national examination score for admission to specific departments at specially designated colleges and universities, and a minimum score for admission to other universities, was equally set by provincial level authorities.
When 125 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS several applicants attained the minimum test score, the higher institution had the option of making a selection – a policy that gave university faculty and administrators a certain amount of discretion while still maintaining the necessary standards.
The quota system of admission is very widely practiced in spite of the large number of colleges and universities, all in attempt to provide equal educational opportunity for every Chinese citizen.
3.3 Administration and Finance in Chinese Higher Education 3.3.1 Scholarships and Loans In the People’s Republic of China, education is mainly financed through annual budget allocations from the state and local governments and subsidised by rural people’s communes and production brigades.
There are also grants from relevant governmental agencies and enterprises.
Apart from the general people’s stipend system which financial handicapped higher education there are other three main categories of scholarship and loan schemes.
There are three main categories – ‘high flying’ students who are usually encouraged to attain all-round excellence; students opting to specialise in areas of education (teaching), agriculture, forestry, sports, and marine navigation; and students who volunteer to work in the rural and remote regions under very harsh environmental conditions as in mining and engineering.
Scholarships are also generously extended to students who wish to study abroad in places like Russia, Germany and in the United States of America.
3.3.2 Educational Investments The People’s Republic of China has too many economic development and modernisation programmes to finance.
As a result of this, there are limited funds for the educational sector.
Above all, investments in science and technology were (and still are) very expensive especially when experts had to be imported from Europe and America.
Sending students abroad for appropriate training which was the best option, was equally very expensive.
To help obviate the high cost of education and yet meet the high demand for highly trained specialised workforce for the Chinese development programme, alternate forms of higher education such as spare-time, part-time, radio and television and even internet educational systems were established.
Because of the avowed faith in the instrumentality of education for modernisation by Chinese leaders in government more money is being invested in education especially at the higher education level.
By the middle of 1986, records indicate that there were about 15,000 Chinese scholars and graduates scattered all over American universities as career scientists, seeking 126 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS advanced training in their respective areas of specialisation.
Ukoli 1987 reports that the Ahmadu Bello University in Zaria sent out trainee scientist and technologists abroad for the same purpose, but many did not return.
The Rivers and Bayelsa State governments in the last ten years have been sending students out – especially to Asian countries, but there has been no report of any returnee.
3.4 Training of Educational Personnel Education personnel comprise teachers, staff members and other workers.
It is commonly agreed that no educational system can be better than its teachers; hence, the only way to improve the quality of education is to first improve the quality of the teaching force and fund education well.
In China, following the Cultural Revolution years, a network for the training and retraining of teachers and administrators was embarked upon.
At the National Level, there is, for instance a College of Educational Administration responsible for the training of leading cadres of higher educational administrative personnel.
There are also all kinds of teacher training institutions.
There is the Nationwide Programme of Network for the Education of Teachers.
The programme helps to harmonise all aspects of teacher education through modernisation; provision of educational information; providing support services for continuous learning.
Almost all higher educational institutions in China are dominated by professors, assistant professors who account for 9.5percent and 30percent respectively.
SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 What are the major sources of finance for higher education in the People’s Republic of China?
3.5 Curriculum and Research in Higher Education in the People’s Republic of China 3.5.1 Curriculum Programmes (professions/careers) The China Ministry of Education generally defines the guiding principles of the teaching programmes.
At all levels of the Chinese educational system, there is unquestionable emphasis on the integration of theory and practice.
That is why in the colleges and universities, learning is organised along laboratory experiments, field studies, social investigation and practice, production units’ factories and workshops.
In efforts to implement the principle of combining mental and physical work, productive work is an integral part of the teaching programmes.
Students participate in part-time and study/part-work programmes to cultivate a healthy attitude towards hard work.
127 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Many industrial universities and specialist colleges are strengthening many incomplete subjects and exploring new areas like automation, atomic energy, energy resources, oceanography, nuclear physics, computer science, polymer chemistry, polymer physics, radiochemistry, physical chemistry and biophysics.
In the Liberal Arts, the curricular extended to such areas as Politics, Chinese and Foreign Languages, History and Geography.
Other areas include Chemistry, Biology and Mathematics.
3.5.2 Adult and On-line Education Adult education of all types and at different levels has been established for workers, peasants and soldiers over 15 years of age.
Students who complete the required courses and pass the necessary examinations are awarded certificates and diplomas which are recognised by the government for employment into various positions in the bureaucracy.
Students in the rural and underdeveloped areas are the most beneficiaries of this adult education programmes especially the on-line education.
The Ministry of Education in Beijing has also approved 68 ordinary schools of higher learning and the Central Television University for the purpose of piloting the modern concepts of Distance and Life Long Education.
Because of the very diverse and dynamic nature of adult education, about 140 academic subjects in ten professional career or disciplines are currently being offered since 2003 in 2,027 satellite learning centres in China.
Adult higher education programmes are disseminated through the radio and television for workers, farmers in correspondence, second-chance evening universities, management and education colleges; and the internet network.
In Beijing alone, records show that more than 90 adult education schools with night schools enrolled tens of thousands of students.
More than 20,000 of these students graduated annually from evening universities, workers’ colleges, television universities and correspondence schools.
The Central Radio and Television University allows students to spend up to six hours a day over a three year period watching lectures on videotapes which have been produced by some of the best teachers in China.
These lectures were complemented by face- to-face tutoring by local instructors and approximately four hours of homework every evening.
Many developing nations, including Nigeria, have applied these techniques.
In Venezuela, Cuba and Coted’Ivoire, very appreciable results have also been achieved using these tested strategies innovatively.
128 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.5.3 Rural and Private Education Like many developing countries, a great majority of Chinese live in the rural areas.
Governments have continually demonstrated concern for the betterment of the rural areas.
Special funds have, therefore, been set aside for the development of education in the rural areas.
China has the world’s largest distance learning system for rural education.
For example, the China Agricultural Broadcast and Television School has over 250,000 rural schools with over 45,000 staff.
By means of the modern media like radio, television, satellite, network and all kinds of audio-visual materials, it has succeeded in equipping over 100 million rural dwellers with skills in applied agricultural technologies for the benefit of the rural areas.
4.0 CONCLUSION Higher education in China is an encompassing issue, covering all areas of the Chinese life.
Because of the large population and the very long recorded history, it has been a little difficult for the Chinese government to provide adequately for everybody in the nation.
It is for this reason that, the Chinese government has tried all kinds of educational typologies – including the conventional type, the mediated type and the rural version.
A lot of progress has been made in the direction of the individual personality.
There is widespread respect for hard work by Chinese youths in spite of the very large population.
The state of the Chinese economy is the greatest evidence of the way in which the government has achieved massive development and modernisation using the instrumentality of education.
It is worthy of emulation by all developing nations, Nigeria inclusive.
5.0 SUMMARY In examining higher education in the People’s Republic of China, this unit has brought out some details of the historical antecedents which have shaped education in China.
It also examined the structure, the administration and how education is financed in China.
Teacher and administrative personnel training was also briefly considered.
The teacher education programme showed that proficiency and expertise were the core of the objective.
Finally, the content of curriculum of all levels of education has been presented, including adult and rural and private education.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1 The People’s Republic of China has the largest concentration of human beings in the world.
With that kind of record in population, it is expected 129 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS that there would be problems about how to provide education for everybody in the Republic.
Chinese higher education policy has therefore been shaped by all kinds of historical landmarks.
For example, China has one of the longest recorded history in the world.
Her history dates back to about 3,500 years even up to the Zhoughua ancient historical period, a very rich recorded cultural past.
There was also the very long period of the reign of the feudal overlords who were very oppressive.
China therefore wanted to use the instrumentality of education to free the citizens from the oligarchical stronghold of the feudalists.
Above all, the 1949 Revolution was a turning point.
It opened up the eyes and the doors to a better life, enabling every Chinese citizen to aspire to the highest position in the society.
All these were catalysts to the shape of the higher education policy.
ANSWER TO SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2 The Communist Part of the People’s Republic has abiding faith in education, and so the government makes huge financial provisions in the annual budgetary estimates for education at all levels – from the People’s Parliament, to state and local government levels.
Even rural people’s communes equally contribute tremendously to educational funding.
Because the education system is tied very intimately with the industry and the production sectors, all kinds of financial grants come from the product brigades and several entrepreneurial agencies.
Several categories of students equally benefit from all kinds of scholarship and loan schemes.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
State briefly, the historical antecedents of the Chinese educational system.
2.
Describe fairly graphically, the structure of higher education in China.
3.
Describe how higher education is administered and financed in China.
4.
How are teachers and other workers in Chinese higher educational institutions trained?
5.
Match the various subject disciplines in the Higher Education Curriculum and the professional/career disposition in China.
130 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Iwuama, B.C., et al (1992).
Comparative Education: A Functional Approach.
Agbor: Central Books Ltd. King, Edmund J.
(1979).
Other Schools and Ours: Comparative Studies for Today, (Fifth Edition).
London: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Postlethwaite, T. Neville (1988).
(Ed).
The Encyclopedia of Comparative Education and National Systems of Education.
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Wikipedia, Free Encyclopedia: Education in the People’s Republic of China.
131 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS MODULE 5 SELECTED PROBLEMS OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA Unit 1 Problems Relating to Governance Unit 2 Problems Relating to Curriculum/Academic Programmes Unit 3 Problems Relating to Funding Unit 4 Problems Relating to Access and Quality Assurance UNIT 1 PROBLEMS RELATING TO GOVERNANCE IN HIGHER EDUCATION IN NIGERIA CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Administrative Problems in Higher Education in Nigeria 3.1.1 Admission Problems (Access/Equal Opportunity) 3.1.2 Overproduction and Poor Quality of Graduates 3.2 Economic Problems in Higher Education in Nigeria 3.2.1 Unclear/Ambiguous Economic Policies 3.2.2 Shortages/Delays in the release of Funds/Mismanagement 3.3 Political Problems in Higher Education 3.3.1 Politicisation of Educational Policies 3.3.2 Corrupt Practices in Higher Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION In all spheres of development, Nigeria has been struggling to make some impact.
Economically, it cannot be said that Nigeria can heave any sigh of relief.
With an estimated population of about 150 million, vast natural resources, unexploited layers of mineral resources, and luxuriantly rich agricultural forests, Nigeria has aptly been described as Africa’s sleeping economic giant, and in fact, a deformed giant at that.
William Saint, Teresa A. Hartnett and Erich Strassner (2003) report that while one-third of its population pursues a lifestyle fashioned in various degrees towards European and North American patterns, the other two- third struggle to survive on less than one dollar a day by World Bank Standards.
The result is that, the Nigerian business environment is distorted and very restrictive – making Nigeria to be described as one of 132 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS the most difficult countries in the world for private investment.
In spite of the substantial oil revenues, the per-capita income has continued to decrease while the non-oil economy is stagnant.
The role of government in the overall development of higher education has not been salutary except on paper and in principle.
In the modern world, the educational system – higher education in particular, has very easily become the largest and most potent instrument for controlling people and directing their actions (Nwagwu 2002).
All through our history, Nigerian governments, military or civilian have always expressed abiding faith in the efficacy of education in the transformation of the society both socially, politically, and economically – hence, education has always been rated high on the hierarchy of her priority list.
One of the fundamental problems of government and education in Nigeria has to do with the control and management of education.
The missionaries pioneered the control of education from the cathedrals from where it moved to dual control of both missionaries and government.
Finally, the third stage emerged – a kind of multi-control between the missions, governments and private proprietors, especially with the deregulation policy on education.
One of the unforeseen consequences of this tripartite control is that education has become everybody’s (and so nobody’s) business Hence, government and its officials stay aloof.
This has resulted in the exploitation of unsuspecting parents and guardians by private properties as well as delaying education standard.
Economic and social development is knowledge-driven and higher education is fundamental to knowledge construction and a sine qua non for a knowledge economy.
Increased innovative capacity is facilitated generally by very heavy investments in science and engineering education by serious nations.
But in the case of Nigeria, political/government interference in higher education system had imposed stifling distortions and constraints on the developmental process of the system.
As far back as 1980, Nigeria had established a top-class higher education system, offering courses in all areas that can complete with international standard.
Saint, et.
al.
(2004) report that, the Ibadan and Ahmadu Bello universities earned global recognition for their research in tropical health and agriculture respectively.
But under the successive military governments, between 1980 and 1990, this reputation was bastardised.
In a twist of fortune and in unwarranted response to political pressures of social demand for access, the educational system suffered uncontrolled and unplanned rapid expansion.
In quick response to the unexpected expansion in the number of universities, enrolments soared at an annual rate of 12 to 15 percent.
133 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Between 1980 and 1992, an additional 11 universities were hurriedly established, in fact, some of them were on establishing basis.
Government interference in university administration is seen in indirect appointment of Vice-Chancellors, and in some cases, the aberration of military “sole administrators” became the common practice.
Among the universities that suffered from this, is the Ahmadu Bello University.
This led to the usurpation of the cherished university autonomy by the federal government, resulting ultimately in the steady disappearance of erstwhile incentives and rewards for research productivity, teaching excellence and all associated academic innovations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify some administrative problems relating to government’s interference in higher education • enumerate some economic problems in higher education and how they were tackled in Nigeria and elsewhere • describe some of the political problems which impinge on progress in higher education in Nigeria.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Administrative Problems in Higher Education in Nigeria and the International Strategies for Solving Them 3.1.1 Admission Problems As at Oct 2009 Nigeria had 102 universities nationwide, which was distributed federal – 27; state – 41; private – 34 (out of which 14 are yet to be accredited).
Nigeria is therefore rated the nation with largest university system in sub-Saharan Africa.
With a total student population of over 1,096,312, (NUC.
2009), Nigeria has overtaken South Africa which, till year 2002, had a higher student enrolment in tertiary education than Nigeria.
It is very easy to conclude that with that number of universities and the enrolment figure, Nigeria may have been experiencing serious admission problems.
One of the admission problems was the incidence of multiple admissions where individual students secured admission into more than one university, therefore denying several other qualified students who would otherwise have been admitted.
This was the situation for over 15 years until 1978 when the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board (JAMB) was established by Decree 2 of 1978 with a mandate to administer a national university 134 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS entrance examination to all university applicants.
Since then, the problem of multiple admissions by candidates had been laid to rest.
In the same way, the American Central Entrance Examination Board and several other testing centres as in Princeton, New Jersey conduct similar qualifying examinations for university entrants.
The Chinese educational system has a very competitive similar examination system for her high school graduates seeking admission into one of the several universities.
Another problem that quickly reared its head was the widespread examination malpractices among the candidates of the JAMB in their University Matriculation Examination (UME) scores.
Many universities suddenly discovered that many of the candidates who paraded very high scores in their UME could not match or justify themselves with corresponding brilliant performance in the university programmes they were admitted into.
It became so embarrassing that in 2005, individual universities were empowered to conduct screening exercises on the applicants who had scored up a certain cut-off mark to be determined by individual universities.
The Post-UME screening exercises conducted by most boards of the university revealed that, many candidates who scored a total mark of 250 and above in UME perform poorly in the Post-UME screening tests.
Another problem facing higher education in Nigeria is that of access.
Governments’ approach to access and equity has been extensively researched.
Nigeria has long adopted the quota (federal character) based on admission policy regulated by the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board – reserving specific percentages for various categories– 40 percent for merit; 30 percent for catchment area; 20 percent for disadvantaged students/areas; and 10 percent for the university’s VC’s discretion.
Adeyemi (2001), in evaluating these admission policies found out that there are significant differences in the academic performance between students admitted on the basis of merit and those admitted on the basis of other criteria.
He also observed that, the drop-out and repetition rate for the merit-based admission was three times lower than the rates for those admitted on the basis of catchment and disadvantaged or discretion.
This was however before the commencement of the use of the Post-UME screening exercises.
If that finding was valid, then the resort to Post-UME for admission would need to be re-examined and the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board is championing that cause.
The deregulation policy of government leading to the issuance of license to private individuals to establish universities has been seen as government’s genuine effort in increasing access to university education.
The establishment of the National Open University of Nigeria 135 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS (NOUN) is another popular strategy that has been successfully applied internationally and the Nigerian experience though still in its embryonic stage, is working.
The British Open University system has been existing for the past 50 years.
3.1.2 Overproduction and Poor Quality of Graduates In spite of the apparent limitation and shortages in university spaces due to the alarming number of candidates applying to JAMB for admission every year, there are clear cases of overproduction of graduates.
The embarrassing number of university graduates roaming the streets of Abuja, Lagos and other state capitals for non-existent jobs is a testimony of the soaring records of unemployment.
Where the jobs are available, the quality of the products of our universities has been very low in recent times.
Both public and private employers of university graduates, as well as the government, have complained about the incompetence of Nigerian graduates.
Their training has been described as being poor and of a low standard, thus, as they are very unproductive on the job, with very obvious shortcomings in oral and written communication and in applied technical skills.
In addition, there are obvious mismatch between what the universities are producing and the critical requirements in the job market.
For instance, between 1991 and 1999, while the demand for degree-based professional skills were in the areas of Engineering, Health and Management Sciences, about 49 percent of the graduates from the federal universities were in the humanities especially in Law, Education, Arts and the Social Sciences.
The end result was that, the labour market could possibly absorb only about 10 percent.
Thanks to the new generation banks which have been employing university graduates based only their success in the bank’s screening exercises.
3.2 Economic Problems in Higher Education in Nigeria 3.2.1 Unclear/Ambiguous Economic Policies In all cases, university admission policies are not given adequate economic considerations.
For instance, instead of relating admission quotas to labour demands in the public and private sectors as in China, Japan and elsewhere, they are based mainly on candidates’ qualification and performance in the qualifying examinations.
There seems to be no link between labour market, information systems and the career counseling units or admission offices in the universities.
Elsewhere, there are close links and cooperation between curriculum consultants, faculty attachments, student placements and research funding.
The only reasonable conclusion which can be drawn from this could be that, many students enrolled for degree programmes just to get a degree.
Even among lecturers in some universities, the compulsory demand for a PhD.
136 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS by the National Universities Commission is making many lecturers to obtain doctorate degrees outside the areas they are employed to teach – as in lecturers in Adult Education or Vocational and Technical Education acquiring PhD in Educational Administration or Educational Planning.
3.2.2 Shortages/Delays in Release/Mismanagement of Funds In the days of oil boom, when the universities were relatively few, funding was not a serious problem.
But with increase in the number of universities, more fund is now required for management of the universities.
The development of infrastructure and the maintenance of students took the lion’s share of government allocation.
As the funds were becoming smaller, so were they now being delayed as a result of bureaucratic bottlenecks in the Ministry of Education?
Apart from that, government officials were now involved in very sharp practices with funds allocation.
In capital projects requiring the award of contracts, the contract money became overpriced and inflated with the result of many universities being inundated with abandoned uncompleted projects as evident in students’ hostels and university administrative buildings.
Elsewhere, when government funding is reduced and institutional performance cannot be maintained in teaching and research, money is generated from other incomes such as investments, fees, endowments and so on.
All these are still in their infancy in Nigeria especially in universities that are located in rural/traditional/historical cities like Ile- Ife, Benin, Nsukka.
More worrisome is the federal government’s economic pretensions not to charge tuition fees in her universities, whereas lot of money would have been realised from undergraduate tuition fees which the can be used for institutions development.
3.3 Political Problems in Higher Education 3.3.1 Politicisation of Educational Policies Nwagwu (2002:6) reminds us of some peculiar characteristics of the education system which has exposed it to serious political pressure, propaganda, public opinion and ultimately governmental control.
Among them is that education, being a highly socialised and domesticated activity has become everyone’s activity and ultimately nobody’s business.
In spite of the openly declared, high expectation and the potentials of education as instrument par-excellence for the avowed transformation of the society, only a very small fraction of the required fund is always allocated by the political power wielders.
Above all, the new developments in technology (which only the politicians in 137 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS govermment can afford) have succeeded in breaking the monopoly of educational institutions in effecting positive changes in human behaviour.
Many ICT systems are competing almost favourably in information and knowledge dissemination and character moulding.
Finally, educational institutions do not have the financial wherewithdal to be independent and so, they have continued to rely on government (politicians) funding for virtually everything.
Because the well-meaning academicians are not willing to “play ball”, the political power brokers are also anti-intellectual to their educational policies, otherwise how does a government in one breath preach fiscal federalism and in another, breath unitary system.
Hence, the NUC, NBTE or JAMB are, by government standards, not breaching the concurrent legislative provisions of the 1999 Constitution, but the pending ASUU/Federal draft agreement is anti-due process.
All these unwarranted interferences led to university autonomy being steadily compromised.
3.3.2 Corrupt Practices in Higher Education The problem of corruption in the higher education can be said to be a hangover from the military era.
The regimented military tradition had spilled over the management of the educational institutions following the forceful takeover of the former regional universities.
University management in the civilised world is based largely on cooperative participatory system of senate and the intricate network of academic committee system.
But at home, there were management rigidities imposed by government bureaucracies.
The instability of government, and its policies have led to widespread corruption – even within the university systems.
There is no stability or accountability whatsoever.
In the last 10 years of democratic governance, the government has had to change the minister for education several times thus; there has been no accountability or continuity in governance.
The long tradition of weak governance, oversight and limited management accountability has unfortunately extended to the universities federal, state and private.
The media in the past ten years have been awash with stories of sharp practices resume falsification, plagiarism, cheating, examination malpractice, sexual harassment, contract kickbacks, sale of handouts and unbridled gangsters, unending strikes, cultism, all other forms of disruptive behaviour, and a general deep-seated social dysfunction.
It has been argued that, for Nigeria to join the rest of the world in the development of a really competitive international system of learning, she cannot rely on politics or this corrupt bureaucratic system.
She has to give a good deal of autonomy (stripped of the exuberances of the NUC) to higher institutions to enable them become dynamic and be able to move fast in the international 138 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS competition.
The institutions would have to develop a new, some entrepreneurial leadership side by side the institutional autonomy.
Universities, therefore, have to become more flexible and responsive.
They have to specialise in areas of comparative advantage which will be identified through the popular and participatory strategic planning processes.
4.0 CONCLUSION In conclusion, the problems which have been identified in connection with governance and undue interference by the bureaucracy all require more innovative and very dynamic university management.
In addition, there has to be the political will and commitment for robust funding of the entire system.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has examined problems relating to governance as they relate to higher education in Nigeria.
Some of the administrative problems of admission in terms of access and equitability have been highlighted.
It has been pointed out that the desire to increase access for more Nigerians who are thirsty for education has resulted to the lowering of standards and the establishment of several substandard higher institutions.
Benchmarks of international standards would have to be established for all proprietors to comply with.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Identify about three ways in which government’s interference has created problems for higher institutions in Nigeria.
2.
How can those problems be solved, suggest ways and places where such approaches have been tried.
3.
Describe some political problems which have slowed down the progress of higher education in Nigeria.
139 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adeyemi, K. (2001).
“Equality of Access and Catchment Area Factor in University Admissions in Nigeria”.
Higher Education.
42.
(307- 332) The Netherlands: Kluwer Publishers.
Farish, M.; McPake, J.; Poiney, J.
& Weiner, G. (1995).
Equal Opportunities in Colleges and Universities: Towards Better Practices: Buckingham Society for Research into Higher Education (SRHE) & Open University Press.
Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
The Politics of Educational Policies in Nigeria.
Benin City.
UNIBEN: Faculty of Education Lecture Series No.1.
Obayan, P. (1995).
“Major Educational Challenges of the Twenty-First Century” A Keynote Paper in Region II Forum.
Vol.I No.I.
Saint, W.; Hartnett, T.A.
& Strassner, E. (2003).
“Higher Education in Nigeria: A Status Report” in Higher Education Policy.
Vol.16, No.3 September.
Ukoli, F.M.A.
(1987).
‘Can Science and Technology Be The Key to National Development?
4th Convocation Lecture Series.
The Rivers State University of Science and Technology, Port Harcourt March 13.
World Bank (1994).
The Dynamics of Education of Policy-Making.
Washington D.C: The World Bank.
140 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 2 PROBLEMS RELATING TO CURRICULUM ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Curriculum and Pedagogy Problems 3.1.1 Unclearly Stated Curriculum/Pedagogy Goals 3.1.2 Poor and Unrelated Curriculum Content to Developmental Goals 3.2 Poor Teacher’s Preparation 3.2.1 Quality of Student Teachers 3.2.2 Poorly Motivated/Remunerated Teachers 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION No doubt, a good number of Nigerians have acquired higher education at home and abroad.
The value of education has never been in doubt as no nation has ever achieved any appreciable development either in science or technology without the appropriate education.
Despite its importance, education in higher education in Nigeria is still faced with curriculum problem.
Ukoli (1987) had bemoaned the provisions for energy in the National Policy on Science and Technology of 1986 which he described as “another Hercules of good intentions which leaves no one in doubt about government’s full awareness of the scope and ramifications of our developmental problems, at its commitment to finding lasting solutions” through appropriate curriculum.
Without any pessimism whatsoever, he had declared, “it doesn’t work, and it won’t work”, because we do not have the laboratories, standard equipment and trained manpower.
This and other pedagogy problems take their roots from the curriculum problems which have bedeviled our education system curriculum problems also gave rise to the 1969 first ever National Curriculum Conference in attempt to find relevance for our inherited colonial curriculum.
This is the basis for this unit.
141 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this unit, you should be able to: • identify some curriculum and pedagogy problems in higher education in Nigeria • clearly state, in behavioural terms, some curriculum goals • state the importance of teachers in the effective implementation of the goals of a national higher education system • enumerate the various ways teachers can be motivated for effective curriculum implementation.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Curriculum and Pedagogy Problems in Higher Education in Nigeria 3.1.1 Unclearly Stated Curriculum/Pedagogy Goals The role of the teacher at any level of the educational system cannot be ignored.
There is no doubt that we are in a computer age.
The important role of the computer in today’s education can only be ignored at great peril to the entire education system.
We cannot be aiming at scientific and technological development without regard for the place of the computer.
In fact, the potential usefulness of micro-computers in education has long been recognised.
Among the developing nations of the world India has embraced and integrated the computer into its curriculum and this has catapulted her to the top among the other developing nations.
From automobile to medical sciences, the computer has raised India above her peers.
India is now regarded as the ‘Pharmacy’ of the developing world.
In Nigeria, some of the goals of teacher education which are eloquently stated in the National Policy on Education are there just for the records.
Let us examine some of them: The document (NPE, 1998) states that the goals of teacher education shall be to: (a) produce highly motivated, conscientious and efficient classroom teachers for all levels of our education system.
It is a common knowledge that teachers in our school system are the most poorly motivated in spite of the efficiency of most of them.
At the lower levels, the very qualified ones for promotion would have to get involved in all kinds of unconventional practices like bribing the 142 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS bureaucracy in the Board/Ministry of Education to get promoted.
And for principalship, it is simply “cash and carry”.
(b) encourage further the spirit of enquiring and creativity in teachers.
Here, the teaching environments are not challenging enough to provoke the inquiring spirit and creativity.
You cannot create something out of nothing.
In the higher institutions for example, the facilities are simply not there for creativity, hence, research which is the third component of the duties of an academic is simply at its lowest ebb.
The result is low productivity, resume falsification and plagiarism and so on.
(c) help teachers get into the social life of the community and the society at large and enhance their commitment to national goals.
Government policies have succeeded more in estranging teachers from the social life of the community and the larger society by the kind of remuneration given to teachers.
For example the Teachers’ Registration Council was expected to go with the Teachers’ Salary Scale (TSS) only a few states have implemented the TSS.
(d) provide teachers with the intellectual and professional background adequate for their assignment and make them adaptable to changing situations.
The strategies which the federal government had adopted in training of its teachers had been very deficient.
For the UBE, the federal government has adopted the crash programme in training teachers.
The National Teachers’ Institute is at the forefront in the crash programme “production/training” of teachers.
Some of the Colleges of Education in the states are not doing any better job.
The same can be said of the several Sandwich/Part-time teacher education programmes of the Institutes of Education and federal universities.
Specifically, university education is designed and projected to make optimum contribution to national development by: (a) intensifying diversifying its programmes for the development of high level manpower within the context of the needs of the nation.
(b) making professional courses contents to reflect our national requirements; (c) making all students as part of a general programme of all-round improvement in university education, to offer general study courses such as history of ideas, philosophy of knowledge and nationalism.
143 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Sub-sections 51-55 of the National Policy on Education (1998) give details of apparently beautiful curricular goals, but in practice, most of them have been implemented only in the breach.
3.1.2 Poor and Unrelated Curriculum Content to Developmental Goals In today’s competitive knowledge economy, updating of curricular needs to be an almost permanent undertaking just as the NERDC is doing.
This has to be so because of the rate at which the society is changing.
If the curriculum is to be relevant for all time, then continuous review is imperative.
For our higher education system, Saint and his associates have suggested three pieces of evidence which pointed to the need for greater attention to reviews and innovations in both the curriculum and teaching.
First, they observed that students’ success seems to be very limited while drop-out rates are high.
This was confirmed by Adeyemi (2001) who observed that success is essentially limited to students who have been admitted on the basis of merit, as opposed to those whose admission were based on catchment area, disadvantaged states and other criteria and those whose drop-out rates are a little high.
In fact in 2002, NUC estimates for six universities indicated a drop-out rate as high as 50 percent (Okebukola 2002).
Secondly, employers believe that university graduates are poorly trained and when they are lucky to secure job placements, reports indicate poor productivity.
This is why many banks organise special training for their new employees.
Some of the banks and the oil companies organise training programmes lasting for as long as six months for their prospective employees.
3.2 Poor Teacher Preparation 3.2.1 Poor quality of student teachers Available records in admission offices show that very few students apply for degrees in education.
The reason for this is not farfetched.
The condition of service for teaching profession has not really been improved to a point of its being attractive to applicants.
Many parents who earn their living through teaching would never want their children to get into teaching because of the societal attitude towards the profession.
Even with increase in the teachers’ salary, most students enrolling for degree in education are generally those who could not be considered for their original choice of programmes.
The situation is such that, two sessions after admission into the Faculty of education for degrees in education, many students would still be scouting for change 144 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS of course forms.
As a result, when these students graduate, they become reluctant and poorly motivated teachers.
3.2.2 Poorly Motivated/Remunerated Teachers As the government’s fund for education is decreasing, teachers’ remuneration and financial attraction for higher education personnel is also experiencing a corresponding decrease.
There has also been the incidence of the rising workloads associated with deteriorating staff/student ratios.
According to Saint, et.
al (2004).
Nigeria’s federal university system is performing very poorly in the area of teaching and learning and rewards both materially and psychologically.
This kind of situation provides a very weak base from which to launch response actions aimed at revamping the curriculum and the different strategies to pedagogy which an ambitious higher education system requires for competitive performance in the globalised world of the 21st century.
4.0 CONCLUSION The curriculum is at the centre of any educational programme.
The curriculum through a well organized pedagogical system ensures the achievement of educational goals and objectives.
The success or failure of an educational system depends on how well the curriculum is planned, developed and implemented.
When the goals of the education are not stated in explicit and clear terms, then they are difficult to implement.
In the same way, when the admission process is faulty, the whole process, especially the implementation stage is compromised.
5.0 SUMMARY Some pedagogical and curricular problems of higher education have been examined.
The goals and objectives of education need to be clearly stated in ways that will make them easily attainable.
The qualities of the personnel who are recruited to train and teach in higher institution requires a serious attention.
It was pointed out that a situation where only ‘rejects’ from other faculties and ‘second rate’ students are admitted into a programme whose products would be charged with the onerous responsibility of teaching our future leaders poses some danger to the survival of the system.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
Name the goals of teacher education in Nigerian education system.
2.
Why are some of the provisions of higher education curriculum in Nigeria not implementable?
145 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.
What role do teachers play in the successful implementation of a curriculum programme of an educational system?
4.
What are the motivational strategies which can help improve the quality and effectiveness of teachers in an educational system?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adeyemi, K. (2001).
“Equality of access and catchment area factor in university admissions in Nigeria” in Higher Education 42 (307- 332).
Azeke, T.O.
(2002).
“Contemporary Issues in Nigeria Education” in Refocusing Education in Nigeria, Oriaifo, S.O.
et al (eds) Benin City: Da-Sylva Influence.
Farish, M., McPake, J. Powney, J., & Weiner, G. (1995).
Equal Opportunities in Colleges and Universities: Towards Better Practices.
Buckingham.
The Society for Research into Higher Education (SRHE) and Open University Press.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (FRN 1998).
National Policy on Education (Revised).
Nwagwu, N.A.
(2002).
The Politics of Education Policies in Nigeria.
Benin City: Faculty of Education, University of Benin Lecture Series No.1 June.
Obanya, P. (1995).
“Major Educational Challenges of the Twenty-First Century” in Region II Forum.
Vol.1.
No.1 June.
Okebukola, P. (2002).
The State of University Education in Nigeria.
Abuja: NUC.
Onwuchekwa, J.
(1987).
“The Seven Questions” in The Guardian February 22, pp.7 in Ukoli, F.M.A.
Can Science and Technology Be The Key to National Development.
4th Convocation Lecture Series, the Rivers State University of Science and Technology.
Port Harcourt: Nigeria.
Saint, W.; Hartnett, T.A.
& Strasser, E. (2004).
“Higher Education in Nigeria: A Status Report” in Higher Education Policy.
Vol.16.
No.3.
Ukoli, F.M.A.
(1987).
“Can Science and Technology Be the Key to National Development?” 4th Convocation Lecture Series: The Rivers State University of Science and Technology, Port Harcourt: March 13.
146 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 3 PROBLEMS RELATING TO FUNDING CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Nature of Education Funding 3.1.1 Sources of Funds 3.1.2 Government Grants 3.1.3 Students Tuition Fees 3.1.4 Endowments 3.1.5 Revenues from Internal Sources 3.2 Management of Funds 3.2.1 Funds Distribution 3.2.2 Imbalance in Funds Distribution 3.2.3 Financial Mismanagement/Problem and its Effects 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION Education is unarguably a very expensive and capital-intensive project anywhere in the world.
In the stable and well developed economies of the West, that is, Europe and North America, adequate funding is generally taken for granted because there are clearly stated and known sources from which such funds would be derived – even by mere projections which are generally near accurate.
This is not to say that shortages are never experienced in these countries, but the truth is that, the shortages which they experience are often anticipated and planned for, unlike the Nigerian system, where shortages are almost a permanent feature, the results of which generally lead to the abandonment of plans and projects.
In many parts of the less developed economies, problems of funding are almost an integral component of the various developmental processes which gives the impression of inadequate planning.
In the early 1970 up to early 1980, Nigeria had a very strong and healthy economy as well as very massive economic potentials due to the gains from the oil boom.
But this was soon frittered away by the insidious adverse effects of government’s scandalous and deviant handling of the economy.
Thereafter, the Nigerian monocultural economy has remained limp for over 30 years with the national competitive index remaining so low that Nigeria soon became a dumping ground for finished goods from foreign factories while 147 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Nigerian factories were bugged down by widespread corruption and inefficiency.
The notorious problem which has repeatedly crippled Nigeria’s successive developmental plans in all sectors, education inclusive had always been the absence of reliable data from which successful plans can be based.
Higher education in Nigeria has no meticulously structured plan; each of them is faced with problem of financing.
No meaningful financial plan can be made without appreciable reliable data.
All through the years from the Elliot through the Ashby Commissions to pre and post independence, planners have had to cope with such questions as: • How many Nigerians are there?
• How many school-age children are there?
• How many schools are there?
• What are the enrolment figures?
• What is our revenue profile?
Answers to these questions should provide adequate information for our planners, but alas, where the answers are provided, they are either grossly over or under-estimated.
That is the bane of funding of education.
Fafunwa (1991:168), quoting Chief S.O.
Awokoya, the then Minister of Education for Western Region, said “Educational development is imperative and urgent.
It must be treated as a national emergency, second only to war.
It must move with the momentum of a revolution”.
Thus, according to Fafunwa, the boldest and perhaps the most unprecedented educational scheme in Africa, South of the Sahara was launched by an indigenous government as a meaningful demonstration of its commitment to the vital interests of the people it governed.
Therefore, financing education has long been recognised as a joint responsibility of the federal, state, local governments’ private individuals and organisations.
But the recurring issues in educational financing had always been the level of government’s commitment to national, states and local governments’ educational goals, in terms of who should be educated and to what level?
What level of education should receive greater financial attention from government; what should be done about the unprecedented exponential annual increases in the demand for higher education and finally, is it really feasible for government to ever make sufficient allocations to the education sector regardless of the implication for other sectors of the economy?
148 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Egonmwan (2002) had rightly observed that although education has always received a higher priority than health in the national plans, real achievements in the sector have never really matched the quantum of investment.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of the unit, you should be able to: • itemise and describe the various sources of funding for education • suggest the criteria for equitable distribution and allocation of funds for education • describe some of the areas of mismanagement and their effects on the national economy and education in particular.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Nature of Education Funding In all parts of the world, whether developed or developing, countries education is seen as a capital-intensive project.
In most developing countries, Nigeria inclusive, financing education much more difficult due to low productivity and decreasing revenue.
Nigeria for instance, relies principally on crude oil as a major source of government’s revenue.
In recent times, the revenue from oil and, recently, gas has been on the downward trend because the foreign consumers have been working hard in their effort to find alternatives to petroleum for energy and other uses.
The result is that the quantum funding for education over the years has been below the required international standards as shown in table 5.3.1 below Table 5.3.1 Federal Government Education Expenditures (1996- 2001) Year Recurrent Capital Total Percentage Expenditure Expenditure (N (Millions) of Total (N millions) Million) Budget 1996 11,667 3,215.7 14,882.7 4.41 1997 12,983.1 3,808.2 16,791.3 3.92 1998 14,034.8 10,579.2 24,614.1 5.05 1999 23,047.2 8,516.6 31,563.8 3.33 2000 39,034.0 10,529.2 49,563.2 7.07 Source: Adapted from Federal Bureaus of Statistics 149 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.1.1 Sources of Funds Human development and economic experts have contended that education is simply an investment in human capital.
Any nation that wants to develop would therefore have to invest heavily in the development of her citizens by providing them with the appropriate education.
It is through this appropriate education that the required skills for the various sectors of the economy could be acquired.
At the higher education level, lots of funds have to be set aside for research and development (R&D) because the result from the research is what is required by commerce and industry for development.
The consequence is that governments usually get everybody involved in funding education –the industry, commerce, private organisations and individuals and even the international community.
3.1.2 Government Grants Government grants constitute over 80 percent of the sources of education funds.
These grants are of various types.
A direct grant from government’s annual budgets is used for both recurrent and capital expenditures of the education sector.
In higher education, for example, grants from the federal government generally cover salaries, wages and other services.
Capital projects are equally provided for annually.
Because education is constitutionally on the concurrent legislative list, state and local governments equally make their financial contributions to education.
In the 1990s, when the price of petroleum products in the world market soared, the federal government had to create a special fund – the Petroleum Trust Fund (PTF) from the additional revenue accruing to government.
All levels of education have benefitted tremendously from this fund, especially when it was managed with utmost accountability by General Muhammadu Buhari.
Many capital projects have been financed in many educational institutions in Nigeria through the Petroleum Trust Fund.
Some universities have built students’ hostels, libraries, office complexes, lecture theatres and science laboratories from the fund.
The Education Tax Fund (ETF) is another source of fund.
The universities produce high level manpower for all sectors of the nation’s economy.
The government therefore has imposed a mandatory two per cent tax of all profits from all companies which employ more than 100 employees and are operating anywhere in Nigeria.
They remit this tax regularly to government.
150 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 3.1.3 Students Tuition Fees The federal government has been pretentious on the issue of tuition fees in all its higher institutions.
There is no doubt that tuition fees would have been a major source of funds for the education sector.
While the proprietors of private universities are smiling to the banks every semester, the federal and some state universities wait for government subventions every month before they can pay salaries.
When it comes to capital projects, university authorities approach, it almost cap-in-hand, begging the civil servants in the NUC and the Ministry of Finance/Education for the release of funds from the budget.
All the same, several institutions have devised very ingenious ways of collecting all kinds of fees and levies from their students.
This leads to very large sums being expended in the provision of services to both students and personnel by the University.
3.1.4 Endowments At the tertiary level, financial institutions are major sources of funds.
Individuals and organisations endow many departments for research and development.
The Rockfeller Foundation, Fullbright and many others are major sources of funds in Europe and America.
Apart from the endowment of many departments, university management also provides research study and post graduate study scholarships to deserving candidates.
The Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme also provided the opportunity to study in some of the Commonwealth countries for post graduate students.
3.1.5 Revenue from Internal Sources The over dependence of institutions on government funds in the face of the dwindling revenues accruing to governments have made government to issue a mandate that universities should be able to generate 10 percent of their total annual revenues.
In response to this, all universities in the 1990s resorted to the establishment of the ‘notorious’ satellite campuses in which university degrees virtually “went on sale” to the highest bidder.
Almost all universities were involved because lot of money was being generated through satellite campuses even at the risk of lowering educational standards.
With the government’s ban of satellite campuses, other avenues which have been evolved by universities as sources of funds include commercial ventures like catering and hospitality services, transport services through shuttle-buses on campuses, establishment of shopping centers’, consultancy services in various professional areas and so on.
When government funding becomes insufficient to maintain institution’s academic and academic activities, universities in other parts of the world (like in Europe and America and parts of the developing 151 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS world) have often sought to supplement their public funding with locally or internally generated income.
In recent years in Nigeria, locally generated incomes have accounted for up to about 15 percent of universities’ recurrent budgets.
The universities located in urban centres are the ones which have made appreciable gains from internal revenue generation.
The recent developmental strides which have been recorded at the University of Lagos have been attributed to the successes of the managers of internal revenue generation (IGR) outfits of the university.
Other sources include foreign grants, UNESCO, WHO, Philanthropic donors/Alumni Associations, Community Development Associations etc.
3.2 Management of Funds 3.2.1 Funds Distribution The management of funds in accountable and judicious ways have posed very insurmountable problems for all sectors of the Nigerian economy.
This is because of the pervasive influence of corruption through the sharp practices of government officials.
The structure of government spending has never reflected the areas of priority; thus, education funds are distributed simply arbitrarily.
According to Egonmwan (2002), in 1977 the education sector absorbed as much as 40 percent of the recurrent Federal Budget and about 55 percent of the recurrent state budget, primary education which was the priority during this planning period suffered serious neglect in the distribution.
In 1980, for example, primary education received less than 20 percent of public current educational expenditure.
The (UNDP, 1990) reports that within the three-year plan period 1985-1988, primary education expenditure as percentage of total expenditure was only 17.2 percent.
3.2.2 Imbalances in Funds Distribution There are all kinds of imbalances resulting from the inequitable allocation of education funds.
There are imbalances between the various levels of education, imbalance in the level of development even in the same federal university of the same age.
There are visible imbalances between the output of university graduates and the various employment outlets whose absorbing capacity cannot cope with the yearly output from the university “factories”.
For example, just 10 percent of academic programmes of potentially strategic development importance were accredited in the 2000/2001 academic session in many federal universities because of imbalance of financial allocation and distribution.
And so it is the contention of experts that without 152 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS disciplinary capabilities approaching international standards in at least a few key professions necessary to underpin economic growth, it will be difficult for Nigeria to compete successfully even with some other developing nations in the global knowledge economy whose driving force is heavy financial investment in the appropriate level of education.
3.2.3 Financial Mismanagement and Its Effects In spite of the underfunding which has characterised higher education in Nigeria, even the little that was allocated was either misappropriated, diverted to other less important areas because of lack of prioritisation.
Data on which financial planning would have been based are either not available and when they are, they are grossly falsified in order to cover up some shady deals by the officials.
There are so many areas competing for attention in terms fund allocation.
Quite often, extraneous considerations are brought into play in allocating funds.
For example, scholarships which are supposed to be awarded on merit are given out on the basis of several unconventional criteria like political and ethnic cleavages.
For the same reasons, many universities are overstaffed especially in the non-academic areas where the ratio of 1:3 academic/non-academic ratio stipulated by the NUC is flouted by many universities.
One of the serious effects of this state of affairs is the deplorable state of the physical infrastructures in our universities nationwide.
Many of the lecture theatres, students’ hostels and even office blocks are in very bad state of repair and dilapidation.
Government officials and university staff would need to imbibe the spirit of accountability especially with respect to the management of public funds.
4.0 CONCLUSION Funding education in adequate proportion is a worldwide problem.
This problem is particularly severe in developing countries because of their low level of development and the serious limitations in their annual revenue profiles.
In Nigeria, the problem is accentuated by a number of factors among which are – the uncontrolled expansion in all levels of education.
The carrying capacity for the next higher level of the system is unable to cope with the output at the lower level.
For instance, the secondary schools do not have the capacity to absorb all the graduates from the primary levels who desire to proceed to secondary school because finances are simply not adequate to provide the required facilities.
The same is true for the higher level of education where the problem is very acute as the data from the admission agencies indicate.
153 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS Apart from exploring alternative sources of funds for our education, some sense of accountability needs to be injected into the financial managers of the education funds.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit, the nature of education funding has been examined with a focus on the major sources.
This was followed by the management of education funds, pointing out that in almost all the levels of education, financial managers have not demonstrated any mastery of the strategies for financial planning.
The widespread malaise of corruption appears be very common among government and university officials.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
List the major sources of funds for education in Nigeria.
2.
Describe any three of them in some detail.
3.
What should be the criteria for the allocation of funds to education?
4.
Describe some subtle ways by which officials divert education government funds.
5.
What effects does the mismanagement of funds have on educational development?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Adesina, D. (2009).
“Nigeria at 49” in The Guardian Newspaper Thursday.
October 1.
Pp.18.
Egonmwan, J.A.
(2002).
“Refocusing Education in Nigeria: Philosophy and Policy Issues”.
In Refocusing Education in Nigeria: A Book of Readings.
Oriafo, S.O.
et.
al.
(Eds) Benin City: Da-Sylva Influence.
Fafunwa, A. Babs (1991).
History of Education in Nigeria New Edition.
Ibadan: NPS Educational.
Ibadin, V.O.
(2004).
“Economics and Financing of Education” in N.A.
Nwagwu et al (Eds).
Organisation and Administration of Education: Perspectives and Practices.
Benin City: Festa Press.
154 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNIT 4 PROBLEMS RELATING TO ACCESS AND QUALITY ASSURANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Problems relating to Access 3.2 Problems relating to Opportunity 3.3 Problems relating to Quality Assurance 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTION One problem which many nations have had, all through their developmental odyssey, is that of equal access and opportunity to education.
Richard Shall in his foreword to Paulo Freire’s Pedagogy of the Oppressed had observed that: • There is no such thing as a neutral education process.
Education either functions as an instrument which is used to facilitate the integration of the younger generation into the logic of the present system and bring about conformity to it, or it becomes “the practice of freedom”, the means by which men and women deal critically and creatively with reality and discover how to participate in the transformation of the world.
But the access and opportunity for that education has always been a problem to contend with.
The situation has also been compounded by the nature of the society itself.
All societies are by nature stratified in all matters.
In the possession, control and exercise of power, the society is intricately stratified.
In the acquisition and possession of wealth, the society is stratified.
Even in the mundane accident of birth, there are embarrassing inequalities.
All these contribute in various ways to the problems which nations face with regard to access and quality assurance in higher education practices worldwide.
155 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to: • suggest practical ways by which the problems of access and quality assurance in our higher education system can be solved.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Problems relating to Access Nigeria is a very populous nation.
As at the last head count, the population of Nigeria was put at 150 million, with over 48 percent of them in need of education very urgently.
Over the past 30 years, Nigeria has repeatedly preached egalitarianism, using education as the driving force.
This is because even at the international level, education has proved to be the greatest investment of economic, social, political and cultural development.
By this means, education is able to open the way – providing access – for individuals to acquire education.
To stamp authority into such efforts, the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and the revised 1998 National Policy on Education.
In a very clear terms, the national educational goals as a free and democratic society, just and egalitarian society, united, strong and self - reliant, dynamic economy and a land of bright and full opportunities for all citizens.
The question is, how much of these laudable ideals has the system provided access for their achievement by the average Nigerian?
University education or even higher education generally has been universally recognised as the most potent means for human capital and capacity building, an important vehicle for implementing national development.
But why has Nigeria been unable to take the necessary advantage of these provisions which have led to restrictions of access?
According to Sofoluwe (2002:391), the economic depression that manifested in the seventies and spread into the 1980 had very telling effects on the entire university system.
Many projects which had been slated for execution were in most cases underfunded as a result of the fundamental crises originating from the sudden slump in the oil market which Nigeria depended upon.
Added to this was the continuous and prolonged military misadventure into governance with all their disdain for higher education.
When governments are not stable, then the citizens are restricted in a number of ways including access to education.
3.2 Problems relating to Opportunity The opportunities for higher education have been very greatly hampered by the few places available in the universities.
On the surface, Nigeria has over 100 universities both public and private.
But available records 156 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS from the office of the Joint Admissions and Matriculation Board indicate that over one million candidates apply for admission yearly with room for only about 30 percent.
The problem of admission is a very thorny one.
Sofoluwe also argues that it was a problem of planning, based on simple input-output models.
The exponential growths at the lower levels of the education laden have not been adequately provided for at the tertiary level with the result that a good number of qualified people are being denied the opportunity for higher studies.
What, for instance, is the explanation for the varying cut-off marks for different states and different students?
The universal concept of the university system has been negated by the restrictive Nigerian inventions of “quota system”, “federal character”, educationally disadvantaged areas”, “backward states” “ecologically disadvantaged regions” and all other politically motivated opportunity denying concepts.
3.3 Problems relating to Quality Assurance The issue of quality assurance permeates all facets of the university system from the quality of students who are admitted, the quality of staff who teaches and administer the state of the curriculum and to the quality of the graduates that the system produces.
Universities have been seen as community, collegial, bureaucratic, and complex organisations where administration is expected to permeate every segment of the operation of the organisation.
The life-wire of the university is determined by the vision, dedication and integrity of the managers.
In managing and administering universities for quality assurance, experienced staff- administration and academic, with internationally reputable academic credentials are to be appointed as principal officers.
But unfortunately, in the recent past, in the history of Nigerian universities, such appointments are made through the orchestrated affirmatives action in favour of the “son of the soil” syndrome.
The end result is the general absence of commitment and dedication on the part of staff with all the telling efforts on quality in all its ramifications.
Accountability is equally closely connected to quality assurance.
There is, therefore, the need for continuous and permanent assessment in all sectors of the university system.
The occasional and sporadic activities of the National Universities Commission are not enough for quality assurance.
There should be an in-built self-evaluation system on a regular basis to compare the level of achievement with the objectives which have been set from the onset.
157 EDA809 COMPARATIVE STUDIES IN HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS 4.0 CONCLUSION The problems which university systems face are a myriad – and they all require the collective efforts of all stakeholders – parents, students, lecturers, the administrators and above all the proprietors of the universities.
5.0 SUMMARY In summary, therefore, the issues of access and quality assurance in higher education in Nigeria would require very coordinated planning and effective execution of the plans.
Areas of special attention will include admissions, appointments and promotion of staff, programme (academic) evaluation, finance and many others.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Suggest ways and measures to ensure access and quality assurance in the higher education system in Nigeria.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING Isyaku, K. (2002).
“Refocussing and Remoulding Excellence in relation to selected indices of tertiary education in the new millennium” in Oriaifo, S.O.
et al.
(eds) 2002.
Refocusing Education in Nigeria: A Book Readings.
Benin City: Da-Sylva Influence.
Sofoluwe, A.O.
(2002).
“Re-focusing University Education in the 21st Century” in Oriaifo, S.O.
et al (eds) (2002) op.
cit.
Freire, P. (1990).
The Pedagogy of the Oppressed.
New York: Continuum Publ.
Coy.
158
