 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDA755 COURSE TITLE: Responsibility and Accountability in Educational Management  EDA755 COURSE GUIDE COURSE GUIDE EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Course Team Dr. N. S. Okoroma (Developer/Writer) – RSUST Dr. E. C. Ibara (Co-Developer/Writer) – NOUN Dr. J. K. Adeyemi (Editor) – UNIBEN Dr. U. M. Okonkwo (Programme Leader) – NOUN Dr. E. C. Ibara (Coordinator) – NOUN Mr. T. O. Ajadi (Co-Coordinator) – NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ii  EDA755 COURSE GUIDE National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No 5 Dar-es-Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II – Abuja Tel: 09-6711929 Fax: 01-271-2665 e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-329-7 All Rights Reserved iii EDA755 COURSE GUIDE CONTENTS PAGE Introduction............................................................................ 1 What You Will Learn In This Course................................... 1 Course Aims........................................................................... 2 Course Objectives.................................................................. 2 Working through this Course................................................. 3 Course Materials..................................................................... 3 Study Units ........................................................................... 4 Assignment File...................................................................... 4 Presentation Schedule............................................................. 4 Assessment.............................................................................. 5 Tutor Marked Assignment…………...................................... 5 Final Examination and Grading.............................................. 5 Course Marking Scheme......................................................... 5 Course Overview…………………………………………….
6 How to Get the Best from the Course...................................... 7 Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials.............................................. 7 Summary.................................................................................. 7 iv Introduction EDA755: Responsibility and Accountability in Educational Management is a third Semester Course.
It is a two (2) Credit Units Course.
It is a 700 level elective course available for all students offering M.Ed (Educational Administration and Planning).
The course will expose you to an understanding of the concepts and activities involved in responsibility and Accountability in educational management.
It will assist you to be able to apply some of the principles of responsibility and accountability to actual school setting.
The course consists of 17 units plus a Course Guide and they include: The Nature of Educational Management; Functions of Educational Management; Activities of Educational Management; Provision and Maintenance of Fund and Facilities by Educational Managers; Organization and their Importance; Organizational Structure and Characteristics; Characteristics, Types and Patterns of Organizational Structure; Record Keeping in Educational Institutions; Nature of Responsibility in Organization; Responsibility and Educational Management; Responsibility and Educational Policy Formulation; Planning and Implementations; Accountability in Education; Role of Accountability in School System; Areas of Accountability in Education; and Strategies for Improving Accountability in Education.
This Course Guide tells you briefly what the course is about, what course materials you will be using, and how you can work your way through these materials.
In addition, it suggests some general guidelines for the amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in order to complete it successfully.
It gives you guidance in respect of your Tutor-Marked Assignments, which will be made available in the Assignments’ file.
There will be regular classes that are related to the course.
It is also advisable for you tom attend these tutorial sessions.
What You Will Learn in This Course The main aim of Responsibility and Accountability in educational management is to acquaint you with important principles of responsibility in educational institutions and strategies for improving accountability in education.
The context in which these principles and strategies are used will be discussed.
Responsibility attributes and areas of accountability in the school system will be explained.
EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT The nature, functions and activities of educational management will also be highlighted.
The procedure and importance of record keeping in educational institutions will be examined.
Organizational structure and characteristics; and provision and maintenance of funds and facilities by educational managers are part of what you will learn in this course.
Course Aims The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: To build in you the capacity to understand and apply the principles and concepts of responsibility and accountability in the school organization.
Specifically this course will aim to: 1.
Describe the nature, functions and activities of educational management; 2.
Examine organizational structure and their importance; 3.
Describe the provision and maintenance of funds and facilities by educational managers; 4.
Examine the nature of responsibility in organization; and 5.
Describe line of accountability in education and strategies for improving accountability in education.
Course Objectives In order to achieve the aims set out, the course has a set of objectives.
Each unit has specific objectives which are usually at the beginning of each unit.
You should read these objectives before your stuffy of the unit.
The comprehensive objectives of the course are stated below.
By meeting these objectives you should have achieved the aims of the course as a whole.
On successful completion of the course you should be able to: 1. explain the nature of educational management; 2. identify what is educational management; 3. define management; 4. explain the functions of educational management; 5. describe the activities of educational activities; 6. identify the sources of funding education; 7. describe the concepts of budgeting and accounting; 8. explain the characteristics of organizations; 9. describe the nature of organizational structures; 10. describe the importance of record keeping; 11. identify statutory records that should be found in schools; iiEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT 12. understand the concept of responsibility; 13. explain managerial responsibility; and 14. relate responsibility to the funding of education; 15. describe the role of decision making to responsibility assignment; 16. explain how educational leadership affects matters pertaining to responsibility; 17. explain the factor of responsibility on education policy formulation; 18. explain the factor of responsibility on education planning; 19. explain the factor of responsibility on implementation of education programmes; 20. describe the new dimension of leadership; 21. identify the leadership characteristics that enhance responsibility accomplishments; 22. define accountability; 23. describe the nature of accountability in education; 24. identify the issues in accountability in education; 25. explain accountability within the school system; 26. state the problems of accountability within the school system; 27. discuss the problems of accountability; 28. describe the types of accountability; 29. identify areas of accountability; 30. identify the dimensions of accountability in school; 31. describe the line of accountability in education; and 32. identify the strategies for enhancing accountability in education.
Working Through This Curse To complete this course, you are required to read each study unit and read the set of books and other relevant materials that you may lay your hands on.
Each unit contains self-assessment exercises, and at certain points in the course you will be required to submit assignments for assessment purposes.
At the end of the course, there is final examination.
The course should take you about 17 weeks to complete.
Below, you will find the list of all the components of the course.
The Course Materials The main components of the course are: 1.
Course Guide 2.
Study Units 3.
References 4.
Assignments’ File iiiEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT 5.
Presentation Schedule Study Units There are 17 Study Units divided into four modules as follows: Module 1 Unit 1 The Nature of Educational Management Unit 2 Functions of Educational Management Unit 3 Activities of Educational Management Unit 4 Provisions and Maintenance of Funds and Facilities by Educational Manager Module 2 Unit 1 Organization and their Importance Unit 2 Organizational Structure and Characteristics Unit 3 Characteristics, Types and Patterns of Organization Unit 4 Record keeping in Educational Institutions Module 3 Unit 1 The Nature of Responsibility in Organization Unit 2 Responsibility and Educational Management Unit 3 Responsibility, Educational Policy Formulation, Planning and Implementation Unit 4 Responsibility Attributes for Successful responsibility Accomplishment Module 4 Unit 1 Accountability in Education Unit 2 The Role of Accountability in School System Unit 3 Areas of Accountability in the School System Unit 4 Line of Accountability in Education Unit 5 Strategies for Improving Accountability in Education Assessment File Assignment file will be made available to you.
The file will contain details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
Presentation Schedule ivEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT The dates for submission of all assignments will be communicated to you in due course.
Also to be communicated to you are details of completing the study units and dates for examination.
Assessment There are three aspects of assessment of the course.
First is the exercise, second is the tutor marked assignments, and the third is the written examination.
The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance with the headlines stated in the presentation schedule and the assignment file.
The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count 30% of your total course marks.
At the end of the course you will need to sit of r a final examination of about three hours.
This examination will count for 70% of your course marks.
Tutor-Marked Assignment There are seventeen tutor marked assignments in this course.
You only need to submit four assignments.
You are encouraged to submit all the four assignments as the best three out of the four assignments will be considered.
Each of the best three assignments counts 10% towards total course marks.
Assignment questions for the units in this course are contained in the Assignment File.
You will be able to complete your assignments from the information and materials contained in your reading, references and study units.
Final Examination and Grading The final examination for course EDA755 will be of three hours duration and has a value of 70% of the total course grade.
The examination will consists of questions that will reflect the type of self- testing, practice-exercise and tutor marked problems you have previously encountered.
All areas of the course assessed.
Course Marking Scheme Assessment Marks Assignment 1 – 4 Four assignments, best three of the four, counts 10% each = 30% of Course mark Final Examination 70% of Overall Course marks Total 100% of Course work vEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT Course Overview The table given below brings together the units, the number of weeks you should spend to complete them, and the assignments that follow them.
Unit Title of Work Weekly Assessment Activity (End of Unit) Course Guide Module 1 1 The Nature of Educational 1 1 Management 2 Functions of Educational Management 1 1 3 Activities of Educational Management 1 1 4 Provisions and Maintenance of Funds 1 1 and Facilities by Educational Manager Module 2 1 1 Organization and their Importance 1 1 2 Organizational Structure and 1 1 Characteristics 3 Characteristics, Types and Patterns of 1 1 Organization 4 Record keeping in Educational 1 1 Institutions Module 3 1 1 The Nature of Responsibility in 1 1 Organization 2 Responsibility and Educational 1 1 Management 3 Responsibility, Educational Policy 1 1 Formulation, Planning and Implementation 4 Responsibility Attributes for 1 1 Successful responsibility Accomplishment Module 4 1 1 Accountability in Education 1 1 2 The Role of Accountability in School 1 1 System 3 Areas of Accountability in the School 1 1 System 4 Line of Accountability in Education 1 1 5 Strategies for improving 1 1 Accountability in Education Revision 1 Total viEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT How to Get Most from the Course 1.
Read the Course Guide thoroughly 2.
Organize a study schedule.
Note the time you are expected to spend on each unit and the assignments that are relate to the units.
3.
Once you have created your own study schedule, do everything to stick to it.
4.
Read the unit thoroughly.
5.
Do all you assignments and submit to the course tutor.
6.
Prepare your self for examination.
Facilitators/Tutors and Tutorials There are 17 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course.
You will be notified of the dates, time and location of these tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your facilitator/tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group.
Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments, keep close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter, and provide assistance where necessary.
The following might be circumstances in which you would find help necessary.
Contact your tutor if: (1) You do not understand any part of the study unit or the assigned readings; (2) You have difficulty with the self test or exercises; and (3) You have a question or problem with an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should endeavour to attend tutorials.
This is the only chance to have face to face contact with your tutor and also an opportunity to ask questions which are answer instantly.
You can raise any problem encountered in the course of your study.
To gain the maximum benefits prepare a question list before attending them.
You will learn a lot from participating actively in discussions.
Summary The Course EDA755 intends to introduce you to responsibility and Accountability in Educational Management.
The Course Guide has given you an overview of what to expect in the Course.
viiEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT We wish you success in the course and hope that you will find it interesting.
viiiEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT Course Code EDA755 Course Title Responsibility and Accountability in Educational Management Course Team Dr. N. S. Okoroma (Developer/Writer) – RSUST Dr. E. C. Ibara (Co-Developer/Writer) – NOUN Dr. J. K. Adeyemi (Editor) – UNIBEN Dr. U. M. Okonkwo (Programme Leader) – NOUN Dr. E. C. Ibara (Coordinator) – NOUN Mr. T. O. Ajadi (Co-Coordinator) – NOUN NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA ixEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT National Open University of Nigeria Headquarters 14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way Victoria Island Lagos Abuja Office No 5 Dar-es-Salaam Street Off Aminu Kano Crescent Wuse II – Abuja Tel: 09-6711929 Fax: 01-271-2665 e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng URL: www.nou.edu.ng Published by: National Open University of Nigeria 2008 First Printed 2008 ISBN: 978-058-329-7 All Rights Reserved xEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION MANAGEMENT CONTENTS PAGE Module 1 …………………………………………………… 1 Unit 1 The Nature of Educational Management …….... 1 Unit 2 Functions of Educational Management …….….
6 Unit 3 Activities of Educational Management …….….
9 Unit 4 Provision and Maintenance of Fund and Facilities by Educational Managers …….…….. 12 Module 2 ………………………………………………….
16 Unit 1 Organizations and Their Importance ………….. 16 Unit 2 Organizational Structure and Characteristics ….
19 Unit 3 Characteristics, Types and Patterns Organizational Structure …………………...… 22 Unit 4 Record Keeping in Educational Institutions….. 26 Module 3 ………………………………………………….
30 Unit 1 The Nature of Responsibility in Organization 30 Unit 2 Responsibility and Educational Management 34 Unit 3 Responsibility, Educational Policy Formulation, Planning and Implementation 40 Unit 4 Responsibility Attributes for Successful Responsibility Accomplishment …………….. 44 Module 4 ……………………………………………….. 48 Unit 1 Accountability in Education ………………….
48 Unit 2 The Role of Accountability in School System 52 Unit 3 Areas of Accountability in the School System 56 Unit 4 Line of Accountability in Education ………… 60 Unit 5 Strategies for Improving Accountability in Education …………………………………….
64 xiNoneEDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT MODULE 1 Unit 1 The Nature of Educational Management Unit 2 Functions of Educational Management Unit 3 Activities of Educational Management Unit 4 Provision and Maintenance of Fund and Facilities by Educational Managers UNIT 1 THE NATURE OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Management 3.2 Definition of Educational Management 3.3 Issues in Educational Management 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Reading1 1.0 INTRODUCTION This course is related to the nature and scope of educational management with special focus on responsibility and accountability.
The focus of this unit is specifically on the nature of educational management.
This basic knowledge will enable the student to better relate the concepts of responsibility and accountability to the broad spectrum of educational management.
The unit objectives as stated below have specifically provided what you should learn in this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the nature of educational management  define management  define educational management  discuss the issues in educational management.
1EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Management The definition of the term varies according to perceptions and purposes.
Scientific management and behavioural management are two forms of management that have been identified.
The first is referred to as quantitative management and the second as qualitative management.
Behavioural management is the body of knowledge devoted to the understanding of human and organizational behaviour.
It is this form of management that we are interested in.
Radnor and Neal (1973) agree that management science (which focuses on techniques and models) cannot achieve much without collaboration with behavioural management.
Management in their views may be seen as an art or a science.
The definitions of Terry (1977) and Sherlekar (1984) give better expositions to the concept of management.
According to Terry “Management is a distinct process consisting of planning, organizing, actuating, and controlling performed to determine and accomplish stated objectives by the use of human beings and other resources” (p. 4).
On the other hand, Sherlekar (1984) states that “management is the guidance, leadership and control of the efforts of a group of people toward some common objectives.
In order words, management is a social (interactional) and economic process involving a sequence of coordinated events known as planning, organizing, coordinating and controlling.
The advantage of applying management principles lies in the fact that resources are better harnessed leading to the achievement of desired objectives faster and more efficiently.
Although the words management and administration are often used interchangeably it is of benefit to point out the difference between the two regardless of how slight.
As stated earlier, management concerns itself with activities (planning, organizing, directing, co-ordinating etc) sequentially coordinated with the aim of achieving desired goals.
Administration on the other hand, is a facilitative function by serving as a means by which formal goals are achieved through human efforts that are positively directed and harnessed.
Miewald (1978) describes administration as the capacity to harness the many and often conflicting social energies (forces) in an organization in such a positive manner that they operate as a unity and therefore facilitate organizational goals achievement.
The important roles of administration in every organization have been highlighted by Okoroma (2007).
According to him, administration: 2EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (i) exists to influence decisions; (ii) influences the results to be achieved, the direction to be pursued and priorities to be recognized within the organization; (iii) has a decisive impact on strategies selected and utilized to reach predetermined objectives; (iv) determines in large measure organizational climate and working relationship; and (v) helps to make personnel employed more productive.
3.1 Definition of Educational Management The education industry involves planning and the formulation of educational policies, which translate into educational programmes.
The end result is to achieve educational goals.
Educational Management is the process of bringing men and materials together in order to ensure effective and functional teaching and learning in school.
According Okeke, et al (1985), educational management is a process which is concerned with using methods, principles, and practices to achieve the objectives of education.
What is involved in this process is the careful arrangement and utilization of available human and material resources with the efforts geared toward the achievement of educational objectives.
The inadequacy of resources available to education has made their effective management very imperative so that the formal school system can be qualitatively sustained.
Peretomode (2001) and Nwankwo (1987) have tried to distinguish between Educational Management and Educational Administration.
According to Peretomode, Educational Management is concerned with the planning and formulation of educational policies or the application of the processes of planning, organizing coordinating, controlling and evaluating human and material resources or objectives.
The systematic arrangement of human and material resources and programmes that are available for education and the careful and systematic use of them within defined policies to achieve educational goals fall within the periphery of Educational Administration (Nwankwo, 1987).
3.2 Issues in Educational Management The quality of every society is largely predicated on the quality of its educational system.
In the light of the apparent constraints on educational resources their efficient utilization for maximum result need not be overemphasized.
The claim that education alone takes much of Nigeria’s resources has not reflected in the quality of educational services in Nigeria.
The dismal situation of education can either be blamed on Government’s inability to make adequate resources available 3EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT or on educational managers’ failure to effectively manage the scare resources.
Apparently, no organization can live above its leaders in terms of goal achievement.
The effective management of education at all levels requires committed educational managers who are adequately motivated to perform their duties.
Adequate resources are a necessity for the achievement of results.
Only professionally trained personnel in education will be suitable to cope with the enormous challenges in the industry, which unfortunately, experiences high demand for its services without commensurate inflow of resources.
This poor situation places the educational manager in a dilemma of some sort.
In order for him to succeed in the pursuit of educational goals, adequate personnel (especially teachers), facilities and funds will continue to be necessary.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What do the terms management and educational management mean?
4.0 CONCLUSION Educational management is the application of the process of planning, organizing, coordinating, controlling and evaluating of human and material resources necessary for the achievement of educational goals.
Its main concern is to ensure that teaching and learning are effective, especially in the school system.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has introduced you to the concepts management and educational management.
You have seen that all activities in the educational system are influenced by educational managers.
The next unit will discuss the functions of educational management.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Management is the process of sequentially coordinating various organizational activities with the aim of achieving desired goals.
Educational management is therefore the sequential co-ordination of activities to enhance functional realization of the overall educational objectives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the issues of concern to educational management.
4EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Miewatd, Robert D. (1978).
Public Administration: A Critical Perspective.
New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co. Nwankwo, J. I.
(1987).
School Administration and human Learning in School in E. B. Ezewu (ed,) Social Psychological Factors of Human Learning in School.
Onitsha: Leadway Books Limited.
Okeke, B. S. et al (1985).
A Hand Book on Educational Administration.
Owerri: New African Publishing Co. Ltd. Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management, Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition).
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
Peretomode, V. F. (2001).
Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspectives.
Lagos: Joja Educational Research and Publishers Limited.
Radmor, M. & R. Neal (1973).
The Progress of Management Science Activities in Large U. S. Industrial Corporations.
Operations Research, 21 (March – April) 427 – 450.
Sherlekar, S. A.
(1984).
Modern Business Organization and Management: System-Based Contingency Approach to the Organization and Management of Business.
Girgaon Bombay: Himalaya Publishing House (Third Undated Edition).
Terry, George R. (1977).
Principles of Management.
Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin Inc. 5EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 FUNCTIONS OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 20 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Functions of Educational Management 3.2 Policy Making and Programme Planning 3.3 Procurement and Development of Personnel 3.4 Curriculum Development 3.5 Student or Pupil Administration 3.6 Management of Funds and Facilities 3.7 Maintenance of Effective Interrelationship with External Agencies 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The focus of this unit is mainly on the functions and activities of Educational Management.
At the end of this unit you will appreciate in a greater dimension the scope of educational management.
The extent of the knowledge you will acquire from this unit is specified in the following objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the functions of Educational Management  describe the activities of Educational Management.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Functions of Educational Management The main purpose of Educational Management is to ensure that the objectives of education are achieved through a good educational system.
This is made possible through the following functions of educational management.
6EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.2 Policy Making and Programme Planning This involves the formulation of educational policies that guide various educational programmes.
Policies on education give rise to education plans followed by implementation.
3.3 Procurement and Development of Personnel This function enables educational managers to identify and meet the staff needs of schools in the educational system.
Various agencies of education such as the schools boards and Ministries of Education facilitate the procurement of various school personnel.
3.4 Curriculum Development This involves the development of appropriate curricula or school activities.
The function covers the selection of appropriate subjects, text books, work scheduling, use of teaching aids and facilities, teaching methods as well as methods for evaluating school and student progress.
3.5 Student or Pupil Administration This function involves the selection, orientation, placement, guidance and counselling of students so that every student will have adequate opportunity and motivation to learn.
Educational managers are required to encourage extra-curricula activities such as games, clubs, student unions as well as ensure adequate school health services, facilities and discipline.
3.6 Management of Funds and Facilities Adequate funds, personnel and facilities are necessary for the effective functioning of every educational system.
The educational manager has an important function of sourcing funds with which to procure personnel and facilities.
A sizeable percentage of such funds are provided by Government which has an exclusive duty to finance education, especially at the basic level.
3.7 Maintenance of Effective Interrelationship with External Agencies This function recognizes the fact that a school is a social organization with an open system.
The school can only thrive well by maintaining effective interrelations with its immediate communities and external agencies.
This is important because every school is a part of a society and created by the society for its continued existence.
Consequently, the 7EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT school needs the society for a healthy existence (Okoroma, 2007).
Such agencies include NUC, NBTE, WACE, NECO, UNESCO, etc.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What specific functions do education managers perform?
4.0 CONCLUSION The main purpose of educational management is to ensure that education objectives are achieved through a good school system.
This is facilitated through effective of educational management as listed and discussed.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learned the functions of educational management.
You have seen that adequate funding is critical to the success of the educational system.
In unit 3 we shall discuss the activities of educational management.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Education managers facilitate the formulation of educational policies, identify and meet personnel needs, embark on curriculum development, help to appropriately guide and counsel students, and source for and manage available funds.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the functions of educational management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition) Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
8EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 ACTIVITIES OF EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Activities of Educational Management 3.2 Planning 3.3 Organizing 3.4 Directing 3.5 Co-ordinating 3.6 Staffing 3.7 Controlling 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on the activities of educational management and is intended to acquaint you with the main functions carried out by educational managers.
It is expected that by the conclusion of this unit you should become familiar with the following unit objectives 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  identify the various activities of educational management  explain these activities.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Activities of Educational Management Generally, management or administration is carried out through a number of interdependent activities which are collectively referred to as the administrative process.
Campbell et al (1975) have defined the administrative process “as the way by which an organization makes decisions and takes actions to achieve its goals”.
Gullick and Urwick (1937) have listed the administrative activities to include Planning, Organizing, Directing, Staffing, Co-ordinating, Controlling, and budgeting.
Let us discuss them separately and in some details.
9EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.2 Planning Planning involves preparation in advance before an action is taken.
It is an activity that requires the ability to think, to analyze and to make decisions.
Among the advantages of planning are: i. Emergencies are reduced ii.
Crises can be avoided iii.
More efficient methods of operation can be used iv.
Effective organizational control achieved v. Ensures direct focus on set objectives 3.3 Organizing This involves the separation of work into task.
It is a systematic means by which human and material resources are differentiated and effectively coordinated to attain set goals of an institution.
Organizing makes possible the establishment of the formal structure of authority.
It is such structure that facilitates the arrangement of work into smaller units, which make objectives easily realizable.
3.4 Directing This is concerned with ensuring that every employee performs at his best in an effort to maximize the achievement of organizational goals.
In order to succeed in this effort the manager must appreciate the strengths and weaknesses of the employees.
Directing ensures that incompetent employees are shown the way out, while their competent colleagues are adequately motivated.
The activity of directing also facilitates the effective and efficient implementation of institutional policies and decisions.
3.5 Coordinating This is the process by which the various groups of people and the various operations or duties in an organization are appropriately matched so as to achieve the desired results.
This function facilitates the effective use of human and material resources as wastages are reduced and job satisfaction enhanced.
3.6 Staffing This involves the recruitment and development of human resources.
The structure of every organization usually specifies the jobs available and these must be staffed with competent personnel to enable the organization achieve its goals.
Effective forecasting and planning of 10EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT personnel are important in order to adequately meet the staff needs of an organization.
3.7 Controlling This is concerned with the appraisal and examination of results.
Through this function, weaknesses and errors are exposed and steps are taken to prevent their re-occurrence.
In fact the main interest of this function is to see that organizational activities produce results that are in line with goals and objectives.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE What are the activities of educational managers that determine the success of the educational system?
4.0 CONCLUSION The activities of educational management have been identified to be planning, organizing, directing, co-ordinating, controlling, and staffing.
It is the effective handling of these activities that determine the success of the educational system.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been acquainted with the activities which educational managers embark on to ensure the success of education.
You have seen that each of the activities is as important as the other.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Generally, administrative activities involve Planning, Organizing, Directing, Co-ordinating, Controlling and Staffing.
Thus, educational management involves the interplay of these activities to achieve educational goals.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Discuss the activities of educational management.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management, Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition).
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
11EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 PROVISION AND MAINTENANCE OF FUNDS AND FACILITIES BY EDUCATIONAL MANAGERS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 School Financing 3.2 School Budgeting 3.3 School Accounting 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses specifically on how funds and facilities are provided to run educational institutions through budgetary procedures.
It also concerns itself with how the funds and facilities are utilized in the interest of education through the processes of accounting and auditing.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the unit objectives below: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  identify the sources of funding education  describe the concepts of budgeting and accounting.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 School Financing The provision of funds and facilities are critical to the success of every educational administrator.
The financing of education has become very challenging because of the increasing demand for educational services and the ever declining resources available to education.
The main ways for financing education are through levies, fees, taxes and revenues from oil explorations.
These sources are presented below: 12EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT - Pay As You Earn (P.A.Y.E) Taxes: these taxes are paid by all salary earners and are deducted at source making evasion very unlikely.
- Property tax: these are taxes paid by property owners on various categories of property.
- Rates: these are taxes paid for the use of such facilities as water, electricity, roads, airspace etc.
They are usually collected by Local Government Councils.
- Education Levies: individual schools through their Parents Teachers Association, Board of Councils etc can embark on education levies to raise funds for education.
- School Fees: these are fees charged students as their contributions to keeping the schools functional.
For Government institutions school fees are kept as moderate as possible in view of the fact that the tax payer is principally responsible for financing education - Endowments: these are usually special funds and financial assistance to educational institutions in place by private individuals with genuine concern for the development of education.
- Donations: some individual philanthropist and organizations voluntary donate to the course of educational development.
Such gestures may be in cash or kind.
- Commercial Ventures: some educational institutions embark on meaningful commercial activities to source for extra funds to run the schools.
Some have succeeded immensely.
3.2 School Budgeting In his efforts to source for funds, the educational administrator must have a budget to guide him.
A budget is a statement of income and expenditure.
It is the estimated cost of running a on educational institution.
It is important that every school administrator must have a realistic budget at all times as such budget reflects the kind of programmes that will be run by the school.
A school budget involves principally the following four elements: i planning educational programmes; ii getting the funds for running the programmes; iii spending the funds appropriated for the education plan; and iv evaluating the results within the given period which is usually one academic year.
13EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT Every school budget has the following components: - educational plan, which spells out the educational programmes that will be embarked upon.
- expenditure plan, which gives a blue print of how available funds will be utilized to meet set objectives; and - financial plan, which give a graphical picture of how and from where the expected funds will come.
The Importance of Budgetary Practices in School Management School budgets are important for the following reasons.
i a budget projects the anticipated educational programme for the next academic year; ii the budget indicates the main sources of funds for the implementation of educational programmes; iii a budget is a guide to the school administrator to enable him to be focused and judicious in the allocation and utilization of funds; and iv it provides information to the public on the kind of educational programme planned for their children.
3.3 School Accounting One of the duties of a school administrator is to collect and account for all funds made available for the development of education.
Basically, the school administrator plays the following roles in school business management: (a) collects revenues from many sources; (b) spends the money collected in the interest of education; and (c) keeps proper account of all income received and all expenditures made to the satisfaction of the public that support education The Purpose of Good School Accounting System The following reasons account for the importance of attached to school accounting: (i) protection of public funds from misuse; (ii) to ensure a systematic way of relating expenditure to attained educational goals; (iii) it serves as an objective method of appraisal for the educational administrators and other personnel; (iv) budgets form sound basis for administrative decisions; 14EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (v) it provides protection for the image and reputation of personnel who collect and disburse funds; and (vi) It helps to meet the legal requirement for reporting basic information especially on financial matters (Okoroma, 2007).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the sources of funds for education 4.0 CONCLUSION The financing of education is an important funding of school administration especially with respect to funds procurement.
Budgeting and accounting are equally important for effective school administration 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been introduced to the concepts of school financing, accounting and budgeting.
You have seen that education is financed by the public through tax payments.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Education is capital intensive and is funded exclusively by the public through various sources.
The main sources of funding education include taxation, endowment, school fees etc.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the following concepts; financial education, education budgeting and school accounting.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition).
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
15EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT MODULE 2 Unit 1 Organizations and Their Importance Unit 2 Organizational Structure and Characteristics Unit 3 Characteristics, Types and Patterns Organizational Structure Unit 4 Record Keeping in Educational Institutions UNIT 1 ORGANIZATIONS AND THEIR IMPORTANCE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Organization 3.2 The Importance of Organizations 3.3 Characteristics of Organizations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit explores to understand the nature of organizations, their importance and characteristics.
The following objectives will be the focus of this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain the concept of organizations  appreciate the importance of organizations  identify the characteristics of organizations.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Organization Any form of management can only take place in an organization, which comprises of both formal and informal aspects.
Etzioni (1964) has 16EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT defined an organization as a social group that has been deliberately constructed for the purpose of achieving certain specific goals.
A formal organization can be defined as: (i) an association of persons who come together to pursue certain predetermined goals; (ii) an institution established to achieve a goal; and (iii) a framework or mechanism to enable a group of persons to work effectively so as to achieve set goals through integrated group efforts.
There are three essential elements of an organization, namely: (1) people, (2) common goal, and (3) common means, necessary for a joint effort to attain the set goal.
Various economic resources are required for the success of every organization.
These are usually referred to as the 5Ms namely (1) men, (2) money, (3) machines, (4) materials and (5) management (Sherlekar, 1984).
3.2 Importance of Organizations Organizations are of great importance to every society for the following reasons.
The following are some known organizations: schools, hospitals, churches, companies, government, agencies, trade unions and the prisons.
Etzioni (1964) rightly observed that every individual from birth to death moves from one organization to the other.
In fact, society is basically made up of organizations.
This observation led Etzioni to conclude that “our society is an organizational society”.
Among the reasons that accord much importance to organizations are: (i) the problems usually created by the aggregation of various individuals in pursuit of a common goal can only be solved by an organizational setting which has rules and regulations; (ii) most human beings achieve their goals faster and more completely when they are part of organizations; (iii) organizations help individuals to achieve their goals in life; and (iv) organizations have synergistic effects.
This implies that individuals working separately cannot be as productive as those working together in an organization.
3.3 Characteristics of Organizations Organizations are usually identified by the following characteristics: - objectives are clearly defined; 17EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT - a definite structure and a system for providing leadership is assured; - activities are properly coordinated; - personnel policies such as selection, promotion, development, welfare are provided; - stability and flexibility of actions are imperative; - actions are depersonalized; - co-operation and willingness are necessary; - machinery for planning and decision-making must be effective; and - periodic evaluation of programmes and policies is necessary.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define and discuss the importance of an organization 4.0 CONCLUSION Every form of management can only take place in an organization.
Organizations facilitate the pulling together of individual efforts so as to achieve collective and individual goals faster through an effective management of available resources.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has exposed you to the concept of organizations and their importance.
You have also learned their characteristics, which make them unique.
Let us now go and study their structures, which facilitate tasks accomplishments.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Organizations are component parts of every society as they facilitate human activities.
An organization has been defined as “an association of persons who come together to pursue certain predetermined goals.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Define an organization and state its importance.
18EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Etzioni, A.
(1964).
Modern Organizations, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc. Shelekar, S. A.
(1984).
Modern Business Organization and Management: System.
Based Contingency Approach to the Organization and Management of Business.
Girgaon Bombay: Himalaya Publishing House.
19EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND CHARACTERISTICS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Nature of Organizational Structures 3.2 Characteristics of Organizational Structures 3.3 Qualities of a Good Organizational Chart 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is intended to acquaint you with the structure that enables an organization to accomplish stated goals.
By the end of this unit you should become familiar with the following unit objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe the nature of organizational structures  identify the characteristics of organizational structures  know the qualities of a good organizational structure.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Nature of Organizational Structures Every organization has a structure which enables its members accomplish common tasks.
The structure of an organization refers to the logical relationship of functions among people for getting work done more effectively.
An organizational structure or chart shows a hierarchy of levels of authority, accountability relationship, activities and communication channels.
The structure shows the network of relationships between various people, positions and roles in the organization.
20EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.2 Characteristics of Organizational Structures The following characteristics are typical of organizational structures or charts: - each box represents a position occupied by an individual in the organization; - the higher the position the higher the authority associated with it; - each lower position is accountable to the position above it; and - There is a relationship between the position, individuals and roles in the organization.
3.3 Qualities of a Good Organizational Chart Every good organizational chart usually possesses these qualities among others: (i) effectiveness- this is the ability of the structure to accomplish the purposes of the organization which are usually both economic and social.
(ii) efficiency- this is the ability of the structure to accomplish organizational tasks with the minimum use of resources.
(iii) division of labour- a good structure allows work to be divided into smaller units and functions so as to encourage specialization.
(iv) scope of Authority and responsibility – there should be a clear definition of the scope of authority and responsibility as concerns the various positions and staff in the organization.
(v) chain of Command – this relates to the channels of communication connecting the hierarchy of authority.
It shows the relationship between one position or office and another.
(vi) channels of Contact- this has to do with the different areas or boundaries of interaction between the various levels, positions and individuals in the organization.
(vii) control- this is the proper organization of records and resources as well as maintaining standards and measurement of performance.
(viii) perpetuation – a good organizational structure must contain a hierarchy of positions that gradually increase in responsibility and preparation of individuals for leadership.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define the term organizational structure.
21EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION Organizational structures show the logical relationships of various functions among people for getting work done more effectively.
The characteristics and qualities of good structures were discussed and noted as critical to the success of a good structure.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has highlighted the importance of organizational structures to the success of every organization.
You have seen that various functions at different levels exist in a structure and that the effective handling of these functions is critical to success.
The next unit will give more expositions to the subject.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Organizational structure shows the levels of relationships in terms of authority, accountability and channels of communication, including other activities as they exist in an organization.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the nature of organizational structures 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management, Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition) Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
22EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 CHARACTERISTICS, TYPES AND PATTERNS OR ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Characteristics of Administrative Structure 3.2 Types of Organizational Structure 3.3 Patterns of Organizational Structure 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on the characteristics of administrative structure, types and patterns of organizational structure.
The knowledge you are expected to acquire from this unit is specified in the following unit objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you are expected to:  identify the characteristics of administrative structures  identify the various types of organizational structures  describe the various patterns of organizational structures.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Characteristics of Administrative Structure Administrative structure is characterized by the following elements: (a) Departmentalization: this is the creation of units or departments in an organization so as to facilitate efficiency through a better management of resources.
Departmentalization involves: (i) division of activities and functions into groups for effective handling; (ii) the presence of relationships between the various workers in the unit; and 23EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (iii) the provision of conditions which make the unit perform.
Advantages of Departmentalization - Resources are saved from unnecessary duplication of activities.
- Important activities are easily recognized and given attention.
- Effective control and co-ordination are assured.
- Division of labour through specialization is encouraged, which results in higher productivity.
(b) Centralization: this is the concentration of organizational activities and authority at the centre.
Most decisions, including departmental ones are made at the centre.
In other words, delegated authority is withheld.
(c) Decentralization: this involves the dispersal of organizational activities and the delegation of authority for decision-making to various parts of an establishment.
Decentralization enables important decisions to be made easily with unnecessary reference to the central authority.
(d) Span of Control: this is also known as “span of supervision” or “span of management”.
The principle of span of control states that there is a limit to the number of individuals that an administrator or manager can effectively control”.
Span of control relates to the delegation of authority and assignment of responsibilities.
Its main concern is on the number of workers a manager can effectively supervise.
(e) Delegation of Authority: this is the giving of permission to somebody or a group of people to exercise some authority within certain conditions.
Delegation of authority entails giving members of the organization certain jobs to perform along with the necessary authority to execute the assignment.
3.2 Types of Organizational Structures (i) Line Organization Structure: this is also called the scalar structure.
A line organization permits a clear line of authority to be maintained from the highest to the lowest level within the structure.
Each member is held directly responsible to only one superior.
(ii) Staff organization Structure: in every organization there are staff functions.
Such functions are usually advisory.
Staff officers or personnel essentially advise line officers on 24EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT professional matters.
Staff officers have no functional authority; cannot give command or enforce compliance.
They only provide specialized services to the line authority in the organization.
Staff personnel by their training can offer advice and make recommendations.
(iii) Line – and – Staff Organization Structure: this type of structure provides for both line and functional authority.
This structure gives opportunities to staff officer to play more active roles in assisting line officers especially when the activities of the line departments increase in number and complexity and, therefore, become more pressing.
(iv) Committee Form of Organization: many organizations create committees to facilitate employee communication, participation, and decision-making.
Committees can be used to appraise employee suggestions, to resolve grievances, and to select candidates for promotions.
In fact, Committees can be used to solve various problems in the organization.
3.3 Basic Patterns of Organization Every organizational structure shows some functional relationships as presented below: (i) Horizontal Organization: This pattern of organization is characterized by the officers functioning at the same level.
Examples are deans of faculties’ heads of departments, and teachers who have responsibilities that are horizontal in nature.
(ii) Vertical Organization: This pattern of organization has responsibilities that are vertical in nature.
Examples are deans of faculties who occupy higher positions than heads of departments.
(iii) Vertical – Horizontal Organization: This type of organization responsibilities are arranged both vertically and horizontally.
The positions are at different levels of the structure.
(iv) Tall Organization: This pattern of organization is characterized by many distinct authority levels from the lowest to the highest levels of employees.
(v) Flat Organization: In this type of organization the distance between one authority level and the other is usually short.
25EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the types and patterns of organizational structure.
4.0 CONCLUSION The characteristics of administrative structure have been noted to include departmentalization, centralization, decentralization, span of control and delegation o f authority.
These elements influence the achievement of organizational goals.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been taught the features of administrative structure.
You have seen that these features are critical to the success of the structure and indeed, the entire organization.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Administrative structure has the following elements: departmentalization, Centralization, Decentralization, span of control, delegation of authority.
These features have effect on the effectiveness of the structure.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Mention and explain the features of administrative structures 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management, Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition).
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
26EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 RECORD KEEPING IN EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 School Records 3.2 Types of school Records 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is concerned with school records, which are statutorily required in every educational establishment.
It advances unassailable reasons why record keeping is of great value to educational institutions.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the unit objectives below: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe the importance of record keeping  identify statutory records that must be found in schools.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 School Records Education laws generally require that certain statutory records be maintained in every educational institution.
School records provide permanent evidence of a person’s transactions while in the school.
Since every educational institution must serve as a permanent reference point from which information can be obtained on individuals, record keeping consequently becomes an important function of the educational administrator.
It is to be noted that both statutory and non-statutory records are usually kept in schools because of their relevance in providing useful information for both the school and interested members of the general public.
A good records system serves as an invaluable information bank 27EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT from which many benefit as long as they are reliable.
Okeke et al (1985) opine that records must be honestly and faithfully kept in order to make them reliable and serve as a means of diagnosing individual student’s problems and recording his achievements.
Importance of School Record Keeping The following are some of the reasons why school records are necessary: - record keeping is one of the most important aspects of school administration; - school records provide useful information to employers of labour who may want to recruit graduates for jobs; - the provide information to parents on the general performance of their children; - school records are required by the Inspectors of Education to enable them make objective assessments of pupils and staff performances; and - school records are useful when data about available human and material resources are required perhaps for planning.
3.3 Types of School Records The following are among the statutory records required in every educational institution: 1.
Admission Register: this is a record of all the pupils/students enrolled into the institution each year.
It usually contains the following information.
(i) admission number, (ii) name of pupil (iii) date of birth , (iv) date of Enrollment, (v) name of parent guardian, (vi) address of parent/guardian (vii) previous school attended, (viii) date of leaving (ix) reason for leaving, and (x) occupation after leaving.
2.
Attendance Register: it shows daily class attendance.
Each class normally has a register where the names of students are recorded 3.
If Time Table: this is the daily guide for the school.
It shows the subject taught in each class, the time allotted to each subject per period, the number of period per day and the extra- curricular activities.
28EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 4.
Weekly Diary: the school diary has two parts, namely: (i) scheme of work, and (ii) record of work.
5.
Scheme of Work: this is usually drawn from the school syllabus and indicates the mapped out themes that are to be covered in each subject area.
6.
Record of Work: this records the work already done on a weekly basis.
It is different from the scheme of work which shows the work to be done on a weekly basis.
7.
Visitors Book: all the very important visitors received in the school must be recorded in the visitor’s book 8.
Corporal Punishment Book: a corporal punishment is the punishment of last result and must therefore be recorded each time it is melted out.
Other school records include academic records of students, continuous assessment records, inventory records, health book minute’s book, the school syllabus, the teachers’ service manual etc.
These records help to strengthen the performance of a school and its administrator.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the concept of recording keeping.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Record keeping in school is statutory requirement.
The keeping of records is one of the important aspects of school administration.
Various types of school records are in existence.
4.0 CONCLUSION Record keeping has been identified as very important because of the immense information they engender in enhancing the activities of education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been exposed to the importance of record keeping.
You have seen that every educational institution is expected to maintain some statutory records.
29EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and explain the types of statutory records excepted to be maintained in schools.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okeke, B. S. et al (1985).
A Hand Book on Educational Administration: Owerri: New African Publishing C. O. Ltd. 30EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT MODULE 3 Unit 1 The Nature of Responsibility in Organization Unit 2 Responsibility and Educational Management Unit 3 Responsibility, Educational Policy Formulation, Planning and Implementation Unit 4 Personality Attributes for Successful Responsibility Accomplishments UNIT 1 THE NATURE OF RESPONSIBILITY IN ORGANIZATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Responsibility 3.2 Managerial Responsibility 3.3 Nature of Authority and Delegation 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit is designed to acquaint you with the nature of responsibility in the organization.
The definition of responsibility and its scope is presented.
Responsibility as it concerns both the manager and the employees will be discussed.
Let us now see the objectives expected to be covered by this unit.
2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should become familiar with the following objectives:  understand the concept of responsibility  explain managerial responsibility  explain the nature of authority and delegation.
31EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Responsibility Responsibility has been defined as “an obligation of an individual to perform the functions assigned to him to the best of his ability and in accordance with stated directives” (Okoroma, 2007, p. 33).
This definition is made clear by the following point.
Employees within an organization have responsibilities that are determined by the duties of their respective jobs and by the assignments given to them by their superior officers.
When jobs (duties) are assigned to subordinates by their superiors the subordinates have obligations to perform such duties.
It is this obligation that is called responsibility (Chruden and Sherman, 1980).
The responsibility of managing an organization is usually assigned to a chief executive who may be a managing director, principal, provost, vice-chancellor or commissioner.
3.2 Managerial Responsibility The success of an organization depends on the chief executive who, in our context here, is simply referred to as a manager.
The manager has the responsibility of overseeing (managing) the organization having been so mandated by a superior body such as board of trustees, Governing Council etc.
Organizational responsibilities are usually enormous and challenging.
The manager is therefore expected to divide and assign portions of his responsibilities to his subordinates who occupy various levels in the organization’s structure.
Even as the manager assigns various, responsibilities to various employees he remains the ultimate owner of all the organizational responsibilities.
Regardless of the number of levels of reassignment of responsibilities by subordinates to other subordinates it is still the manager that will be held responsible for the results of the various activities.
In order, therefore, for subordinates to exercise their responsibilities effectively and enhance the manager’s performance it is advised that subordinates be adequately developed and motivated.
3.3 Nature of Authority and Delegation In the context of management, authority is the right to take action in directing and coordinating the activities of others for the purpose of 32EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT achieving the goals of an organization.
It also involves the right to use discretion in handling activities.
Authority is normally in the position an individual is occupying and not in the individual as a person.
It provides the force that binds the various units or departments of an organization together.
Through the process of delegation, authority is passed downward within the organization and divided among subordinate personnel.
In every organization individuals can only rightfully exercise that authority that has been delegated to them, which must essentially be equal to the responsibilities assigned to them.
On the other hand, individuals must be held responsible for exercising properly or improperly the authority that has been delegated to them.
It is in the interest of every organization that the capacities of employees are fully utilized.
This can be achieved by giving employees more autonomy and greater roles in decision making.
This will enable management and, indeed, the organization to benefit more from the knowledge, experience, and mental capacities of its employees.
In order for authority delegation to be successful, managers need to identify duties that their subordinates can carry out most readily.
Effective delegation can be achieved when there are control measures to determine how well subordinates are able to cope with the authority and responsibilities assigned to them.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define organizational responsibility 4.0 CONCLUSION Responsibility has been defined as an obligation of an individual to perform the functions assigned to him to the best of his ability.
This implies that employees within an organization have responsibilities that are determined by the duties of their respective jobs and by the assignments given to them by their superior officers.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been introduced to the concept of employee and managerial responsibilities.
You have seen that responsibilities must go with some authority in order to obtain desired results.
33EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Responsibility in the organization is an obligation of an individual to perform the functions assigned to him to the best of his ability and in accordance with stated rules and regulation.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the nature of responsibility and authority in the organization.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Chruden, H. J.
& Sherman, Jr. A. W. (1980).
Personnel Management: The Utilization of Human Resources (6th Edition).
Cincinnati, Ohio: South-Western Publishing Co. Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management, Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition).
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
34EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 RESPONSIBILITY AND EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Responsibility and Funding of Education 3.2 Responsibility and Educational Decision Making 3.3 Responsibility and Educational Leadership 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on Responsibility and Educational Management.
The unit provides an understanding in the relationship between responsibility and the concept of educational management.
The specific unit objectives which you should learn are stated below: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  relate responsibility to the funding of education  describe the role of decision making to responsibility assignment  explain how educational leadership affects matters relating to responsibility.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Responsibility and Funding of Education The educational system expects very much from its operators (academic and non-academic personnel).
Each individual in the system has an obligation to perform the functions assigned to him to the best of his ability and in accordance with stated objectives.
To whom much is expected much should also be given.
The degree of education funding in Nigeria and the responsibilities assigned to the operators of the educational system leave much to be desired.
The absence of adequate teachers, facilities and other resources make the realization of educational goals difficult.
The situation could never have been better 35EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT since, the various governments whose responsibility is to fund education adequately has not been able to leave up to this task.
To expect the functionaries in the school system to stand up to their responsibilities is obviously unrealistic.
Scholars like Atakpa (2001), and Okala (2001) have shown concern over the funding of education and the enormous responsibilities assigned to the educational system which lack compatibility 3.2 Responsibility and Educational Decision Making Decision making is an important function of educational administrators.
Necessary decisions must be made on scarce educational resources.
A reasonable sense of responsibility must necessarily be demonstrated in making such decisions.
Since decisions are usually implemented co- operatively those whose responsibility it is to participate in the implementation programme need to be adequately considered and if possible encouraged to make some inputs.
With such a disposition implementation challenges are usually easier to overcome.
The commitment to implementation responsibilities by individuals becomes enhanced.
It is in consideration of the importance of responsibility in decision making that the following principles have been proposed.
(i) The Humanitarian Principle: this principle considers three elements namely; Democracy, Justice, and Human relations as critical in any decision making venture.
Democracy: - this element recognizes individual worth.
Since education is a social organization the democratic principle advocates the inclusion of all affected interests in the factors that ultimately influence decisions.
Justice: - in educational management the principle of Justice implies adherence to established rules and regulations without victimization.
The emphasis of justice on equity, fairplay and absence of favouritism.
Human Relations: - this principle lays emphasis on the diverse dispositions of the individuals in an organization.
It considers their various backgrounds, needs, expectations, emotions and interests and urges the administrator to find ways to getting the best out of such people.
The principle recognizes the importance of dealing with organization’s members with respect, courtesy, kindness, consideration, confidence, trust, open- mindedness and sincerity.
36EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (ii) The Prudential Principle: this principle advocates the exercise of prudence or sound judgments in handling all educational matters.
Prudence in educational administration involves such elements as economy, responsibility, loyalty and proper method of staffing.
Economy: - the limited educational resources call for a careful application so as to obtain the best results.
This principle recommends checks and balances, accurate accounting, proper planning, and optimal utilization of educational resources.
Responsibility and Authority: - this principle demands that all responsibilities assigned to any staff must be accompanied with commensurate authority to exercise it.
This implies that every staff to whom some responsibilities has been assigned to must be appropriately supported with the means to carry out such responsibilities successfully.
In order to avoid a situation of non- performance this principle emphasizes that responsibilities and authority must be commensurate.
Loyalty: - loyalty is seen as very essential for the existence and achievement of the goals of an organization.
According to this principle employee loyalty can better be achieved if organizational objectives and goals are clearly defined to remove any doubts as to the organization.
Employment of Staff: - the principle of staffing requires the administrator to ensure that “the right person is in the right job.
It emphasizes that in the employment of staff, there is need for careful selection, appointment, placement, job description, training, retraining, etc.
For a maximum effect, these activities should be devoid of bias, nepotism, tribalism or favouritism.
(iii) The Fundamental Principles: this principle is also referred to as “the universal principle” of administration.
Its concern is on the following elements; responsibility, delegation of authority, and communication.
Responsibility: - this principle states that at all times and at all levels of the organization, each person in his own area and capacity must act responsibly.
Furthermore, each person in the organization must recognize his sphere of influence and act within it, performing dutifully and with a sense of seriousness the tasks of the individual’s position and responsibilities.
The principle also requires every person to consider the positions and 37EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT responsibilities of others above and below him/her in the organizational structure so as to avoid conflict with the functions of others while performing their duties.
Delegation of Authority: - this principle recognizes that no one person can operate effectively in a complex organization such as the school.
The principle of delegation therefore demands that departmental functions be entrusted to a person, or group of persons on the basis of location, expertise, position or roles.
Delegation of authority reduces the negative effects of centralization and enhances efficiency.
Communication: - adequate flow of information is the concern of this principle.
The principle believes that effective communication enhances the abilities of individuals in the organization to adequately carry out their responsibilities.
3.4 Responsibility and Educational Leadership Educational managers provide educational leadership in school organizations.
They assign responsibilities to various members of the organization as well as facilitate the accomplishment of these responsibilities.
The success or otherwise of organizational activities largely depend on the leadership.
Whether responsibilities are appropriately assigned and authority appropriately delegated is a function of available leadership.
The behavioural approach to leadership is pertinent for consideration here.
The behavioural elements involved are autocracy, democracy and laissez-faire.
Autocracy: - This is the leadership style in which the leader has the tendency to control the behaviour of employee by relying on the power attached to his position.
This approach kills the initiatives of employees and may not perform their responsibilities happily and satisfactorily.
Democracy: - The democratic approach to leadership places emphasis upon the human beings whose co-operation and dedication are necessary for the achievement of organizational objectives.
The approach emphasizes strong group relationships and encourages effective communication as a tool for solving individual and organizational problems.
No doubt, this approach has the potency to bring about the faster achievement of assigned responsibilities in organizations.
Laissez-faire:- This is a leadership approach that permits subordinates to do what they choose.
It does not emphasize checks and 38EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT discipline, which makes it less suitable for the successful accomplishment of organizational responsibilities.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Responsibility in the organization is an obligation of an individual to perform the functions assigned to him to the best of his ability and in accordance with stated directives.
Explain the concept of responsibility in relation to educational management.
4.0 CONCLUSION The various managerial activities in the organization are facilitated through adequate funding, which is the responsibility of Government.
The educational manager has the responsibility to provide good leadership for the effective utilization of the resources.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learned that the funding of education is the responsibility of the Government just as the effective administration of such resources is the responsibility of the educational manager.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Responsibility in the organization is an obligation of an individual to perform the functions assigned to him to the best of his ability and in accordance with stated directives.
Educational management involves the effective co-ordination of educational resources.
These resources are provided by the government whose responsibility it is to do so.
The educational manager has a responsibility to effectively co-ordinate the use of the resources.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the concepts of decision making and educational leadership in relation to organizational responsibility.
39EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Atakpa, R. A.
(2001).
Evaluating Resources for Business Education Programmes.
NABE Book of Readings Vol.
1, No.
1, p.133, October.
Okala, O.
(2001).
Government Funding of Business Education Programmes in Public Schools: A Case Study of Rivers State of Nigeria.
African Journal of Agricultural Teacher Education* (1/2) 55 – 62.
Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management, Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition).
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
40EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 RESPONSIBILITY, EDUCATIONAL POLICY FORMULATION, PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Responsibility and Educational Policy 3.2 Responsibility and Educational Planning 3.3 Responsibility and Implementation of Educational Programmes 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on responsibility, education policy formulation, educational planning and implementation.
It will explore the place of the concept of responsibility in determining and influencing positive factors that affect education policies, plans and implementation strategies.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the unit objectives below: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe the factor of responsibility on education policy formulation  explain the factor of responsibility on of education planning  explain the factor of responsibility on implementation of education programmes.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Responsibility and Educational Policy Formulation An educational policy is a public policy decision made by the society through its representatives to guide its educational activities.
A policy serves as a general guide which gives the direction of decisions.
It is the responsibility of policy makers in education to ensure the formulation of viable and implementable policies.
The failure of the people with responsibility to formulate good policies has usually resulted in 41EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT educational policies that have failed to stand the test of time.
A good example is the 6 – 3 – 3 – 4 system of education which has existed since 1977 without making any appreciable impact in Nigeria.
3.2 Responsibility and Educational Planning The articulation of education plans is the responsibility of educational planners.
Planning presupposes the determination of an activity in advance of action.
If planning is responsibly carried out the other functions will become easy.
To plan responsibly implies taking into cognizance the factors that facilitate good and implementable education plans such as educational objectives and goals, realistic data, adequate information on available resources for educational activities etc.
In order for education plans to be responsibly made the following factors must be duly focused on: The Planning Environment:- every plan is to take care of a particular environment with its peculiar social, political, economic, technological and legal constraints.
Plans run into implementation hitches when these environmental factors are not adequately taken into account at the planning stage.
Social factors:- every environment has people with varying attitudes, desires levels of education and intelligence, customs etc which determine their dispositions to education plans during implementation.
Education planners can only be said to have dutifully accomplished their responsibility if these factors have been accounted for in their plans so that implementation will not be hindered.
Political Factor:- it is agreed that man is a political being and, so, no society is left without its political antecedents.
In view of this, education planners are expected to be on guard and to be aware that their plans will always go through the crucible of politics.
If political factors are not duly considered the responsibility to produce time-tested plans would become unrealizable.
Financial Constraints:- this factor often renders most efforts in planning education fruitless and responsibility unaccomplished.
Education planners are wiser and successful if they give maximum attention to the financial resources required for the implementation of their plans while it is on the drawing board.
Statistical Problem:- most education planners are unable to accomplish their planning responsibility because they plan with incorrect data which are highly out of tune with reality.
Obviously, plans will be better 42EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT implemented if accurate statistical data are sourced and used in planning.
3.3 Responsibility and Implementation of Educational Programmes The greatest challenge that has faced the education sector is the problem of the adequate implementation of education plans.
Those whose responsibility it is to ensure effective implementations are head teachers, principals, provosts, rectors, vice-chancellors, staff of the Ministries of Education and the Schools Boards.
Unfortunately, one factor or the other has always hindered the effective implementation of any conceivable plan or programme.
It is for this reason that the implementers of education plans have always found it difficult to accomplish their responsibilities as delegated authority is often inadequate.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Explain the concepts of educational policy, planning and implementation in relation to organizational responsibility.
4.0 CONCLUSION Educational policies, education plans, and plan implementation are various responsibilities that are sensitive to certain environmental factors, which must be taken cognizance of.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learned that educational policies, planning and implementation are critical responsibilities that must be carried out responsibly in the interest of the entire educational system.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Educational policies are guides to educational activities and facilitate the production of education plans.
These plans constitute the blue print for programme implementation.
The responsibilities for each activity are bestowed on the various levels of educational managers.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the concepts of policy formulation, educational planning and implementation in relation to organizational responsibilities.
43EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition).
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
44EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 PERSONALITY ATTRIBUTES FOR SUCCESSFUL RESPONSIBILITY ACCOMPLISHMENTS CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 New Dimensions in Leadership 3.2 Leadership Characteristic for Responsibility Accomplishments 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on leadership as a key factor to success in the educational administrator’s ability to carry out assigned responsibilities to an acceptable end.
The unit introduces new dimensions in leadership that are capable of enhancing responsibility accomplishments.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as provided by the unit objectives below: 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe the new dimensions of leadership  identify the leadership characteristics that enhance responsibility accomplishments.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 New Dimensions in Leadership No doubt, much has been said about on the subject of leadership.
One point has repeatedly been appreciated by both leadership experts and non-experts alike.
It is that no activity can record any success beyond the commitment of the leaders that direct such activities.
Even in the matter of carrying out assigned responsibilities in organizations, it is the leadership factor that determines the measures of success.
It is for this reason that Okoroma (1999) identifies and proposes four elements of 45EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT leadership, which the author believes can make a significant difference in the theories and practices of leadership.
Below are the elements.
(i) Selfless Service: it is only selflessness that can make for effective leadership, which will in turn nurture selfless followership.
Co-operatively, both leaders and follower will be able to carry out assigned responsibilities with a great measure of success.
(ii) Compassion for People: this is a leadership attribute that considers the welfare of the masses as very paramount.
A compassionate leader will show commitment in the service of the people rather than service to self.
An organization’s members are carried along in things that are beneficial; they also show commitment in seeing to the success of whatever responsibilities that may have been apportioned to them.
(iii) Show of Love: the most important instrument of a good and successful leader is his ability to show love to the people under his care.
It is to be noted that almost all other qualities required for effective leadership are subsumed in love for the followership.
The absence of love breeds apathy as the leader will fail in his duties and so, lose the respect and commitment responsibility accomplishments may hang on to balance.
(iv) Reasonableness and Moderation: the act of a leader will be useful only to the extent to which his actions are reasonable and moderate.
An action is said to be reasonable if it is exercised with reasons; it is just, not extreme or excessive it is sensitive and inexpensive.
A moderate action is one that is kept within bounds or reasonable limits.
A leader with these disposition will obvious elicit devoted and committed followership that can facilitate the success of any assigned responsibilities in the organization.
3.2 Leadership Characteristics for Responsibility Accomplishment Some leadership attributes that can enhance the ability of a leader to mobilize his followers toward responsibility accomplishment include (i) Integrity:- this is the constant adherence to the truth regardless of the interests that may involve.
(ii) Diplomacy:- this is the ability to handle matters without generating in controversies, while carrying various interests along as much as possible.
46EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (iii) Objectivity and Open Mindedness:- this is the disposition of a leader to take criticisms, which will enable him to improve on his performance this is an asset in the management of responsibilities.
(iv) Decisiveness:- this is the quality of a leader to take decisions on available human and material resources.
In doing so he must take some calculated risks.
(v) Democratic Attitude:- a good leader is one who is able to carry his followers along in the pursuit of organization’s interests and goals.
It is to be noted that these attributes among others are important in determining the ability of a leader to assign responsibilities to his followers and have the opportunity having such responsibilities accomplished.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the new dimensions of leadership.
4.0 CONCLUSION Leadership attributes such as selfless service, compassion for people, show of love, reasonableness and moderation are new dimensions that have added impetus to other known concepts.
They have the capacity to enhance the accomplishment of assigned responsibilities.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been introduced to the concept of personality attributes and new dimensions, of leadership.
You have seen that good leadership attributes can enhance the accomplishment of assigned responsibilities.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Personality attributes have been identified as crucial to leadership.
The new dimensions of leadership are attributes that have added impetus to leadership effectiveness with the capacity to enhance responsibility accomplishments.
47EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the various personality attributes that can enhance leadership effectiveness.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Okorom, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management, Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition).
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
Okoroma, N. S. (1999).
The Use and Abuse of Power.
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
48EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT MODULE 4 Unit 1 Accountability in Education Unit 2 The Role of Accountability in the School System Unit 3 Areas of Accountability in the School System Unit 4 Line of Accountability in Education Unit 5 Strategies for Improving Accountability in Education UNIT 1 ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Definition of Accountability 3.2 The Nature and scope of Accountability in Education 3.3 The Issues in Accountability in education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This course is related to the nature and scope of Accountability in Education.
The unit focuses on the nature of Accountability in Education.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the unit objectives below: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe the nature of Accountability in Education  define Accountability  identify the issues in Accountability in Education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Definition of Accountability 49EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT The Longman modern English dictionary defines accountability as “the quality or state of being accountable; while it defines accountable as answerable; bound to give an explanation; able to be explain.
Both “accountability” and “accountable” are derived from the verb to “account”, which means to give reasons or to answer for one’s actions or behaviour.
Accountability in education is concerned with determining what records are to be kept, how such records will be maintained in term of the procedures, methodology and forms to be used, recording classification and summarization of activities of events analyzing and interpreting the recorded data, preparing and issuing reports and statements which reflect conditions as of a given time (Adams et al, 1967).
3.2 The Nature and Scope of Accountability The term accountability connotes different things to different organizations.
In the political scene, the term suggests that any governmental entity functions as a part and not independent of a larger political system.
The ensuring interaction subjects the entity to some controls, which cause it to render a general accounting of and for its actions.
In the area of education, accountability is usually linked to the management of the scarce resources of education to ensure the prudent and efficient utilization of available resources (human and material) for the accomplishment of the stated goals of education.
According to Knezevich (1975) the scope implies “financial accountability, budgeting, fiscal auditions and reporting to satisfy the existing demands of the public”.
In his own view, Presthus (1975) notes that accountability is geared towards ensuring democratic responsibility to the public at large.
Accordingly, he maintains that every public official is subject to two types of accountability namely (i) fiduciary accountability, and (ii) accountability for the exercise of proper judgment in making fiscal decisions.
3.3 Issues in Accountability in Education Educational accountability has elicited much attention as a result of the following reasons.
(i) The school system, which facilitates the objectives of education, is a creation of the society which must maintain checks and balances.
50EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (ii) Education is generally funded by society through taxes, which must necessarily exercise some control in all facets of the educational process.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Define the term accountability in education 4.0 CONCLUSION Accountability in education has been defined as answerability to one’s actions in the educational system.
It is the state of being accountable to the stakeholders in education and accountable for the resources used in education.
5.0 SUMMARY This unit has introduced the concept of accountability in education as well as the issues in educational accountability.
Let us go to unit 2 where we shall discuss the role of accountability in the school system.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Accountability in education is concerned with keeping records of school activities and using such record to assess or appraise institutional performance in relation to the achievement of predetermined objectives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the nature and scope of educational accountability 51EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Adams, D. K. Hill, O. M. Lichtenberger, A. R. Perkins, J.
A. and Shaw P. S. (1967).
Principles of Public School Accounting, State Educational Records and Reports Series: Handbook IIB, Washington D. C., US Government Printing Office, P. 260 Knezevich, S. J.
(1975).
Administration of Public Education.
New York: Harper and Row Publishers Prestuhus, R. (1975).
Public Administration.
New York: The Ronald Press Company.
Tawari, O. C. (1995).
The Importance of Accountability in the School System paper presented at a Workshop organized by the Rivers State Primary education board.
52EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 2 THE ROLE OF ACCOUNTABILITY IN THE SCHOOL SYSTEM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Role of Accountability within the School System 3.2 Importance of Accountability 3.3 Problems of Accountability in the School system 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on the role of Accountability in the School system.
The unit is to guide educational administrators appreciate the need for accountability in the school system.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the unit objectives below: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  explain accountability within the school system  state the problems of accountability in the school system  mention the problems of accountability in the school system.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Role of Accountability Within the School System Education plays an important role in the general developmental process of every society.
Education renders services that are of both economic and non-economic nature.
The private services that education renders include: (i) transmission of literacy; (ii) creation of a politically enlightened electorate; and (iii) addition to knowledge through research.
The services education renders to the public sector of the economy has to do with increased productivity through the adequate training of 53EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT human resources and the consequent effective utilization of human and material resources.
Siberman (1970) and Moorish (1972) believe that crisis in education can be avoided by reducing the increasing lack of public confidence in the school system.
According to them this can be done by: (i) appropriate definition of educational goals; (ii) avoiding multiple and conflicting educational goals; and (iii) ensuring that educational goals are compatible.
Having established consistency in educational goals, the school system is expected to ensure that such goals are realized.
Unfortunately in Nigeria for example, pupils have consistently performed poorer in public examinations such as the Senior School Certificate Examinations; the completion rates of schooling is rapidly decreasing, many children drop out of school; indiscipline among students is on the increase; there is increased frustration on the part of employees due to lack of incentives.
These problems are related to the inefficiencies of the school system to keep up with the demands and innovations of a changing society.
The identified problems and numerous others in the school system make accountability very necessary to keep the system in good stead.
Furthermore, the accountability skills help to strengthen the school system with the ability to provide a meaningful account or report to acknowledge that educational objectives identified and intended to be achieved with a given resources have been achieved.
Accountability in the school system enhances increased efficiency in school transactions.
Educational accountability ensures a rational critical and a systematic analysis of activities of the education production process with the aim of verifying that educational goals have been efficiently or wastefully achieved.
3.2 The Importance of Accountability One of the duties of the school administrator is to collect and account for all funds made available for the development of education.
This is in addition to preparing the school budget.
The business management of a school deals with: (a) revenue collection from many sources; (b) spending the money collected in the interest of education; and 54EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (c) keeping proper records or account of all incomes received and all expenditures made to the satisfaction of the public that support education.
The following are the reasons for accountability in the school system: (i) protection public funds from misuse; (ii) protection of public property from abuse; (iii) to insure that educational goals are committedly pursued and achieved; and (iv) to check wrong actions or deeds in the educational system.
3.3 Problems of Accountability in Education Accountability in education is faced with a number of problems including the following: 1. vague definition of educational goals, which makes implementation and goal attainment difficult; 2. inability of the school system to keep up with the innovations dictated by the needs of the changing society; 3. the sub-groups in every society with their varied needs, values, interests, desires, aspirations and cultures which often tend to conflict with one another make the enforcement of accountability in the school system ineffective; and 4. school administrators are unable to command absolute leadership responsiveness from their administrative subordinates and this constitutes a hindrance to the practice of accountability.
(Kaufman, 1973) ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the role of accountability within the school system 4.0 CONCLUSION It has been noted tat accountability in the school system helps to protect public funds from misuse as well as fostering a committed pursuit of educational goals by administrators.
55EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have been acquainted with the role of accountability within the school system.
You have seen that accountability in education is faced with many problems.
Let us now turn to Unit 3 and look at the areas of accountability in the school system.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Educational accountability enhances teaching and learning in the school system.
It forestalls the misuse of public funds and facilities.
Accountability in the school system also enhances the realization of institutional objectives.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Enumerate some of the problems of accountability in the school system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Kaufman, H. (1973).
Administrative, Feedback Monitoring Subordinates Behaviours Washington, DC: Brookings.
Moorish, I.
(1972).
The Sociology of Education: An Introduction.
London: George Allen and Urwn Ltd. Siberman, C. (1970).
Gises in the Classroom.
New York: Random House.
56EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 3 AREAS OF ACCOUNTABILITY IN THE SCHOOL SYSTEM CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Typologies of Accountability 3.2 Accountability for Things 3.3 Accountability for Deeds 3.4 Accountability for cash 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION The focus of this unit is on the types and areas of accountability.
It guides you to appreciate the dimensions of accountability in education.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the unit objectives below: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  describe the types of Accountability  identify areas of Accountability.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Typologies of Accountability The task of accounting, auditing and reporting are associated with the business of formal education.
The concept of educational accountability is used to describe (a) the nature, sources and amount of revenue inputs, (b) the appropriation of revenues to various programmes and (c) the actual expenditures in these programmes.
These data are then related to educational outputs or benefits so that the actions are able to understand the financial implications of educational decisions.
Consequent upon the above, educational managers are accountable to the public.
In order to aid the process of accountability in education, administrators of the educational system should among others: 57EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (i) identify the goals and objectives of the educational system; (ii) determine the validity and relevance of such goals and objectives; (iii) assess periodically how fully such goals and objectives have been achieved; (iv) identify which factors assisted or hampered goal achievement in the system; and (v) design strategies to improve performance.
There are five major types of accountability in education.
These are (i) product/output accountability, (ii) input accountability, (iii) process accountability, (iv) goal accountability, and accountability for means and enabling environment for education.
Product Accountability:- this has to do with the evaluation of teaching effectiveness and the extent to which the teacher achieves the expected outcome of teaching and classroom interaction.
Input Accountability:- this concerns the evaluation of the extent of adequacy of supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the system’s operations.
Goal Accountability:- Relates to the evaluation of the selection, definition and the prioritization of the goals and objectives of education.
Accountability for Means and Enabling Environment: - this refers to the evaluation of the extent to which the general public shows their co-operation in providing the required resources for education as well as creating the right atmosphere for educational pursuit in the state.
Durosaro(2002).
Furthermore, Okoroma (2007) has identified four areas of educational accountability as presented below: (i) Accountability for Cash:- the educational manager is required to account for every cash he receives for the development of education in his school.
This requirement is a factor that enables him to exercise utmost carefulness in the disbursement of public funds.
(ii) Accountability for Things:- all physical facilities of the school must be accounted for.
The use of such facilities as school buildings, vehicles, libraries, laboratories, personnel etc should be adequately accounted for.
58EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT (iii) Accountability for Actions:- all actions of every member of an organization must be accounted for by the educational manager including his own actions.
(iv) Accountability for Results:- Every organization has goals and objectives it has set for accomplishment.
The educational administrator has a duty to ensure that expected results are achieved.
In fact, the quality of result obtained from any educational efforts will show whether expected goals are attained or not.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the types of accountability in education 4.0 CONCLUSION Areas of accountability in the school system include accountability for cash, accountability for actions, accountability for things and accountability for results 5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learned the types of accountability in education.
You have seen that there are four areas of general accountability which are also applied to education.
Let us now turn attention to Unit 4 and discuss the line of accountability in the school system.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Different types of educational accountability exist in schools.
Five types have been identified namely input accountability.
Goal accountability, product accountability process accountability, and accountability for men.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT List and discuss the types of accountability in the school system.
59EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Durosaro, D. O.
(2002).
Accountability in Education: the Case of Nigeria.
Management of Nigerian education: Project and School Plant Maintenance.
Okoroma, N. S. (2007).
Perspectives of Educational Management, Planning and Policy Analysis (2nd Edition).
Port Harcourt: Minson Publishers.
60EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 4 LINE OF ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Dimensions of Accountability in education 3.2 Fine of Accountability in Education 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on the line of accountability in the educational system.
It guides you to better appreciate the hierarchy of accountability as concerns the various role players in the system.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified in the objectives below: 2.0 OBJECTIVES At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  identify the dimensions of Accountability in school  describe the line of Accountability in education.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Dimensions of Accountability in Education Accountability within the school system is the ability to answer for one’s behaviours or actions to someone else who is in a position to receive such answers.
This point implies that there is a relationship between “accountable for achieving institutional objectives” and ‘accountable to superior officers”.
These are the two dimensions of accountability in the education sector and are discussed below: Accountability for Achieving Institutional Objectives - an educational system exists to achieve the diverse objectives of education.
Educational objectives are sometimes not usually clearly stated.
However, the school administrator is usually accountable for the quality and clarity of the school’s objectives and priorities.
It is his responsibility to ensure that both short and long term goals are identified and pursued.
61EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT The school administrator is accountable for the quality of the teaching learning process in his school and he is also expected to ensure that proper assessment procedures take place in the school.
Accountable to Superior Officers:- regardless of whether the educational administrator is a headmaster, principal, provost, rector or vice-chancellor, he is an employee of the Ministry of education and State school Board officials representing his employers (government and the public).
The employers expect the employees to show loyalty, honesty, integrity, dedication and be highly productive.
By virtue of the assigned positions and responsibilities employees are expected by employers to be accountable to them in the following areas; the pupils, the staff, the community, the facilities and the finances, which have been entrusted into their care.
In the light of the above, the employees (school administrators) are judged by the employers on how they co-ordinate the available human and material resources for the realization of the goals of the school system optimally.
Furthermore, the school administrator, apart from being accountable to his employers, is also accountable to:  parents who have entrusted their children into their care to be educated;  staff who must depend on the leadership qualities of the administrator to enable them make a success of their own jobs; and  the pupil/student who depends on the school administrator to create the right atmosphere for his development.
3.2 Line of Accountability in Education Educational activities affect almost every person in the society in one way or the other.
In accounting for the progress of educational system each individual is responsible to someone and for specific activities that facilitate goal achievement.
The line of accountability in education is examined below: Classroom Teacher:- accountability starts with the classroom teacher.
He is accountable for the expected outcome of his job as a teacher.
The teacher is directly accountable to the school administrator who may be Headmaster, Principal, Provost, Rector or Vice-chancellor.
School Administrators:- they are accountable for resource utilization and output achieved by their institutions at any given point in time.
School administrators are accountable directly to the various statutory organs set up by government to co-ordinate their affairs.
Among such 62EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT organs are the National primary education Commission (NPEC), the National Commission for Colleges of Education (NCCE) and the National Universities Commission (NUC).
Statutory Bodies: - The NPEC, NCCE, NBTE and the NUC are accountable to the Minister of Education for selection and employment of staff to the institutions and for instructional programmes to facilitate goal achievement.
The Minister, Commissioner and Ministry of Education: - They are accountable to the governor/presidency for the supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the process of education.
The Presidency/Governor: - this is accountable to the national Assembly for the selection, definition and prioritization of the goals and objectives of education.
The National Assembly/State Assembly: - this is accountable to the electorates who provide the funds and enabling environment for the pursuit of education (Durosaro, 2002).
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Describe the dimensions of accountability in education 4.0 CONCLUSION All operators in the educational system are accountable to one superior officer or the other.
The line of accountability starts from the teacher to the public that funds education.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you have learned how various stake holders account to and for educational activities.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Educational administrators are both accountable to the entire stakeholders in education as well as accountable for achieving the goal of education using available resource.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the line of accountability in education 63EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Durosaro, D. O.
(2002).
Accountability in Education: The case of Nigeria.
Management of Nigerian Education: Project Monitoring and School Plant Maintenance.
64EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT UNIT 5 STRATEGIES FOR IMPROVING ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATION CONTENTS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Strategies for Improving Accountability in the School System 3.2 Supervision 3.3 Educational Auditing 3.4 Communication 3.5 Dynamic Leadership 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTION This unit focuses on the strategies for improving accountability in education.
The unit is a guide to understanding relevant measures that can enhance educational accountability.
Let us look at what you should learn in this unit as specified by its objectives below: 2.0 Objectives At the end of this unit, you should be able to:  identify the strategies for enhancing accountability in education  describe the strategies as identified.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Strategies for Improving Accountability in the School System Accountability involves a value judgments of how judicious and effective the elements and processes in a school system have been combined to achieve identified common goals.
This implies that accountability has to do with monitoring and evaluation of how well assigned responsibilities are being executed for the achievement of predetermined goals.
65EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT In order to improve accountability for better goal achievement the following strategies have been identified.
Supervision:- this is a technique that assists educational administrators to foster the professional growth of workers in the educational system.
Supervision enhances the development of appropriate educational goals and facilitates the selection of appropriate teaching procedures and facilities (Theirauf, 1977).
Furthermore, supervision improves the utilization of human and material resources for goal achievement.
Educational Auditing:- this is an analytical technique which examines the records of transactions in the education production process.
Its intention is to determine the degree of resource wastage or production efficiency.
(Omoregie, 1981) educational auditing enhances a better understanding of the school as a social system and this improve its decision making processes.
In order to have greater accountability and better management in the schools, school administrators are advised to adopt the auditing technique as it helps to determine the internal efficiency of the school system.
Communication:- this is a process that involves the transmission and accurate replication of ideas with ensured feedback, which elicit actions necessary for goals accomplishment.
All administrators require effective communication to facilitate their interpersonal, informational and decisional roles.
Effective communication also helps educational administrators to fulfill their executive functions of planning, organizing, motivating, resolving conflicts and controlling activities all of which are linked to accountability.
Effective communication also promotes a spirit of understanding, mutual trust, confidence and co- operation amongst the individuals within and outside a school system.
This can enhance job satisfaction and create in employees a high sense of belonging and loyalty to the organization.
This, no doubt, can be an effective parameter for future accountability.
Leadership:- leadership is the process in which a leader harnesses and co-ordinates the available human and material resources in the school for the achievement of set goals.
As school administrators translate the plans and policies of their schools into desirable objectives they also strive for accountability.
They do this by coordinating the efforts of their subordinates through participative and dynamic leadership SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE State and explain the strategies for improving accountability in the school system.
66EDA755 RESPONSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN EDUCATIONAL MANAGEMENT 4.0 CONCLUSION Accountability can be improved so as to ensure better goal achievement.
The strategies that can facilitate this are supervision, auditing, communication, and dynamic leadership.
5.0 SUMMARY In this unit you learned some strategies that can improve accountability in the school system.
You have noted that such strategies include; supervision, auditing, communication, and dynamic leadership.
ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE Accountability involves efforts to ensure that institutional goals in the school system are achieved.
The strategies that can enhance accountability are supervision, auditing, communication, and dynamic leadership.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT Describe the strategies that can improve accountability in the school system.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Omoregie, O.
B. S. (1981).
“Educational Auditing in Schools” in toward Efficiency in School Administration edited by J.
A. Aghenta & Arubayi, E. A. Benin City: Toklast Enterprises.
Theirauf, R. (1977).
Management Principles and Practices.
London: Witney Press.
67
