 NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA SCHOOL OF EDUCATION COURSE CODE: EDA 825 COURSE TITLE: MANAGERIAL PSYCHOLOGY i  COURSE GUIDE EDA 825 MANAGERIAL PSYCHOL OGY Course Developer Dr. (Mrs.) Rosemond Ayanniyi Faculty of Education, Nasarawa State University, Keffi.
Course Writer: Dr. (Mrs.) Rosemond Ayanniyi Faculty of Education, Nasarawa State University, Keffi.
Course Editor: Prof. J. K. Adeyemi Faculty of Education, University of Benin, Benin City.
Course Co-ordinator: Dr. Bolupe A.
Awe School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
ii  CONTENTS PAGE Introduction Course Aim Course Objectives Course Materials Study Units Course Summary The Assignment file Assessment Course marking scheme iii  INTRODUCTI ON EDA 825: Managerial Psychology is a second semester two credit course.
It is a compulsory course for students in Educational Administration and planning programme.
The course is one of the courses for the award of an M.ED (Masters in Educational Administration and Planning in (NOUN).
The course consists of three modules.
The first one is the conceptual explanation of organizations and personal behaviour.
The second module consists of practical information that has to do with how managers could motivate their personnel to make organization more effective.
In addition, management theories and approaches were discussed.
The third module exposed the students to the issue of leadership, leadership styles and the very relevant concept of stress in all its ramifications.
This course guide tells you what the course is about and gives you guidance on assessment procedure.
COURSE AIM The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: this course aims to give you an opportunity to understand the psychology of managing people in organizations.
This will be achieved by aiming to: Introduce you to the concept of organization, Describe the structure and the attitude of personnel in organizations.
Explain the place of motivation in organization Demonstrates the importance of planning in organization.
4  COURSE OBJECTIVES To achieve the aims set above, the course sets overall objectives.
In addition each module also has specific objectives which are always included at the beginning of or module; you should read them before you start working through the units; with this way you can be sure that you have done what was required of you in each module.
On completion of this course you should be able to: - Explain the concept of Organizations - Describe organizational structures - Identify formal and informal organization - Explain the attitude formations, and its sources in personnel.
- Discuss the concept and place of conflict in organizations.
- Apply the concept of motivation in managing organizations.
- Explain the relationship between leadership and organizational management.
- Describe the concept of stress and how managers could identify, and manage stress among the subordinates.
COURSE MATERI ALS AND STRUCTURE Course guide Study units MODULE I Unit 1 Understanding Organization Unit 2 Organizational Structure Unit 3 Organizational Attitude 5  Unit 4 The essence of organizational planning Unit 5 Organizational Conflict MODULE II Unit 1 Effectiveness in organization Unit 2 Human Motivation in organizations Unit 3 The importance of Motivation in Management Unit 4 Management Thought and Theories I Unit 5 Management thought and Theories II MODULE III Unit Leadership in organization Unit 2 Leadership styles Unit 3 Managing stress in organizations I Unit 4 Managing stress in organization II COURSE SUMMARY The first module is an indepth explanation of the meaning of organizations, the structures and the difference between formal and informal organizations.
The attitude of personal, its formation and the sources of such is also explained.
The need for planning and the process of planning is also described.
In addition the concept of conflict is explained and it s rational in any organizational set up.
The second module discusses issues of effectiveness in organizations.
This was analyze comprehensively by their study of the use of motivation as an instrument of organizational success.
In addition to motivation, the various approaches to management thoughts and theories were explained.
6  The third module emphasis the place of leadership, the various leadership styles and the inevitability of stress in organization.
The study was rounded up with the fact that stress either positive or negative is needed in the organization.
THE ASSIGNMENT F ILE In this file you will find all the details of the work you must submit to your tutor for marking.
The marks you obtain for these exercises will count towards the final work you obtain for this course.
ASSIGNMENT There are three aspects to the assessment of this course.
First there is the self assessment exercise which you must endeavour to attempt then the tutor marked assignment and finally the examination at the end of the course.
HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE In distance learning, the study module replaces the university lecturer.
This is one of the great advantages of distance learning; you can read and work through specially designed study materials at your own pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer.
In the same way that a lecturer might set you some readings to do, the study module guides you on how to undertake the practical work (Practicum).
Just as a lecturer might give you an in-class exercise/orientation.
Just as a lecturer might give you in-class exercise, you study units follow a common format.
The first item is an introduction 7  to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with the other units and the course as a whole.
Next is a set of learning objectives.
These objectives inform you about what you should be able to do by the guide your study.
When you have finished the unit; you must go back and check whether you have achieved the objectives.
If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your chances of passing the course.
8  EDA 825 MANAGERIAL PSYCHOL OGY Course Developer Dr. (Mrs.) Rosemond Ayanniyi Faculty of Education, Nasarawa State University, Keffi.
Course Writer: Dr. (Mrs.) Rosemond Ayanniyi Faculty of Education, Nasarawa State University, Keffi.
Course Editor: Prof. J. K. Adeyemi Faculty of Education, University of Benin, Benin City.
Course Co-ordinator: Dr. Bolupe A.
Awe School of Education, National Open University of Nigeria, Lagos.
9  TABLE OF CONTENTS MODULE I: UNDERSTANDING ORGANIZATIONS Unit I Understanding Organization Unit II Organizational Structure Unit III Organizational Attitude Unit IV The essence of organizational planning Unit V Organizational Conflict MODULE II: EFFECTIVENESS IN ORGANIZATIONS Unit I Effectiveness in organization Unit II Human Motivation in organizations Unit III The importance of Motivation in Management Unit IV Management Thought and Theories I Unit V Management thought and Theories II MODULE III: LEADERSHIP IN ORGANIZATIONS Unit I Leadership in organization Unit II Leadership styles Unit III Managing stress in organizations I Unit IV Managing stress in organization II 10  MODULE I Unit I: Understanding Organization Unit 2: Organizational Structures Unit 3: Organizational Attitude Unit 4: The Essence of Organizational Planning Unit 5: Organizational Conflict UNIT I: UNDERSTANDING ORGANIZATIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of Organization 3.2 The Alternate Views of Organization 3.3 The School as an organizations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignments.
7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In this study unit, we shall try to understand the concept of organization.
The unit will also introduce us to the common and alternate views of organizations, the other content that you will learn in this unit is an explanation of the fact that the school is an organization; finally the objective as specified below will also be achieved.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain the concept of organization.
11  2.
Identify the common and alternate views of organization 3.
Describe the school as an organization.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Organization Historically man has been identified as been bonded together for mutual purposes.
These have given rise to all organized pattern seen in all social life and in every facet of life.
The essence of organization is to have orderly, coherent responsibilities, which are shared among members and are fully coordinated to meet the organizational goals.
The Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary: defines organization as a Systematic arrangement for a definite purpose More academically biased definitions of the concept have since been advanced by a number of scholars Schein (1970) opines that organization is the rational coordination of the activities of a number of people for the achievement of some common explicit goals, through division of labour and functions, and through a hierarchy of authority and responsibilities .
However, Bierrien (1976:) using general systems theory, describes organization as an integrated system of interdependent structures and functions.
It is constituted of groups and a group consists of persons who must work in harmony.
Each 12  person must know what the others are doing.
Each one must be capable of receiving messages and must be sufficiently disciplined to obey .
Organizations could be seen as collectivities that have been established for the pursuit of specific objectives on a continuous basis.
Organization exists in and interact with society and that accounts for or insistence of a social system.
The formal nature of an organization presupposes that people, their behaviours and their associations belong to a large system of social relationships of which a single formally organized enterprise is only but a sub system.
According to Etzioni (1964) an organization may be defined as a social group that has been deliberately constructed in order to achieve certain specific goals.
Finally, an organization according to Olagboye (2004) can be defined as a collection of people who have united together to pursue and achieve a common aim through collective efforts and the pooling of resources.
The common characteristics of an organization include composition of people, shared objectives, allocation of resources, practice of division of labour and coordination of activities among others.
In every organization, there is need to make things happen and get tasks performed.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Based on what we have discussed so far, could you identify the common characteristics of an organization?
13  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussions and see how various alternate views explains the relevance of these characteristics.
3.2 The Common and Alternative Views of organization A commonly held view of an organization is that an organization is not only real, but it is also distinct from actions, feelings, purposes and needs of the people in it.
For example state governments could close down state owned companies, considered as failures and redeploy the workers.
The notion here is that the organization is bad but its people are not.
The alternative view argues that organizations are made up of people whose intensions, actions, purposes and needs should be the main concern.
Organizations have no real existence apart from that of the people in them.
The alternative view rest on some fundamental conception, which takes people as non independent part of the organization.
According to this view, the people in an organization are like the colour extension or form of a table; traits that are intrinsically located in it.
A given act is conceived as deriving from the organization and the personality therein.
That is to say that social behaviour results as the individual attempts to cope with an environment composed of patterns of expectations for his behaviour in ways consistent with his own independent pattern of needs.
Thus, one may say that behaviour in an organization is a function of a given institutional role defined by the expectations attached to it, and the personality of the particular role incumbent defined by his needs disposition.
Now you understand that there is a relationship between the goals 14  of the organization and the needs, aspirations and perceptions of the personality in the organization.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Given our discussions so far, Are you convinced that the school can be described as an organization?
------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion and affirm that the school is an organization just as other social economic organizations.
3.3 The School as an Organization The basic concept of an organization is a logical rational progression towards the meeting of the objectives that are already predetermined.
Using the general systems theory, the school is comparable with the energy system that has inputs, processes and outputs which can be put diagrammatically as: Input Process Output In the school, the inputs would be pupils, students, teaching materials, books and school equipment and facilities.
The process takes the form of teaching and learning, characterized by teachers pupil rapport, pupil assignments and other formal and informal 15  interactions between teachers and pupils.
The expected outputs would be educated individuals.
The organizational relationship, which is developed in the school system are expressions of value systems in relation to human systems, the organizational task and the perceived situation.
The interpersonal relationship within the school takes various patterns.
In applying Max Weber s bureaucratic model to school, individuals within the school organization have one or more roles to play.
For instance in the school system, one person is recognized as the head, i.e the head teacher or principal as the case may be.
Certain other functionaries are delegated authority of one kind or another.
Specific individuals talk more frequently with some persons (teachers and students) than others; individuals learn of where to go and who to consult for help at any moment.
These facilitate the mutually dependent teaching and learning activities in the school.
In addition school organizations create the structural arena or a cooperative system in which there is an accepted pattern of purposes, a sense of identification and belonging, continuity of interaction, differentiation of functions and conscious integration.
You will agree with me that the school organization creates and maintain environment in which complex sets of human interaction occur with same regularity and predictability.
It creates certain roles that specify certain behavioural expectations.
That is, the homothetic aspect of an organization.
But this must be in accord with the individual personality traits, idiosyncrasies, and need dispositions, also termed the ideographic aspect of an organization.
Consequently the prevalence of a state of equilibrium between the 16  two aspects the individual needs and the needs and purposes of the school as an organization.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt about the concept of organizations.
You can now explain the characteristic, of an organization.
In addition you can describe the school as an organization.
5.0 SUMMARY This study unit has exposed you to the concept of organization.
You have learnt the common and alternate views of organizations.
Finally you learnt that the school can be described as an organization because of the characteristics and the purposes it serves.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) Explain the concept of organization (2) Distinguish between the common and the alternate views of organization.
(3) What major characteristics of the school would make you describe the school as an organization?
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Barrien F. K. 1976 A general systems approach to organizations In Owen R. G. (ed) Organizational behaviour in Education.
New Jersy Prentice hall Inc. Endewood Cliffs.
Etzioni, A (1964) Modern Organizations Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
17  Olagboye, A.
A.
(2004) Introduction to Educational management in Nigeria, Ibadan: Kemsio Eductaional Consultants Peretomode V. F (2001) Educational Administration: Applied Concepts and Theoretical Perspective Lagos: Joja Educational research & publishers Ltd. Schein (1970) Organizational Psychology, Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall Udoh S. U. and G. O. Akpa (2007) Educational Administration in Nigeria Theory and Practice, Jos: M. P. ginac Concept Ltd. 18  UNIT 2: ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE S 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Two Broad structures: Formal or Informal 3.2 The Importance of Organizational Structure 3.3 Types of Organization 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In study unit 1, we defined the concept of organization, the study unit also introduced you to the common and alternate views of organization.
You can now explain the fact that the school is an organization.
You are about to study another indepth aspect of organization which has to do with the structures.
The study unit will therefore lead us to the knowledge of the importance of organizational structure and other aspects as will be specified in the objectives below: 2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be able to: 1.
Distinguish between formal and informal organizations.
2.
Explain the importance of organizational structures.
3.
List and describe the various types of organizations.
19  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Structures of Organization According to Udoh and Akpa (2007) there are basically two broad structures of organization.
These are formal and informal structures.
Thus we have formal and informal organizations.
Formal organization are viewed as establishment for the explicit purpose of achieving certain goals, possessing rules, designed to anticipate and to shape behaviours in the direction of these goals formalized with clearly marked line of communication and authority.
Denga (1982:) opined that formal organization is planned and involves rational condition of activities for the achievement of explicit common goals .
In a formal organization therefore, the system of roles is officially arranged in a hierarchical manner for the performance of tasks.
It is bureaucratic and guided by rules and policies that reflect the socio psychological and administrative assumptions of the designers.
Its common characteristics include coordination of activities, specialization, stability (order), authority, compensation, replaceability, and impersonal orientation.
Striking example of formal organization are the school, banks, and government agencies, business enterprises organized labour unions and associations.
Decision making in formal organization differ and they also help to distinguish organizations.
When the decision making process is decentralized, the organization is said to be flat.
For example hospital schools and other democratic institutions.
But where the decision making is 20  highly centralized, then a tall organization prevails e.g Military organizations.
My dear students, from this explanation what do you think the structure of the other form of organization would look like?
Let us continue our discussion by explaining the Informal organization.
Informal Organization is formed from the interpersonal relationships in the organization that affect decisions within the formal structure, but are omitted from the formal scheme or are not consistent with that scheme.
Informal organization has a dynamic structure composed of special interest groups.
It is an indefinite and rather structureless set up that has no definite subdivisions.
Denga (1982:) summarized it as the --- friendships association, or attachments that inevitably develop when people are placed in a close and regular proximity to one another .
This relationship which grows out of the personal needs of members cannot fully be accounted for by the organization.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Having discussed the formal and informal organizations: can you mention some informal organizations that are likely to be found in your schools?
My dear students let us go on with our discussion by learning about the importance of organizational structure.
21  3.2 The Importance of Organizational Structure Formal organization has a formal channel of communication between the government and the governed.
In other words, it serves as a means of communicating government policies and directives or even information to all members of staff in every establishment formal organizations establishes order because of the hierarchical set up.
In this way the unit of command is clearly defined.
It therefore reduces power tussles and personality clashes.
It is prescriptive to decision of labour and specialization.
i.e various specialists that make up the organization are assigned duties in accordance with their training and specialization thereby enhancing perfection and increased productivity.
Formal organization defines rules and regulation which must be obeyed by members of the organization.
Similarly appointment into the formal structure is straight forward since it is based on some predetermined criteria and the system of scrutiny in equally formalized, this makes for effectiveness and efficiency.
It is therefore easier for formal organizations to attain their goals and objectives given their distinguishing characteristics like coordination, specialization, order compensation and impersonal orientation.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 As a member of a formal organization can you identify the distinguishing characteristics in your organization?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 22  3.2.1 Informal Organization: Although the informal organization is always defined and their inherent dangers of rumour mongering and disruptive tendencies are equally set apparent, they serve certain advantages that even aid the productivity of formal organizations such as: - Informal organization can introduce reliable innovations that could even be adopted later as part of the formal pattern of operation.
This is particularly true of school organization for example, a group of teachers could initiate programmes with potentials to benefit the school and such could later be adopted by the school principal.
Similarly clubs or associations started by students could be adopted and officially recognized by the school authority.
- Informal organization in its grapevine activities helps to facilitate quicker dissemination of information within the organization.
- It also helps to pass information on sensitive issues that regime caution up to the hierarchy of administration of the organization.
- Informal organization helps to test the popularity or quality of an administration.
- It has become an instrument of check and balance on the school administrators.
- Informal organization protects the worker from arbitrary management.
23  - With the cooperation of the informal leader work would not proceed smoothly and productivity could be hampered 3.3 Types of Organization You have earlier learnt in this unit that all organization placed high value on rationality, effectiveness and efficiency.
Organizational effects are directed towards coordinating and directing material and human resources and every effort towards achieving organizational goals.
Let us continue this discussion by stating that, the purpose of an organization determines its typology.
We can therefore distinguish four types of formal organizations as follows: (a) Organizations for mutual benefits: These are pressure groups or trade unions that work for their members benefits.
The participants are normally the major beneficiaries.
In Nigeria there are numerous example of this type of organization.
Nigeria Union of Teacher (NUT) Nigerian Medical Association (NMA), and other professional bodies of lawyers, engineers, architects etc.
(b) Organization of Business concerns: These are basically profit making ventures that could be public or private.
Examples of these type of organizations include firms, factories, industries and services, companies, essentially motivated by profit maximization.
(c ) Service organization: These differs from one service organization to the other.
Whether formal or informal they 24  select their clients which they wish to deal with and their clients participate on a voluntary basis.
Schools and hospitals are good examples.
They could apply stringent criteria in the selection of clients and at the same time the potential clients are compelled to accept their services.
Another service organization, where clients are selected and compelled to participate is the army .
The last but not the least is a type where instances of these types emerge in schools, where government embarks on compulsory universal education programme, reform schools, mental hospitals and prisons.
- Common wealth Organizations.
These are organizations that do not have other value, apart from attending to the welfare of the society.
They exist to ensure peace, progress, order and tranquility.
Example of this type of organization is government forces and police, (Udoh and Akpa 2007).
It is important to note that both the formal and informal organizations have their typologies and in each case they are inevitable for the survival of the organization.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt about the structure of formal and informal organization.
You have also been informed that these formal and informal organizations are of great importance.
Lastly you have leant to identify the various types of organization.
25  5.0 SUMMARY 1.
What you have learnt in this study unit is the structure of organizations.
2.
You have also learnt the importance of formal and informal organizations.
3.
In addition you have learnt how to distinguish between the various types of organizations.
The study unit that shall follow will build upon your understanding to be able to appreciate how leaders operate on their leadership styles in organization.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT (1) What is a formal Organization?
How is it different from an informal organization?
(2) Discuss some of the importance of formal and informal organization.
(3) Mention at least two types of organizations that you know.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Laurie J. Mullin (1999) Management and organizational behaviour 5 Edition.
England: Pearson Education Ltd. th Peretomode V. F (2001) Educational administration: Applied concepts and theoretical perspectives Joja: Press Ltd. Ikeja Lagos Nigeria.
Udoh S. U. and Akpa G. O.
(2007), Educational Administration in Nigeria Theory and Practice, Jos: M. P Ginac Concept Ltd. 26  UNIT 3: ORGANIZATIONAL ATTITUDE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Defining Attitude 3.2 Forming Attitude 3.3 Changing Attitude 3.4 Attitude for successful experiences in school organizations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References for Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In study unit 2, we discussed formal and informal organizations, and explained the importance of organizational structures.
The various types of organization here has to do with people and their behaviour their personality types and attitude was explained.
The study unit will expose you to the meaning and definition of attitude, the many influences on the formation of attitude, and how attitudinal changes affect organizations.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be able to: (1) Define the term attitude (2) Explain the formation of attitudes, (3) Describe the changing attitude of personnel in organization.
(4) Justify the relevance of attitude to organizational success.
27  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Defining Attitude In general, attitude may be regarded as a series of personal belief or ideas which cause an individual to feel and act in certain ways.
This feeling aspect indicates an emotional content that is always exhibited by individuals in any setting, which includes the organization.
Attitude can be defined as positive or negative evaluation of people, objects, ideas, or events.
For example a person s opposition to an organizational regulation or support for organizational polices could be described as an attitude.
Attitudes are studied by social psychologists because they are important determinants of behaviour (Schaller 1994).
They substantially influence our reaction in a wide variety of situations and tend to be quite stable over time.
Attitudes are fundamental to understanding social perception because they strongly influence our perception of the people we meet and the groups we join or avoid.
Psychologists sometimes describe an attitude simply as a tendency to seek or avoid something.
Their early studies of liking and disliking, approval and disapproval were helpful but incomplete.
We shall therefore examine a broader definition of attitude.
Now let me ask you an exciting question.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 How would you describe your attitude to your studies as a post graduate student?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 28  --------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
Attitude is a relatively enduring predisposition to respond in a reasonable consistent manner towards a person, object situation or idea.
3.2 Forming Attitude According to Schaller (1994) there are many influences on the formation of attitude.
The major influences on the formation of attitude are: Social Influence: This is otherwise referred to as the influence of other people.
Early in life, the family is the primary reference group, and parents are said to have the greatest influence on the developing attitude of the child.
It is later in life that teachers, peers and other groups begin to influence attitudes.
The mass media (Ottarit, 1994), particularly television and the internet also substantially influence attitudes.
All these groups influence attitude through three processes.
(a) Providing information (b) Reinforcement (c) Identification.
The first way parents or guardians influence attitude is by providing information about people, objects, ideas, policies and events in the world.
Also information are provided by mass media such as the television, internet, and radio as earlier stated.
A second means by which attitudes are being influenced is by 29  administering rewards and punishment (Mc Ginnien, 1996) either by parents or by organizations.
More often parents praise children for expressing some attitudes and disapproves when they express others.
Such approval or disapproval has impact on people s attitudes.
The third social influence on attitude is the process of identification.
People emulate other people they admire, and this identification leads to the idea of mentorship.
Contact with peers, teachers, and other adults also influence our attitudes.
(ii) Cognitive Influence: Another very important source of attitude is your own reasoning and logic.
Often, we go beyond what we have been told by other people and we figure things out by ourselves.
(iii) Behavioural Influences: A third influence on people s attitude is their own behaviour rather than other.
For example when parents make sure that their children do not let their siblings or that they do their homework, the children should form attitudes consistent with these behaviour especially if the tangible rewards for the behaviour are small.
Similarly, personnel in organizations form attitudes that are consistent with the behaviourial pattern of an organization.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Can you recall any attitude formed by you through the influence of information from parents?
State such briefly.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
30  3.3 Changing Attitude: From our discussion above, it can be stated that in the course of growing up, people form several attitudes.
These attitudes are useful in forming perceptions and making judgments about the world, and they help in guiding social interaction.
It is to be remembered that attitudes are wrapped up with a person s feelings, needs, and self concept.
To change, such attitude requires a change in itself.
In addition, attitudes are easy to maintain because a person sees what he or she wants to see and may distort reality to find evidence to support any position he wants to hold.
Modifying an old attitude and replacing it with a new one is a process of learning.
An attitude that no longer serves its function will cause the individual holding that attitude to feel blocked or frustrated.
Although many strategies have been employed to exert social influence upon attitudes, three of such have been found to be most successful: (i) Persuasive Communications (ii) Emotional Appeals (iii) Induction of attitude discrepant behaviour.
(i) Persuasive Communication: Most attempts to modify our attitudes involve some type of persuasive communication, which could be spoken, written, televised, or filmed messages which seek to alter our reactions towards various objects through logical arguments, convincing facts and authoritative information.
The effectiveness of this strategy has to do with some characteristics of the communicator (especially his or her credibility) the communication itself, in terms of content and form, and the recipients, when these characteristics are favourable persuasion 31  may succeed, however, persuasion may fail and attitudes will remain largely unchanged.
For example school manager who intends to instill discipline in school must communicate it in actions and in persuasive forms.
(ii) Emotional Appeals: Some attempts to change our attitude involves the use of strong fear inducing appeals, suggesting that failure to adopt certain positions recommended or courses of action could lead to truly disastrous results.
For example, frightening films showing diseased lungs and actual lung cancer operations have been found to produce greater changes in smokers attitude towards their habits than milder communications depicting charts and graphs.
(iii) Induction of attitude (discrepant behaviour): According to the theory of cognitive dissonance, human beings have a strong preference for cognitive consultancy agreement among their attitudes, opinions and beliefs.
Consequently, whenever they become aware of an inconsistency between two or more related thoughts, they experience an unpleasant state of dissonance and will actively strive to reduce or eliminate its presence.
The dissonance theory also suggest that in situation in which individual are offered rewards for engaging in attitude discrepant behaviour, the degree of attitude change that is produced will be at a maximum when such rewards are just barely sufficient to reduce the inconsistent actions.
32  3.4 Attitudes for Successful experiences in the school organization: If learning experiences are to be successful, attitudes towards teachers as well as towards the school, other students and oneself cannot be over emphasized.
Teachers should recognize that all successful learning is accompanied by changes in attitudes, formal instruction can crystalize attitudes already formed sometimes it can help the student acknowledge falacies in his outlook or conflicts among his values.
In the long run, attitudes are established by living, interpretation are tried, confirmed and retained accordingly.
Each person takes on for the most part, the attitude of the people to whom he is loyal.
For example students takes after the teacher/ society.
Therefore the principal aim of the school is to make the students loyal to his society and develop his identification with good citizens.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, we have learnt the meaning of attitude and the formation of attitude in individuals.
We also learnt that changes occur in our attitude due to three successful strategies which includes persuasive communication, emotional approach and induction of attitude discrepant behaviour.
Finally the study unit concluded that the attitude for successful learning experiences lies with the teacher, the school and the individual self.
5.0 SUMMARY The study unit has exposed you to the following: 1.
Meaning of attitude 33  2.
Formation of attitude 3.
Attitudinal change 4.
Attitude for successful learning experiences 6.0 TUTOR MARKE D ASSIGNMENT: 1.
Define the concept of attitude 2.
Explain the social influence as a factor in attitude formation.
7.0 REFERENCES FURTHER READINGS Alhassan A.
B.
(2000) Understanding educational psychology.
Zaria: Tamaza Publishing company Ltd. Mc Gunneis E (1996) Social behaviour A functional ananlysis Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Ottari T. M., Pope-Davis D. B. and Dings J. G. (1994) Relationship between white racial identity attitude and self reported multicultural counselling competencies Journal of counseling Psychology.
Schaller M (1994) The role of statistical reasoning in the formation preservation and prevention of group stereotypes.
British journal of social psychology 33.
(1) 47-61.
34  UNIT 4: THE ESSENCE OF ORGANIZATIONAL PLANNING 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Conceptual Clarification of planning 3.2 The requirement for good planning 3.3 Obstacles in the planning process 3.4 The planning process in organizations 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References for Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In study unit 2 and 3, we discussed the organizational structure and also leant about organizational attitude.
This study unit will focus on the essence of organizational planning as a function of the management process.
The unit will expose you to the concept of planning, the requirements for good planning, obstacles in the planning process and lastly the planning process in organization.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be able to: (1) Define the concept of planning (2) Explain the advantages and requirements for good planning (3) Identify the obstacles to plans (4) Describe the organizational Hierarchy.
35  3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Conceptual clarification of planning.
Planning is probably one of the most important functions which any organization or group or individual can tackle, because it precedes all the other management functions.
These other functions play a supporting role in the achievement of organizational objectives.
Planning must consider organizations leadership and control in order to be effective.
Planning takes place in all organizations and at all levels.
Individuals plan their daily life and the activities of their families.
Managers plan the activities of the organization and they must know what type of person, architecture and management approach the organization needs to be successful.
Planning is a systematic process, which determines where an organization or division currently finds itself, where it is going and how it is going to get there.
The planner must also determine what must be done and how it must be done.
The how is closely linked to organizing, because it leads to the drawing up of a plan to facilitate the achievement of organizational objectives.
Robbins (1984:177) describes planning as the process of determining objectives and assessing the way these objectives can best be achieved Similarly, Marx and Chur (1984: 183) describes planning as the management task which deals with the: - Deliberate reflection (thinking, visualizing, discussing, and deciding) on the objectives which the organization or one of its divisions must achieve within a certain period.
- Resources and activities which are involved in this process.
36  - Problems which may arise - Drawing up of an action plan which shows which activities must be carried out.
In a nutshell planning is the predetermined plan of action which individuals, groups or organizations follow to set and achieve specific objectives.
These definitions illustrates several things.
Planning is a thinking process as well as a doing process.
It is future oriented and it is carried out systematically.
The planners first formulate objectives.
He then identifies the activities which must be carried out and the resources which are needed to carry out the activities.
Another purpose of planning is to use the resources at the disposal of the organization effectively (Kroon, 1995:112).
It is important to know that all the management functions form the integral part of the planning process.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 What is planning?
Can you identify any major event you have planned for in your life?
-------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
37  You will need to know the necessity for planning.
To determine why planning is necessary, we will look at the nature, purpose, advantages and importance of planning.
Although there are various views regarding the need for planning, the following seems to be the most important (Kroon, 1995; Smit & Cronje, 1992).
(i) The fast pace of change in the external environment of the organization is probably the most important factor which makes planning indispensable.
(ii) Planning shows direction, if every individual knows what the organization is striving towards what they are expected to do and how the objectives should be achieved, more co- ordination, cooperation and team cohesion will result.
(iii) Planning promotes co-operation between terms and divisions in an organization.
If the objectives are clearly formulated and suitable plans are developed, tasks and resources can be allocated in such a way that everybody can contribute to achieving the objectives.
(iv) Planning ensures effective utilization of available resources.
Activities are carried out in a more structured way, overhead cost are lowered and performance improved when planned formally.
In the case of informal planning, nothing is written down and people are not always aware of the objectives of others.
This leads to delays, duplication wastage and general in efficiency.
(v) Proper planning improves and facilitates the work of managers because it promotes participation, contributes to 38  personnel development and encourages delegation.
Control is also facilitated in that actual performance is compared with the set objectives.
3.2 The requirements for good planning.
According to Smit and Cronje (1992) in Bruyns Gericke, Kriel tand Malan (2000), the following are the requirements for good planning: (i) Planning must start with top management and be communicated to middle and operational management.
In this way planning will take place in a logical sequence from one management level to the next and be developed within the framework of the organization s business plan.
Participation in strategic planning by middle and operational management must not be forgotten as they are the people who must implement the plans.
(ii) The availability of sufficient, correct and reliable information from the internal and external environment will reduce uncertainties, mistaken assumptions and wrong decisions to a minimum.
(iii) Since everything depends on planning, planning must be done before any activity takes place.
(iv) The organization s main objectives (mission) and policy must be kept in mind at all times during the planning process to prevent deviation from occurring.
(v) Communication plays an extremely important role in planning.
Management must ensure that all the personnel understand the purpose of planning; why it is so important, 39  who must participate in it, what the restructuring are in planning and what results can be expected.
Finally, plans must be drawn up in writing and be formulated as simply and clearly as possible.
They must be revised constantly in order to keep up with new development and unexpected events.
Are you interested in learning more about planning.
Then let us study more by discussing the following: 3.3 Obstacles in the planning process.
Planning you will agree with me is a complex task and planners must know how the various sections interact within the organization.
It may be difficult to achieve the objectives in the organization, as a whole.
In order to facilitate the planning process these obstacles must be taken into account.
Organizations cannot be successful if they cannot adjust to changing circumstances.
To survive in the long term, the organization must reconcile its scarce resources with the opportunities in the external environment.
The accuracy of planning is not only determined by the planners ability to predict events accurately, but also by the correctness and completeness of information at his disposal.
In addition, it is important to know that human shortcomings may result in the planning and/or execution of plans not being successful.
Such shortcomings may be attributed to the following Ø inability or unwillingness to spend enough time on planning, Ø inability to take good decisions, Ø lack of knowledge and skills, 40  Ø resistance to change, Ø unsystematic planning or overemphasis on certain aspects in the planning process, Ø inability to communicate the plans correctly and to motivate people to work according to the plans, and Ø unjustifiable deviation from the plans Lastly, planning is sometimes done at a central point and at too high a level, which restricts participation at lower levels.
This inhibits flexibility in the application of policy, rules and procedures.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 From what you have learnt, explain briefly what you as an administrator can do to plan more effectively.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 3.4 The Planning Process The planning process takes place systematically.
The planner draws up functional plans by using appropriate information from the strategic plan and draws up operational plans by using appropriate information from both the strategic and functional plans.
The planning process is divided into steps but in practice the steps form an integral whole and constantly interact with one another.
41  Step 1: The formulation of the goals and objectives.
Goals and objectives define the results, which the organization wishes to achieve, in the long medium and short term.
It is essential that these are clearly defined for every organizational function, sub division or project.
A goal is a general, broad definition of what we wish to achieve and is not expressed in measurable terms.
A goal must not be formulated in such a way that it reaches too far into the future.
In practice all the goals of most managers are already formulated, in the sense that they describe broad task.
However, objectives are a continuation of a goal and therefore aimed at its ultimate achievement objectives must be written in clear, plain language so that all concerned know what is expected of them.
Objectives should be formulated by a team to promote participation, understanding, acceptance and cooperation.
Objectives must be adaptable to changing circumstances.
They must present a challenge, but still be realistic and attainable, (Kroon 1995) in Bruyns, Gericke Kriel, Malan (2000).
Well formulated objectives must meet the following criteria: v Objectives must describe observable behaviour.
They must contain action words (verbs), such as: collect, do, train, play, build, execute, arrange, purchase, implement, evaluate.
v Standards must be set, which will ensure that objectives can be achieved.
A standard will indicate a specific time or date by which a task, or project must be completed.
The quality (how 42  good) amount, and cost can and must be, where appropriate, reflected in the objective.
v Every objective must contain a single and measurable result.
Step 2: Gathering Information: The planner must gather all possible information which might affect the planning and achievement of the objectives.
All information must be gathered systematically from within and if necessary from outside the organization.
Questions such as who, what, where, when, why and how must be answered.
The planner must look at the past, present, and future.
The planner might also find information from similar projects and opinions from other people or organizations that are useful.
Step 3: Analyzing the information It is important that external role players participate in the analysis process.
This contributes to new insights and alternatives, better decisions are taken, and the execution of plans is promoted.
The new ideas are analyzed and evaluated so that the most suitable plan can be implemented.
The analysis is done by means of qualitative and quantitative yardsticks.
In a qualitative analysis, all prospects, implication and complication are taken into account.
The consequences are weighted against one another, and the alternative which will promote the image of an organization best will be set out in order of importance.
Factors such as legislation, policy, prescription, availability/ and an obtainability of resources and feasibility of various plans.
A 43  quantitative analysis is the drawing up of an estimate.
For example the cost of establishing a science secondary school as compared to the general secondary school.
Step 4: Drawing up a plan To round off the planning process, a plan of action must be drawn up.
Depending on the circumstances a decision must be made on what type of plan and what planning aids are going to be used.
The drawing up of a plan is facilitated greatly by planning schedule or programme control chart.
Every manager should be able to compile planning aids in his section to plan job activities.
Lastly every plan must contain an estimate.
An estimate indicates the amount of funds needed to carry out the plan and serves as an aid to control the spending of funds.
Step 5.
Reality Testing This step is deliberately, included in the planning process as a control mechanism before the plan is finalized and implemented.
During reality testing the plan is revised to determine whether it is realistic and can be implemented.
Revision is usually done by those who initially drew up the plan, people who must carry out the activities or independent people.
The following are some aspects to be considered during reality testing: (i) Is the work which has to be done clearly defined?
(ii) Is the plan understandable and do those involved know exactly which task they must complete?
(iii) Is the cost estimate realistic?
44  (iv) Is the plan flexible enough to adapt to change or unforeseen circumstances?
(v) Do all those involved have the required knowledge and skills?
(vi) Lastly, is the plan in line with the act, policy, directives rules and regulations?
Finally if amendments are required as a result of practical considerations and implications, the necessary adjustments or replanning must be done first before the plan is implemented.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt about the concept of planning and the need for planning in organizations.
You have therefore learnt the requirements for good planning.
We can now say that you can explain the obstacles in the planning process and the major steps in the process of planning.
5.0 SUMMARY 1.
What you have learnt in this study unit concerns the meaning of the concept of planning.
2.
You have also learnt the necessity for planning and the requirements for good planning.
3.
In addition you learnt the obstacles that managers face in planning.
4.
You also learnt the five steps of the planning process.
6.0 TUTOR MARKE D ASSIGNMENTS 1.
What is planning?
2.
List at least four reasons why planning is necessary.
45  3.
Use the steps in the planning process and explain how you will go about planning for your organization.
7.0 REFERENCES FURTHER READINGS Kroon, J.
(ed) (1995) In Bruiyns, Gericke, malan & Krel (2000) 3 rd Edition.
Correctional Management Hodder and Stoughton Johannesbury London Sydney Auckland South Africaa.
Robbins S. P. (1984) Management: Concepts and Practices.
Englewood Clifts, NJ: Prentice hall.
46  UNIT 5: ORGANIZATIONAL CONFLICT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Meaning of Conflict 3.2 Sources of Conflict 3.3 Strategies for Management of Conflict 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In study unit 4, we described organizational planning.
The need for planning and its requirements were enumerated.
Now you are about to study the place of conflict in organizations.
This study unit exposes you to the meaning of conflict.
A look at other contents to be learnt will be specified in the study unit objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be able to; 1.
Explain the meaning of conflict 2.
List the sources of Conflict 3.
Describe the strategies for managing conflict 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Meaning of Conflict Conflict has its origin in differences in objectives, interest, efforts, approach, timing, attitudes and the likes.
Conflict is a 47  disagreement between two or more people or groups.
Conflict is almost always caused by unlike points of view.
According to Euwema et al (1995), conflict behaviour is an individual s reaction to the perception that one s own and another party s current aspiration cannot be achieved simultaneously.
In order words, conflict is a matter of perception conflict has also been defined as a situation of disagreement between two parties.
According to Amusan (1996), a conflict situation is characterized by the inability of those concerned to iron out the difference and reach an agreement on issues of common interest.
Ejiogu (1990) also perceived conflict as mutual hostility and all kinds of opposition or antagonistic interaction, which includes disagreements or controversies about ideas, values and ways of life Conflict is based on the incompatibility of goals and arise from opposing behaviours.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 From what we have discussed so far what do you think is the most common thing that causes conflict in organization?
-------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
3.2 Sources of Conflict In the course of human events, even in the best managed organizations, conflict certainly arises.
All organizations such as schools, colleges, and universities have conflict potentials since they are collection of people with diverse personality types as well as because of the nature of the formal organization itself.
Conflict 48  implies the pursuit of incompatible goals, such that gain to one side comes out at the expense of the other.
(i) Change: Some change within an organization is normal and to be expected.
New policies, changes in operational procedures and a certain amount of employee turnover are common internal changes all organization experience.
Externally, state, or federal legislature can also require an organization to make specific changes.
But other forms of change are more drastic.
Reorganization and right sizing (lay offs) can wreak havoc in organizations, threatening the job security of everyone.
Even growth can cause conflict, although growth is normally seen as good for an organization.
Communication breakdown is sure to occur, responsibilities change and reporting relationship may be shuffled.
Change within an organization definitely could cause conflict.
(ii) Conflicting goals and objectives Usually, this is the result of poor communication and planning.
The goals and objectives of one department may clash with those of another department.
Better communication between departmental heads can usually resolve the issue.
(iii) Limited Resources: Limited resources can mean practically anything: not enough employees, lack of space, shortage of finances, outdated equipment and so on.
These and similar problems can cause organizational conflict by limiting expected performance of individuals, departments and perhaps even the organization as a whole.
49  (iv) Nature of work activities: Where the task of one person is dependent upon the work of others there is potential for conflict; for example if the work of a department is dependent upon the output of another department, there could be conflict.
(v) Individual; Such as attitudes, personality characteristics or particulars, personal needs, illness or stress.
- Group such as group skills, the informal organization and group norms.
- Organization, such as communication, another structure, leadership style, and managerial behaviour.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Mention at least three most common sources of conflict in your organization.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
There are numerous strategies that can be employed by the manager in conflict situation.
3.3 Strategies for Management of Conflict Although a certain amount of organizational conflict may be seen as inevitable, there are a number of ways in which management can attempt to avoid the harmful effects of conflict.
The strategies adopted will vary according to the nature and sources of conflict.
50  - Clarification of goals and objectives: The clarification and continual refinement of goals and objectives, role definitions and performance standards will help to avoid misunderstanding and conflict, focusing attention on super ordinate goals that are shared by the parties in conflict, may help to defuse hostility and lead to more cooperative behaviour.
- Resource distribution: Although it may not always be possible for managers to increase the allocated share of resources.
They may be able to use imaginations and initiative to help overcome conflict situations, e.g.
delaying staff appointment in one area to provide more money for another area.
- Personnel Policies and Procedures; careful and detailed attention to just and equitable personnel policies and procedure may help to reduce areas of conflict.
Examples are job analysis, recruitment and selection, job evaluation; system of reward and punishment, disciplinary procedures, recognition of trade unions and their officials.
- Leadership and Management: A more particular and supportive style of leadership and management behaviour is likely to assist in conflict management.
e.g showing an attitude of respect and trust, encouraging personal self development, creating a work environment in which staff can work cooperatively together.
- Organizational Process: conflict situation may be reduced by attention to such features as the nature of authority structure, work organization patterns of communication 51  and sharing of information, democratic functioning of organization unnecessary adherence to bureaucratic procedure and official rules and regulations.
- Socio Technical Approach: Viewing the organization as a socio technical system in which psychological and social factors art developed, to reduce dysfunctional conflict.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt about conflict in organizational settings.
You can now explain the meaning of conflict in organizations; in addition you can identify the sources of conflict and describe the numerous management strategies for conflict situations.
5.0 SUMMARY 1.
What has been learnt in this study unit is the meaning of conflict in an organization.
2.
You have also learnt the various sources or means by which conflict arises in an organization.
In addition you learnt the numerous strategies that can be employed by a manager in an organization to manage conflict situations.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT (a) Explain the concept of organizational conflict.
(b) Outline the main potential sources of organizaiotnal conflict.
(c ) As a school manager what major strategies would you employ to manage conflict situations in your school?
52  7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Mullims, L. J.
(1999) Management and Organizational Behaviour 5 Edition England: Pearson Educ Ltd. th Ejiogu, A. M. (1990) Educational management: A Systems Approach Lagos: Lantern bks.
Amusan, T. A.
(1996) Sources of conflict in an organization.
Journal of General Studies in Education.
pp.
93 99.
Euwema, M. C. Vaahert E, and S. E. Huismans (1995Managing conflict with a subordinate or a superior effectiveness of conglomerated behaviour Journal of Applied Psychology Vol.
80 (2) 272.
53  MODULE II Unit I: Effectiveness in Organizations Unit 2: Human Motivation in Organization Unit 3: Maslow and MacGregor s Theories of Human Motivation.
Unit 4: Management Thought and Theories Unit 5: Management Concepts UNIT I: EFFECTIVENESS IN ORGAN IZATIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 People 3.2 Outcomes 3.3 What is Management?
3.4 Who is a Manager?
3.5 Organization Culture 3.6 Organization Climate 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In study unit 5 of module I, we explained the concept of conflict in organizations, the various source of conflict were discussed and the strategies that could be employed to manage conflict were enumerated.
You are about to study a very interesting study unit: effectiveness in organizations.
Let us look at what other content 54  you should learn in this study unit as specified in the objectives below.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain an important principle in psychology.
2.
Describe what synergy is in an organization 3.
Define organizational culture.
4.
Explain a number of key terms related to organizational culture.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 People The effectiveness of any organization is largely influenced by human behaviour, skills and interpersonal relationships.
An important principle in psychology is that all people are different.
Every person has his own perceptions, personality, learning abilities, life experiences, attitudes, convictions and aspirations.
To be effective, managers must view every employee as a unique personification of all the behavioural factors (Ivancevich & Matteson, 1990:7-8).
Relationships between people in organizations create expectations in terms of ways individuals act.
These expectations lead to certain roles, which must be taken on.
Some people must take on the role of leader and others the role of follower.
Middle managers must have both subordinate and seniors.
Ivancevich and Matteson (1990:8) believe that the situational or contingency management approach is suitable for identifying important management factors in behaviour.
According to this 55  approach, there is no single correct management approach.
A method which works well in one situation will not necessarily work in another.
A manager who uses the contingency approach can not assume that a specific approach will work.
It is important for you to note that given this situation, the manager will have to make a diagnosis of the relevant individuals, groups, organization and his own leadership qualities before he decides on a solution.
This component (people) is of utmost importance and is the pivotal point around which the organization turns.
People are responsible for renewal in an organization and can only bring about renewal by acquiring new knowledge themselves, sharing themselves, sharing understanding, and constantly improving themselves and the organization.
Garvin (1993:78) uses the term rethinking and says that renewal in a person is a three-step process.
It involves cognitive change, which leads to a change in behaviour, which in turn leads to improved performance.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Given our discussion what will you say is the most significant component in an organization such as the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation?
Let us go on with our discussion.
3.2 Outcomes Synergy involves the results which are achieved by a group.
In a group, the group members achieve a certain result but not all of them perform equally well, however, the groups as a unit or a whole should perform better.
If the group result is better than the 56  sum total of the individual efforts, then the group has reached synergy.
The various divisions, or people within and outside the organization must thus work together to achieve better results.
The bringing together (synthesis) of, and collaboration (energy) between organizational components (architecture, strategy and people) leads to synergy and contributes to the efficient functioning of the organization.
The smooth interaction between the environment and the organization s strategies will bring about effectiveness in turn.
The outcomes of individuals, groups and the organization thus depend on the organizational components and the environment as a whole (holographic network).
Outcomes are usually measured against productivity, quality and customer satisfaction.
According to Veldsman (1994:8-9), there is a close relationship and a dynamic balance between the entire component in an organization.
A change in the content of any of the components can give rise to tension throughout the organization.
For example, the traditional architecture of an organization must be adjusted and people s skills development to support participation as a management philosophy should be enhanced.
3.3 What is Management?
Kroon (1995:7) defines management as a process whereby people in leading positions use human and other resources as efficiently as possible to provide certain products or services in order to meet certain needs and achieve the organization s stated objectives.
57  What is the process of management?
The process consists of four basic management functions: v Planning v Organization v Leadership and v Control And six additional management functions v Decision making v Delegation v Discipline v Communication v Coordination and v Motivation The function listed above are interdependent and constantly interact with one another.
A manager must also be able to carry out these functions together in some or other combination.
It is important for you to note that resources refer to the means which are regarded as essential to meet the organizational needs.
Correctional service (for example the Prisons) requires the following: v Correctional official (people) to protect society against prisoners and to treat and develop prisoners.
v Food, clothing, and medication (raw materials) to care for prisoners.
v Programmes (methods) to provide education, informal training, vocational and skills training.
58  v Machines to maintain buildings, equipment and premises and to train prisoners.
v Money to carry out all the above.
v A market to create job opportunities for released prisoners, parolees and probationers.
The combination of the resources enables the organization to supply certain services and products which can meet specific needs.
In this way the organization reaches its goal (long term) and objectives (short term) Self Assessment Exercise 2 Explain what type of resources are used in your current organization or the last school (institution) you attended ------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
Because managers work with resources (people and material) which are durable, they try to employ them efficiently.
What do we mean by efficiency?
Efficiency means rendering quality services at the lowest possible cost.
Efficiency involves carrying out tasks as well as possible with the minimum of inputs (labour, material and time).
Effectiveness implies the doing of the right things to achieve the 59  chosen goals and objectives.
This means thjat effectiveness applies to the total input process output cycle.
It is to be noted that the systems approach developed between 1950 and 1960 due to the need for a more effective and humanitarian management approach.
The functioning of the systems approach does not differ from that of the organization in terms of a holographic network.
Let us cite an example to ensure clearer understanding: correctional supervision as sentence option brings about efficiency because it costs the state far less than keeping prisoners in a prison.
However, it still remains open to debate whether correctional services effectively achieves the organization s objectives of upliftment and rehabilitation of prisoners.
3.4 Who is a Manager?
A manager is any person in a leadership position who takes the head in the execution of a task or group of tasks in an organization.
Managers are also responsible for the performance of people in an organization and use resources to make things happen, to carry out tasks or to complete them.
They are found at all levels (from supervisors and higher) within an organization and work together to achieve the organzaitional objectives.
Self Assessed Exercise 3 List five of the most important management responsibilities which you or your study centre manager need to attend to on a daily basis.
60  1.
------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 2.
------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 3.
------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 4.
------------------------------------------------------------------- ----- ------------------------------------------------------------------------ 5.
------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------ Let us continue with our discussion.
It is to be noted that the task of the correctional manager is unique.
Personnel are appointed to work with people with behavioural problems.
Even at the lowest post/level, personnel find themselves in supervisory capacities, be it with regard to prisoners, probationers or prisoners on parole.
It is not an easy task because offenders are not always willing to subject themselves to development and treatment programmes.
3.5 Organization Culture Cretzee et.al.
(1995:3-4) affirm that humans are the only beings who can create culture.
Because human beings are inextricably involved in culture and the creation of culture, this is also the case in their work environment.
Just as people have to deal with a process of constant change generally in their lives, they also have to deal with change in their working lives.
Constant adjustment implies constant creation of culture.
In Charlton s (1994:10) view, leadership effectiveness can, amongst other things, be measured against the ability of leaders to impart 61  an inspiring vision into a reality, thus presents a challenge for managers.
This means that all the individuals at the various levels of the organization must be persuaded to combine their effects so that the set objectives can be achieved.
It is important for you to note that utilization of the organization s cultural values plays an important role in a manager s ultimate success in this regard.
An organization s culture can be described as its personality.
It tells people more about who and what the organization is.
Just as the personalities of people determine their behaviour, the current organizational culture determines an organization s activities and actions.
The culture influences human behaviours in the organization but is also influenced by human behaviour itself (Smit & Cronje, 1992:402).
Let us take a closer look at this phenomenon which is difficult to measure but which is nevertheless important and interesting.
Management literature this includes the literature of public management or public administration.
It does not always attach the same meaning to important terms.
Organization is a case in point.
One school of thought will explain that an institution (for example a business or government department) has an organization.
In this sense the organization is the way in which the institution is divided.
Others (for example Smit & Cronje, 1992:402) also use the word organization as a synonym for institution.
Can you see the difference?
An institution can have an organization, or it can be one, depending on the context in which it is used.
62  When organizational culture is discussed, one will also come across the term corporate culture (Smit & Cronje, 1992:402).
According to Cronje and Smit (1992:403), culture consists of a set of important assumptions which members of a community have in common.
On the one hand these common assumptions cover a group s belief about the world and how the world works.
These beliefs are determined and reinforced through personal experiences and are expressed in the form of norms which are standards (yardsticks against which behaviour is measured).
On the other hand, common assumptions also refer to a group values.
Values comprise behaviours which the group believes are desirable or useful.
Self Assessment Exercise 4 According to the above explanation, beliefs, norms and values have different meanings.
It is important that you understand the difference.
Try to explain these terms in your own words.
------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us go on with our discussion.
An organization s reason for existence can be found in the objective which staff strive towards by means of the resources available to 63  them.
The presence of the human being which creates culture ensures that an organizational culture will be established.
Although the scope, intensity, nature, and so on can differ from one organization to the next.
The organizational culture thus comprises those common values and norms which the originating staff strive towards and put into practice.
It is expressed in the way in which staff do things: the quality of their service, how they greet one another, how they act towards one another and their clients, how they react to events affecting the organization.
Because not all values are equally important, one can assume that an organization s culture will develop from a combination.
Culture will develop from a combination of its most dominant cultural values.
3.6 Organizational Climate Organization climate should not be confused with organizational culture.
Climate is the staff s reaction to culture.
Organizational climate reflects the staff s attitude, perceptions and morale.
One could say that the climate reveals a state of satisfaction, neutrality or dissatisfaction with a state of affairs.
Whereas culture is more individual in nature.
Culture is something which develops systematically over a long period, while climate is short-lived by nature and can even change from day to day.
It is obvious that culture changes with difficulty and while climate changes more easily.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt about people and outcomes in organizations.
You have learnt what management is all about.
We 64  can now say that you can explain what is meant by a manager.
In addition, you can explain organization culture and organizational climate.
5.0 SUMMARY 1.
What you have learnt in this study unit concerns people and outcomes in organizations.
2.
You have also learnt what is meant by management in organizations.
3.
In addition, you learnt what manager is as well as organization culture.
6.0 TUTOR MARKE D ASSIGNMENT Explain in your own words the following terms: i) management ii) manager iii) organization culture iv) organization climate 7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Charlton, G.(1994) Leadership Beyond 1994.
Human Research Management, 10,(4) May: 7-10 Cretzee, W., Kruger, W & Loubser, J.
(1995) Correctional Services in Focus.
Jonesburg: Hodder & Stoughton.
Garvin, D. A.
(1993) Building a learning organization Harvard Business Review, 21, 4, 78-91.
Ivancevich, J. and Matteson, T. (1990) Organizational Behaviour and Management.
Homeword, III: Irwin.
Kroon, J.
(1995) Algemere Best vvr.
Pretoria: Kagiso Tersier.
Smit, P. and Cronje, G. (1992) Best uursbeginsels Kenwyn:Juta.
65  UNIT 2: HUMAN MOTIVATION IN ORGANIZATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objective 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Motivation in Management 3.2 Motivation and Goal Setting 3.3 Goal Content and Goal Commitments 3.4 The Individual s Work Behaviour 3.5 Organizational Behaviour 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In this unit we are about to discuss Human Motivation in Organizations.
We have understood that human beings/workers need some degree of encouragement for work to be done in organization, for goals to be achieved and for workers to be committed.
Let worker let us look at what other contents you should learn in this study units as specified in the below objecetives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain why managers should motivate employees in organization.
2.
Define a goal within the context of an organization.
3.
List the factors that affect an individual s work behaviour.
66  4.
Explain what is meant by organization behaviour.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Motivation in Management You will recall that in study unit 5 of module I, we described motivation as the force that energizes behaviour, gives direction to behaviour and underlies the tendency to persist.
In this study unit, what should be of paramount interest is to know why a manager (in an organization) should motivate his staff.
The reasons why a manager should motivate employees the following: i) Managers must understand individual s motives in order to know how to get them to join the organization.
ii) Managers must know how to motivate employees to stay with the organization.
For instance, managers must see that jobs and working conditions allow employees to meet their individual needs.
iii) Managers must motivate, because motivation together with ability, training and correct job placement, can lead to employee performance.
3.2 Motivation and Goal Setting We shall continue our discussion of this section of the study unit by asking you to attempt the following quiz: Self Assessment Exercise 1 1.
As a registered student of the NOUN, what goal have you set for yourself?------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 67  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------- Let us go on with our discussion.
We can define a goal as a future target or end result that an organization wishes to achieve.
There are times when some managers use the terms goal and objective interchangeable.
It is to be noted that there is nothing wrong in this usage, although some writers use objective to refer to more narrow target and shorter time frames.
It is important for you to note that a goal cannot be achieved without a plan.
While a goal is a future end result that an organization wants to achieve, a plan can be defined as the means devised for attempting to reach a goal.
Another important concept you need to know in this section of the study unit is organizational mission: what does that mean?
Organizational mission is a broad declaration of the basic, unique purpose and scope of operations that distinguishes the organization from others of its type.
Hahs (1988) states that a mission statement serves different purposes for shareholders in an organization.
For managers, it can be benchmark against which to evaluate success.
For employees, it may define a common purpose, nature of organizational loyalty, and foster a sense of community among workers.
For external parties investors, government agencies, and the public at large, the statement helps provide unique insight into the organization s value and future direction.
68  Self Assessment Exercise 2 In an earlier section of this study unit, you were requested to state the goal you have set for yourself as a registered student of NOUN.
What will you say is the most important benefit of setting that goal?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
According to Locke and Lathan (1984) there are four benefits of goal setting: i) Goals can increase performance.
Research findings have shown that when challenging goals are set, increase performance frequently range from 10 to 25%, and at times higher.
ii) Goals help clarify expectation.
When goals are set, organization members usually have a clear idea of the major outcomes that they are expected to achieve.
It is important for you to note that without goals, the members lack direction.
iii) Goals facilitate the controlling function, because they provide benchmarks against which progress can be assessed so that corrective action can be taken as needed.
iv) Goals increase motivation.
Meeting goals, feeling a sense of accomplishment, and receiving recognition and other rewards for reaching targeted outcomes all serve to enhance motivation.
69  Given your understanding of the above discussion, we shall now discuss how goals facilitate performance.
In doing this, we shall examine goal content, goal commitments, work behaviour, and feedback aspects.
This is clearly shown in figure I below.
Job Job knowledge knowledge Goal content: and Ability and Ability .
Challenging .
Attainablbe .
Specific and Measureable Work Performance behaviour .
Direction .
Effort Goal Commitment: .
Persistence Situational constraints .
Supervisory Authority .
Planning (tools, materials and .
Peer and group pressure .
Public display equipment) .
Expectations of success Knowledge of results .
Incentives and rewards (feedback) .
Participation Figure 1: How Goals Facilitate Performance (Bartoy and Martin, 1994) It is important for you to note that goals that are effective in channeling effort toward achievement have a content that reflects five major characteristics: 1) Challenging Challenging and difficult goals lead to higher performance.
2) Attainable In addition to being challenging, a goal must be attainable.
Attainable goal is more likely to promote sustainable 70  performance over a period of time rather than continually doing the impossible.
3) Specific and Measurable To be effective, goals need to be specific and measurable so that workers clearly understand what is expected and know when the goal has been achieved.
4) Time Limited There should be a defined period of time within which a goal must be accomplished.
5) Relevance Goals are more likely to elicit support when they are clearly relevant to the major work of the organization and the particular department.
Now that you have a clear understanding of what is meant by goal content, it is appropriate to explain goal commitment.
Goal commitment refers to a person s attachment to, or determination to reach a goal.
You will learn in this study unit that without commitment, setting specific, challenging goals will have little impact on performance.
But how can chief executives of organizations foster commitment to organizational goals?
Managers can foster commitment to important organizational goals in the following ways: 71  1) Supervisory Authority Individuals and groups are more likely to commit themselves to a goal when the goal and reasons for it are explained by a person with supervisory authority, usually a boss.
The explanation and instruction will be more effective with a supportive rather than an authoritative supervisor.
2) Peer and Group Pressure Pressure from peers and work group members can enhance goal commitment when one s efforts are channeled in the same direction.
3) Public Display Commitment to difficult goals is higher when the commitment is public (made in front of others) than when it is private.
4) Expectations of success Goal commitment is more likely when individuals or groups perceive that they have high expectations of success.
This means that individuals tend to become committed when they believe that they have a good chance of performing well on the tasks involved in reaching the goals.
5) Incentives and Rewards Though some incentives such as money may be tangible, while some as challenge of job may be intangible, the fact still remains that goal commitment is also enhanced by incentive and rewards.
72  6) Participation The last factor under goal commitment to be discussed in this study unit is participation.
Having individual s participation in the goal setting process can be effective means of fostering commitment.
It is to be noted that participation can be particularly helpful in developing plans for implementaing goals.
3.4 The Individual s Work Behaviour By now you understand what is meant by goal content and goal commitment.
Individual s actual work behaviour is influencing by four factors: 1) Direction Goals are known to provide direction by counselling attention and action toward activities related to goals, rather than toward other activities.
2) Effort: Individual are likely to put forth more effort when goals are difficult than when they are easy.
3) Persistence: Persistence involves maintaining direction and effort on behalf of a goal until it is reached.
4) Planning: Individuals who have committed themselves to achieving difficult goals are likely to develop plans or methods that can be used to attain those goals.
73  It is important for you to note that in addition to goal content, goal commitment, and goal behaviour, there are other components that may influence performance.
These are: 1) Job knowledge and ability These could affect an individual s work behaviour and prospects for reaching goals even when there is strong commitment.
2) Complexity of the task This may affect the degree to which goal directed work behaviours influence job performance.
3) Situational constraints Availability of proper tools, materials and equiupment is important for achieving difficult goals.
4) Knowledge of result (feedback) Feedback about progress toward goals is an influential factor in the effectiveness of goals.
3.5 Organizational Behaviour According to Luthans (1992) organizational behaviour involves the understanding, prediction and control of human behaviour and the factors, which interfere with the performance of people as members of an organization.
As Mullins (1994) puts it, organizational behaviour does not encompass the whole of management, it is more accurately described in the narrower interpretation of providing a behavioural approach to management.
It is important for you to note that organization behaviour embraces an understanding of: a) The behaviour of people b) The process of management 74  c) The organization context in which the process of management takes place.
d) Organizational processes and the execution of work.
e) Interactions with the external environment of which the organization is a part 4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt motivation in management.
You have therefore learnt how motivation can encourage employees in setting goals within the context of an organization.
We can now say that you can explain goal content and goal commitments.
In addition, you can explain individuals work behaviour as well as organizational behaviour.
5.0 SUMMARY 1.
What you have learnt in this study unit concerns motivation in management.
2.
You have also learnt motivation and goal commitments.
3.
In addition, you learnt individual s work behaviour within the context of an organization.
4.
You also learnt organizational behaviour.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT Distinguish between individuals work behaviour and organizational behaviour.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Bartoy, K. M. & martin, D. L. (1994) Management.
New York: McGraw Hill, Inc. 75  Luthans, T. (1992) Organization: Theory and Practice.
McGraw Hill, Inc., New York.
Mullions, L. J.
(1994) Management and Organizational Behaviour Pitman Publishing London.
76  UNIT 3 : MASLOW AND McGREGOR THEORIES OF HUMAN MOTIVATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Maslow s theory 3.2 The Preposition on which Maslow s theory was Based 3.3 Critique of Maslow s Theory 3.4 McGregor s Theory 3.5 Critique of McGregor s Theory 3.6 Similarities of Maslow s Theory and McGregor s Theory 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References for Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In study unit 2 we studied Human Motivation in Organizations.
You are about to study a stimulating study unit, with specific references to Maslow and McGregor Theories of Human Motivation.
You will also learn the similarities of both theories.
The other contents you should learn in this study are specified in the objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study units, you should be able to: 1.
Explain Maslow s theory 2.
List the weaknesses of Maslow s theory 3.
Describe McGregor s theory 77  4.
State the similarities of Maslow s and McGregor s. 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Maslow s Theory Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs The instinct, drive, intrinsic motivation, achievement motivation and model of motivation theories all assume that humans are motivated in the same ways as lower animals.
Abraham Maslow theorized that some motivational forces are distinctly human.
In promoting this idea, Malsow became one of the founding fathers of the humanistic school of psychology, which emphasizes that humans are unique in the animal kingdom.
The humanistic view suggests that human beings are unique in the animal kingdom; they are not merely the organisms standing on the highest rung of the evolutionary ladder.
Humans are uniquely capable of having a self-concept, a perception of their own characteristics.
In addition, every individual is different, and this individuality is a central determinant of human behaviour.
Behaviour is controlled not so much by the external environment as by the subjective environment created by the individual's biased perceptions of what is going on around her.
Each individual experiences the world a bit differently, and it is this subjective, individualized world that influences behaviour.
Biology has a role, in that each person is endowed with biological motivations that greatly affect behaviour.
78  Figure I: Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs.
Human needs are arranged in a hierarchy.
Basic needs must be satisfied before higher needs are fulfilled (Maslow, 1970).
Need for Self actualization Growth needs Self Esteem Needs Social needs Deficiency Needs Security/Safety Nessd Physiological Needs Maslow hypothesized that human behaviour is motivated by a number of competing needs that can be arranged in a hierarchy.
It is important for you to note that this need hierarchy is a systematic listing of needs in priority order, such that needs further up the hierarchy can be met only after more basic needs have been satisfied.
The more basic needs are deficiency needs -needs that must be satisfied for survival.
The needs at the very top are growth 79  needs - needs that enhance the person's psychological functioning (see Figure I).
Let us now explain in more detail the six basic needs: 1) Physiological needs: At the lowest level of the hierarchy are physiological needs such as hunger, sex, maternal behaviour, and various sensory pleasures (that is of the senses, for example taste).
These needs are of remarkable importance essentially because they are the most proponent of all man's needs and, if unsatisfied, dominate all activities.
2) Security needs: These are almost as dominating as the physiological needs.
These are illustrated by a child's reaction to noise and light, and generally reflect man's need for a safe, orderly predictable world.
It includes the need for freedom from fear of personal danger; many parents in Nigeria satisfy the safety need for children.
A substantial percentage of parents do not.
This generates a severe obligation for other agencies of society particularly the school.
Today in Nigeria, both child and adult safety needs are often threatened by societal violence, avoidable communal violence, and state-of-the-art armed robbery incidence.
3) Social needs: Travers (1986:206) writes that if the physiological and safety needs are met, the need for love, affection, and belongingness emerges.
The individual begins to look to others for satisfaction, both to give and to receive.
The educational implications of this need seem obvious: children must feel wanted and experience a sense of affection toward and from the teacher.
Remember that 80  children need and want discipline as much as they require love and affection.
4) Esteem needs: These are the needs of being worthwhile and capable of making a contribution to society.
Real self-respect is based upon achievement, and the esteem needs founded upon actual achievement, manifest themselves in a feeling of self-confidence and a corresponding desire for recognition by others.
Self-esteem is the need to maintain a perception of oneself as a generally competent, strong, independent person.
The need for other esteem is the desire to have a good reputation and to obtain recognition and status.
Failure to satisfy the esteem needs is likely to lead to feelings of incompetence, helplessness, and inferiority.
It is important for you to note that the lesson for educators seems obvious: Teachers must insure that the task are such that pupils/students can satisfactorily complete them, thus insuring goal achievement and a growing confidence in self and recognition by peers.
5) Aesthetic needs: When all the deficiency needs are regularly satisfied, the growth needs, including the cognitive needs for understanding and knowledge, and the aesthetic needs for order and beauty, become dominant motivators.
The aesthetic needs are the needs in which one finally comes to a deep understanding of the world and the purpose of life and feel a part of the cosmos.
Satisfaction of these needs moves the individual to a higher state of psychological functioning and makes him a more effective person.
81  6) Self-actualisation needs: The very highest need - the capstone of Maslow's hierarchy - is the need for self- actualization.
It is each individual's need to advise all higher capacities, fulfill his/her potentials, and become the best in which one enjoys the experience of creativity and the joy of personal success.
The self-actualised person referred to by Maslow is the fully human person, is constantly striving to achieve higher and higher levels of personal growth.
He/she is non-defensive, open to experience, spontaneous, problem-oriented, and largely autonomous from the environment (Mittelman, 1995).
Maslow (1970) believed that a person's position on the hierarchy is likely to rise with age, but estimated that less than 1 percent of the population ever achieve self-actualization.
Travers (1986) similarly states that probably few, if any, people ever experience self-actualization but it is undoubtedly this need that drives man to his greatest accomplishments, both personally and socially.
Self-Assessment Exercise 1 1) Take a close, critical look at the Nigerian society, Do we have self-actualized people (living or late) in Nigeria?
3.2 The Proposition on Which Maslow s Theory was Based Now that you are familiar with the content theory of motivation as developed by Maslow, it is important for you to understand the proposition on which Maslows theory was based: i) man s needs are arranged in a hierarchy of importance, ranging from the lowest need (physiological) to safety, love (social), esteem (ego), and self actualization.
82  ii) Man is continually wanting: Consequently all needs are never fully satisfied.
Once a particular need is satisfied, its potency or urgency of satisfaction diminishes, and another need emerges to replace it.
This means that man is an insatiable being.
iii) Once a need is fairly well satisfied, it no longer motivates behaviour.
Man is consequently motivated by the next higher level of unsatisfied need.
However, he can be motivated in a reverse direction if a lower level need is threatened.
iv) The various needs are interdependent and overlapping.
When the peak of a need is passed, that need ceases to be the primary motivator of behaviour.
The next level then begins to dominate.
Even when a need is satisfied, it still influences behaviour because the needs are interdependent and overlapping.
In addition, you should note that Maslow viewed an individual s motivation as a predetermined order of needs.
Physiological needs are the most imperative area, but the self actualization need is highly important to each individual.
3.3 Critique of Maslow s Theory A point you must note is that Maslow's theory has been very influential both in practical applications and in generating research (Ebersole & De-vore, 1995).
In the world of business, it has provided a way of understanding what motivates employees and has been used as a tool to reduce turnover, increase productivity, and improve job satisfaction (Aamodtet al 1993).
Maslow's need theory suggests that management should work to gradually move 83  each employee up the motivational hierarchy toward self- actualization -the full realization of an individual's potential.
In addition, applications in education, nursing, consumer economics, management training, and elder care are also common (Daniels, 1992; Seeley, 1992; Umoren, 1992).
It is important for you to note that research support, on the other hand, has been hard to come by.
Complex constructs like self- actualization are difficult to define and measure, and what supportive research there is has been widely criticized (Heylighen, 1992).
Equally as important is the repeated failure to confirm the priority ordering of the need hierarchy (Wicken et al, 1993).
When subjects are asked to rank the needs in order of importance for them, the rankings typically do not conform to Maslow's hierarchy (Mills, 1985).
Enduring satisfaction of physiological and security needs does not necessarily mean the person will go on to seek belongingness and love.
In other cases, those needs may be pursued even in the face of chronic hunger.
Now try this quiz: Self- Assessment Exercise 2 1.
Given our discussion so far and your own personal experience list out the hierarchy of needs according to your priority: i.
-------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- ii.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- iii.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- iv.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- v. ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 84  vi.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- That's okay.
Let us continue our discussion.
Moreover, the age hypothesis has not been confirmed: Position on the need hierarchy does not consistently increase with Goebel & Brown, (1981).
All the same, it is important for you to remember that Maslow's theory has been influential and is widely applied in practical settings but has not been supported by research.
3.4 McGregor s Theory It is important for you to note that motivation in organization encompasses forces both within (internal) and external to the individual worker.
Internal motivation refers to the needs, wants and desires which exist within an individual and make up his internal motivation.
These forces influence him by determining his thoughts, which in turn lead to his behaviour in a particular situation.
External motivation considers the force which exist outside an individual.
External motivation include the factors controlled by the manager such as: job context salaries, and job content recognition, advancement and responsibility McGregor s theory of motivation incorporates both internal and external motivation.
In McGregor s view, external motivation is manifested in the assumptions the manager makes regarding the attitudes of his subordinates.
It is to be noted that McGregor set forth two alternative views of the nature of man.
What are these views?
The views were explained in theory X and theory Y. it is to be noted that the two theories have conflicting assumptions.
85  The Assumptions of Theory X i) The average human being has an inherent dislike of work and will avoid it if he can.
ii) Because of the human characteristics of dislike of work, most people must be coerced, controlled, directed, threatened with punishment to get them to put forth adequate effort toward the achievement of organizational objectives.
iii) The average human being prefers to be directed, wishes to avoid responsibility, has relatively little ambition, wants and security.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 Take a second look at the assumptions of theory listed above.
Will you say the assumptions are correct?
------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us go on with our discussion.
The other view of McGregor s theory Y has its assumptions: Theory Y assumptions are believed could lead to greater motivation and increased fulfillment of both individual needs and organizational goals.
The six assumptions are: i) The expenditure of physical and mental effort in work is as natural as play or rest.
ii) External control and the threat of punishment are not the only means of bringing about effort toward organizational objectives.
86  iii) Commitment to objective is a function of the rewards associated with their achievement.
iv) The average human being learns under proper conditions, not only to accept but to seek responsibility.
v) The capacity to exercise a relatively high degree of imagination, ingenuity and creativity in the solution of organizational problems is widely, not narrowly distributed in the population.
vi) Under the conditions of modern industrial life, the intellectual potentialities of average human being are only partially utilized.
From the assumptions listed above, you can observe that the foundation of theory Y is integration.
Integration is the establishment of an environment in which employees can best achieve their own goals by committing themselves to the organization s objectives.
It is important for you to note that theory Y s emphasis on internal motivation that all employees will be motivated by self esteem and self actualization needs on the job can be challenged.
This may not always be so because some people are uncomfortable with too much freedom.
Critique of McGregor s Theory Although theory X and theory Y are based on polar extremes and are an over-complication, they do represent identified philosophies, which influence managerial behaviour and strategies.
87  Just like Maslow s theory of hierarchy of needs, McGregor s theory X and theory Y approach can help manager s develop a broader perspective on the nature of workers with them.
McGregor s theory looks very simple.
But the theory is not a soft option.
In reality, it is often difficult to achieve successfully.
It can also be frustrating and time consuming and mistakes will occur.
It is important for you to note that theory X should not be completely neglected.
Even when a manager has a strong belief in theory Y assumptions, there are occasions when it may be necessary or more suitable to use theory X approach.
For instance, when the nature of the job itself offers little intrinsic reward or limited opportunities to satisfy higher level needs, a more dictatorial style of management might work best.
In addition, you should know that theory X approach is not most useful in emergency situation, or shortage of time demand the use of authority in directing actins to tasks at hand.
Sub Similarities of the Theories of Maslow and McGregor.
Maslow Higher Level needs: McGregor Theory: Self actualization Esteem ------------ Satisfaction of esteem and Self-actualization needs/ ---------- Responsibility and creativity Self-direction and self Control Lower level needs: Theory Y.
Social Security above all Safety Direction preferable Physiological Threats of punishment 88  Figure 3: The similarities of the theories of Maslow and McGregor (Hicks & Gullet, 1991) Figure 3 shows that although the theories of Maslow and McGregor seem to approach motivation from a different perspective, the two theories emphasize similar sets of relationships.
It is important for you to note the following.
1.
Maslow views the rarely satisfied higher level needs as the motivating force behind the worker.
On the other hand, McGregor approaches motivation through his theory Y which is based on assumptions concerning the motives of workers.
This implies that the two theories are relevant to studies of external motivation.
2.
The three lower level needs in Maslow s hierarchy of needs theory: physiological, safety, and social are all relatively satisfied.
Consequently, they are no longer strong, driving forces.
3.
McGregor s theory Y assumes that the employee desires satisfaction of his esteem and self actualization needs, desires responsibility, exercises self direction and self control.
Maslow assumes that a manager by implication is therefore free to choose either higher level needs, or theory Y assumptions to motivate his employees.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt Maslow s theory of hierarchy of needs.
You have equally learnt the propositions on which Maslow s theory is based.
We can now say that you can list the similarities between Maslow s theory and McGregor s theory.
89  5.0 SUMMARY 1.
What you have learnt in this study unit concerns Maslow hierarchy of needs.
2.
You have also learnt the propositions on which Maslow s theory was based.
3.
In addition, you learnt McGregor s theory.
4.
You also learnt the similarities of Maslow s theory and McGregor s theory.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1) List 3 strengths and 2 weaknesses of Maslow s theory 2) List 3 strengths and 2 weaknesses of McGregor s theory.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Daniels, J.
(1992) Empowering homeless children through school Counseling.
Elementary School Guidance and Counseling, 27 (2), 104 112.
Ebersole, P. & Devore, G. (1995) Self actualization, diversity, and meaning in life.
Journal of Social Behaviour and Personality, 10, 1, 37 51.
Heylighen, F. (1992), A cognitive systematic reconstruction of Maslow s theory of self-actualisation.
Behavioural Science 37, 1,39-58 Hicks, H. & Gullet, R. (1991) Organizations: Theory and behaviour.
Tokyo:McGrew-Hill Inc. Maslow, A.
(1970) Motivation and Personality.
New York: Harper and Row.
90  Mills, A. S. (1985) Participation motivations for outdoor recreation: A test of Maslow s theory Journal of Leisure Research.
17, (3),184-199.
Mittleman, W. (1995) openness: A final reply to Tobacyk.
Journal of Humanistic Psychology 42, 143 144.
Umoren, J.
A.
(1992) Maslow hierarchy of needs and OBRA (1987): Toward need satisfaction by nursing home residents.
Educational Gerontology.
Seeley, E. (1992) Human needs and consumer economics: The implications of Maslow s theory of motivation for consumer expenditure patterns.
Journal of socio economics.
21, (4), 303 324.
Traver, J.
(1986) Fundamentals of Educational Psychology.
Scranton, Pennsylvania: International Textbook company.
Wicker, F. W., Brown, G. & Hagen, A.
(1993) On reconsidering Maslow: An examination of the deprivation/dominance proposition.
Journal of research in personality.
27, (2), 118 133.
91  UNIT 4: APPROACHES TO MANAGEMENT AND ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main content 3.1 Changes in Organization 3.2 The Humanistic Management Approach 3.3 The Systems Approach 3.4 The participative Management Approach 3.5 Participative Management as Management Philosophy 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment 7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In this study unit, what should be of important interest to you is knowing what is meant by change in organizations and types of change.
Let us look at what other content you should learn in this study unit as specified in the below study unit objectives.
Nothing in life is static.
Each day of our lives is different to the next.
Change is inevitable and affect each one of us to a greater or lesser extent.
Even organzitions cannot get away from change.
It is therefore better for an organzition to manage the change than to become a victim of forced change.
The nature of the change will determine to what extent it will affect you personally.
For example, the change from military dictatorship to democratic government affected every person living in Nigeria.
92  Organizations change so fast these days that radical change in management practices, work patterns, work methods and the use of technology have become necessary.
Old methods are thus discarded, new work methods are invented, traditional (vertical) structures which disregard bureaucracy.
However, in this process the behaviour of workers, interpersonal relationships and powers must also be adopted.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this unit, you should be able to: 1) Define the concept of change within the context of organizations.
2) Distinguish between different categories of change.
3) Explain the humanistic management approach 4) Describe the systems approach 5) Explain the participative management approach.
3.0 MAIN CONTEXT 3.1 Changes in Organizations Change is the reaction to any event which affects the activities of an organization directly or indirectly.
Kroon (1995:507) states the following change in the broadest sense of the word is a planned, but more often unplanned reaction to stimuli from the environment .
According to Smit and Cronje (1992:248) organization change refers to any alteration of activities in an organization which includes aspects such as technological development, restructuring and the creation of new work schedules or the adjustment of existing work schedules.
93  Organization development is the planned way in which an organization manages change.
The process through which this change takes place is known as change management.
Organization development aims at renewal so that the organization can adopt to changing circumstances.
Ackerman (1986:1-8) distinguishes between the following three categories of change: i) Developmental Change directed at the optimization of systems, procedures and applications.
ii) Transitional Change directed at the replacement of obsolete systems with newer systems and the application of modern technology.
iii) Transformational Change directed at the change of people s attitudes towards and view of the organizations vision, mission, culture and habits.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Which of the categories of change explained above would you say describes the experience of Nigerians under the government of former President Olusegun Obasanjo?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
3.2 The Humanistic Management Approach: Since 1930 the emphasis on the individual in the organization has contributed to the development of a more humanistic management approach.
Humanists see individuals as an indispensable component in the 94  organization and believe that workers should carry out pleasant and stimulating tasks.
Working conditions should also contribute to the development of individuals.
It is to be noted that research has shown that productivity and worker morale increase when the interests of the workers are taken into account.
It is important for you to note that such findings have led to a transformation in management approaches and have contributed to management techniques such as team building, participation in decision making, and management by objectives.
Note also that traditional and authoritarian policies disregard the workers as individuals, and the unbalanced emphasis on the achievement of objectives within the organization of objectives within the organization are no longer viewed by managers as suitable.
The humanistic management approach leads to high morale amongst personnel and a drop in absenteeism.
A feel of solidarity, security and loyalty develops as a result of the concern which managemrts shows for their personnel and good working conditions.
Now try to answer the following quiz: Self Assessment Exercise 2 1.
List three (3) important management techniques generated by recent research i) ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- ii) ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- iii) ------------------------------------------------------------------ ----and iv) ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- 95  2.
From your understanding of our discussion, state three (3) advantages of the humanistic management approach i.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ii.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------- iii.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------- That s nice of you.
Let us continue our discussion.
According to Mol (1990:17-18) managers following the humanistic approach believe that their subordinates: - Will do their best if they are treated justly and fairly.
- Are not dispensable objects, but like to be given recognition.
- Will experience job satisfaction if their working conditions are pleasant?
- Will perform well if they are treated humanely.
- Play an important role in the organization and will thus wish to be appreciated.
- Have a need for social activities.
- It is important for you to note that the humanistic management approach is often regarded as a warm, soft, and ineffective - Because Managers who use this approach focus mainly on social relationships and are not performance oriented.
The consequences of this appear particularly in service organizations, and the following are some examples: 96  i) Objectives are carried out on a daily basis without properly formulated standards against which results can be measured.
ii) Negative feedback or poor performance is concealed during performance appraisal in order to maintain good relationships.
iii) Poor Performance or dead woods are not addressed but placed in another post or division where they enjoy protection.
iv) Paternalism occurs during the recruitment and appointment process, and only the good aspects of the job are impressed on the personnel.
V) Personnel are kept busy with impressive activities (for example arranging function and other social activities or appear to be very busy but effectively contribute very little to the organization s objectives.
3.3 The System Approach The systems approach developed between 1950 and 1960 due to the need for a more effective and humanitarian management approach.
The systems approach emanated from the general systems theory which consists of the input process output model.
Lessing (1982:68) decribes the system as a network of interdependent sub-systems (divisions) which constantly interact with one another to achieve a joint goal.
The operation of any of the subsystems usually affects the whole system.
The school prison consists of a number of interdependent divisions such as students teachers departments programmes, facility departments, hostel, examination.
These divisions are known as subsystems of the school and interact constantly with one another.
97  The students (input) is admitted into a particular class in order to achieve the set objectives.
The output is the successful completion of the programme and the emergence of a graduate from the system.
By using the system approach managers are able to plan well in order to facilitate the flow of activities between divisions.
The institutions committee for example coordinate the admission of students and other relevant needs of the students are attendant to by various departments before a student is certified to be admitted into the school system.
The harmonious cooperation between divisions cannot be over emphasized.
Should the admission office for example admit a student on the wrong qualification, the error may have an undesirable effect on all the other divisions.
Such an error can lead to the wrong placement and poor performance by the affected student.
It is important for you to note that the systems approach enable managers to determine which internal and external influences may possibly affect the system.
External factors which influences the school set up are for example family members of students, (parents), trade unions, the community and the economy.
Just think of the pressure by external pressure groups when ti has to do with examination results, admission, transfer of teachers, and even promotion of students and teachers.
Example of internal factors which might affect the welfare of the system are gang activities, teachers morale, and the availability of resources and facilties.
98  Self Assessment Exercises .3 List more internal and external factors which affect the activities of a prison.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Well done.
Let us continue our discussion.
3.4 The Participative Management Approach Although the systems approach is still found in most organizations, organizations nowadays are regarded increasingly as social or participative systems.
In contrast to the systems approach where activities and functions take place mainly within the organization, the social system focuses on the diversification of activities.
In the past, correctional services was mainly concerned with the use of internal resources.
Now networking takes place and external organizations and the community are becoming involved in and are taking responsibility for the smooth running of schools.
Think about what you have read up to now in this section of the study unit.
You might think that correctional services and its managers, as described above, no longer exist.
Indeed, the existing state of affairs is no longer acceptable.
Organization can no longer be managed according to the traditional management approaches.
Managers must adapt to new ideas about leadership and keep up to date with organizational and technological innovations.
99  The questions is now whether participative management as an alternative management approach is strong enough to bring about improved performance in organizations.
Yet before we answer this question we must first look at what participative management and performance mean.
i) Participative management is certainly not democracy.
Participative management implies participation in the management process.
Democracy gives all people the right to vote but does not necessarily include participation.
It is important for you to note that there are already structures, functions and management prossesses in the school system which lend themselves to participation and are applied with a certain degree of success.
However, this success depends on how people accept the new principles and accompanying activities.
We will now turn to participative management practices, functions and structures which will be necessary for organizations in the future.
3.5 Participative Management As Management Philosophy Though the traditional management functions still apply, effective leadership is a critical skill which every manager must possess.
It is relevant for you to note that participative management is modeled on self management and is focused on work teams who determine their own work flow.
They are also formal managers or leaders and they are responsible for the strategic positioning of correctional services.
They also carry out operational functions.
They focus on short and long term objectives and the conservation 100  of healthy relationships between roleplayers such as the community, government, family of prisoners, police and justice.
In order to give momentum to the establishment of participative systems: • People should know which practices and schools of thought they should follow to promote participation.
• They should be able to recognize the systems and values of both the bureaucratic and participative management approaches.
• All role players must be involved in the identification of values and the type of behaviour which is required to support the values.
• Control measures must be instituted to ensure that people implement the new values.
• Values, structure and leadership must change simultaneously.
The organization should develop in such a way that every one accepts accountability, has sufficient authority and respects the rights of others.
People must commit themselves to participation, client service, accessibility, legitimacy, diversity and learning.
The habit of passing the buck must be avoided.
People must be allowed to think and do .
Control must be internalized so that every person accepts responsibility for quality, productivity and innovation.
All role players (personnel, community and trade unions) should be involved in the organization s activities.
101  4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt change within the context of organizations.
You have therefore learnt the different categories of change.
We can now say that you can explain the humanistic management approach.
In addition, you can describe the systems approach as well as explain the participative management approach, as it affects the school system.
5.0 SUMMARY 1.
What you have learnt in this study unit concerns change in organizations.
2.
You have also learnt different categories of change.
3.
In addition, you learnt the humanistic management approach.
4.
You also learnt the systems approach.
5.
Finally, you have learnt the participative management approach on a school system.
6.0 Tutor - Marked Assignment a) Explain the concept of change.
b) Describe three categories of change 7.0 References/Further Readings Kroon, J.
(1995) Algemere Bestuur Pretoria: South Africa.
Lessing, B.
(1982) Die rol Vann die Jannesburg.
Mol, A.
(1990) Help?
I m a Manager.
Cape Town: Tafelberg.
Smith, P. & Cronje, J.
(1992) Bestruursbeginsels South Africa.
102  UNIT 5: MANAGEMENT CONCEPT 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Value 3.2 Structure 3.3 Planning 3.4 Remuneration system 3.5 Management Leadership Styles 3.6 Technology 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In study unit 4, we explained the concept of change in the context of an organization.
We also explained different categories of change.
In addition, the humanistic management approach was described.
Finally in that study unit both the systems approach and the participative management approach were explained.
In this study unit, what should be of relevant interest to you is knowing what is meant by values in an organizational set up.
Let us look at what other contentS you should learn in this study unit as specified in the objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES After studying this study unit, you should be able to: 103  1.
Define the concept of values within the context of an organization.
2.
Describe the structure of an organization.
3.
Explain planning in an organization.
4.
Describe management leadership styles.
5. explain remuneration systems 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Values Organization values support the type of behaviour which an organization believes is desirable and useful to achieve organization objectives and goals.
So, what are values?
Values are the principles according to which we do things, communicate with one another or behave.
Values are the fundamental principles according to which organizations and individuals should direct their actions and choice.
Rules and regulations are effective as long as there is someone who can enforce them, while values are always found within the person and direct people s actions.
Let us cite an example to ensure you understand our discussion.
If a prisoner refuses to enter a call and the correctional official is the only person present, the official would probably act differently than when the head of the prison were present.
The rules and regulations of the prison do not allow correctional officials to use more violence than is necessary.
It is important for you to note that the correctional officials behaviour will thus stay 104  within limits in the presence of the head, while limits are often over stepped in the absence of supervisors or managers.
Values have thus become an important focus point in organizations and are of utmost importance in establishing a philosophy of participative management.
However, note that it is not easy to change an organization s value system because values establish themselves over years and become part of a way of living.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Are you happy with the way in which your supervisor takes decisions or treat you?
Do you treat those who work under you and who you come into contacts with daily with dignity, respect and fairness?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue with our discussion.
3.2 Structure The most recent development in organization structures is found in the creation of boundary less organizations and self managed teams.
Boundary-lessness means that the following components of correctional services need not necessarily be part of the prison system: § Community corrections and parole boards § Workshops, factories and agricultural activities 105  § Services related to the physical care of prisoners such as medical and nutritional.
§ Vocational services, for example psychological, social and educational services.
§ Private security companies which can take over custodial services (night shifts, access control, standing guard and even escort duties).
Figure I below makes our discussion clearer: Community Corrections Medical Services Food Supplies Correctional; Services Parole Board Core Vocational Services Consultants Figure I: The boundaryless organization.
It is important for you to note that in future these components can functions as autonomous, supporting and independent business units from the external environment.
This can also help to bring down the per capital costs and encourage the community to become involved for the sake of stability, development and safety.
The creation of boundaryless organizations and self managed (self directed) teams leads to self governance, and makes traditional 106  managers unnecessary.
The structure of correctional services already lends itself to self managed and independent work units such as the disposal offices, vocational divisions and institutional committees.
However, these work teams must be equipped in order to carry out participative management practices and follow a combination of constraint improvement, productivity, quality, reliability and flexibility.
To ensure you understand our discussion, figure II below is provided: Disposal Vocational Head of Prison Prison Institutional Committee .
Team Leader * Team member 0 Team Figure II: Self Managed teams 3.3 Planning Because work is increasingly taking place in teams, divisions, work groups and project teams must reposition themselves, in teams of the strategy.
Participative organizations expect each workers and role player to contributes to the strategic planning activities.
107  Upward strategic development is a general trend in participative organizations.
Operational workers are involved in the analysis of the organization s environment in order to identify new strategies or adapt existing strategies.
Now, try to answer the following question.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 Given our discussion so far, what do you understand by vertical boundarylessness in organizational set up?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
Vertical boundarylessness means that correctional officials who do the work must also think and help to formulate strategies.
Al the same time top management must also stay iin touch and involved with what happens on the operational level.
Thinking and driungh are thus not separated from each other.
Separation of line and staff functions are probably the most important causes for low productivity and waste of resources.
The challenge is to add value to the organization.
Functional divisions can, for example, manage their own budgets, personnel appointments and performance management systems.
This may sound as if functional divisions are setting their primary tasks aside, but the contrary is true.
They accept responsibility for decisions and deviations which might occur.
Teams take better 108  decisions because needs are experienced on a personal level.
They can also no longer blame the staff functionaries for poor decisions.
When teams themselves decide on roles which should be fulfilled and objectives which should be achieved, commitment develop.
Teams learn how to take decisions together about what has be done, who will do what, and how to manage themselves.
Joint formulation of objectives has specific advantages.
There is deliberate integration with clients and other role players.
The team decides openly what it will do and what it will not do.
Team members are clear about their roles, responsibility de develops and objectives are turned into actions which must be carried out.
It is important for you on note that many participative processes facial because budgets are drawn up before objectives have been formulated, to because budgets are drawn up and controlled externally to the team (division).
3.4 Remuneration Systems.
According to research, individualistic remuneration systems have a negative effect on people and their performance, but the following also holds true: Remuneration is part of the organization strategy and should support the strategy.
If quality, productivity, community service and participation are key strategies, the remuneration system should support these priorities.
The use of remuneration to manage to motivate individuals should be avoided at all costs.
Rather consider good remuneration and management practices to improve performance.
109  3.5 Management Leadership Style Traditional managers are often tough customers who ensure that their subordinates work under strict supervision.
They usually believe that workers are not very intelligent and have few skills.
If the workers do not perform as expe4cted, these type of managers believe that discipline will solve the problems.
It is important for you to note that these assumptions no longer hold.
These days managers are more sensitive towards their workers.
They regard subordinates as a valuable resources and consider their needs expectations and general welfare.
The challenge for managers lies in the creation of an employee centred culture in order to obtain the cooperation between managers and workers.
This type of approach should contribute to tolerance, mutual respect and a learner centred culture.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 From your understanding of our discussion, and assuming you were the manager of a thriving company, would you want to maintain the management philosophy if cooperation?
Let us continue our discussion.
If managers wish to maintain the management philosophy of cooperation they should take the following principles into account: - Avoid partisanship and nepotism - Respect people and their right to privacy - Never pretend that you know everything 110  - Promote trust between workers and official - Closely follow management and business ethics.
- Address the problem and not the person - Give the workers authority together with responsibility.
- Treat workers like people and not like slaves.
- Recognize performance to encourage self respect and trust.
- Allow mistakes and support the workers in correcting their mistakes.
- Allow freedom of speech and association without domination - Earn the respect of your subordinates; do not demand it from them.
- Do not expect more from your workers than they are able to do.
- Create an organization climate which also workers to experience some degree of ownership.
- Never humiliate workers or discipline them in the presence of others.
- Recognize abilities without infringing on the when, how an what.
- Do not appoint competent people and then tell them how to do their work.
- Never enforce your will on other people make a request before giving instructions.
- Remember, you are also a worker just like your subordinates do not misused your position.
111  - Obtain the cooperation of your workers by involving them and encouraging them to take decisions themselves.
3.6 Technology Computer based technology is in the process of changing the role of workers and managers.
Managers must therefore understand the software their workers are using in order to train new workers and to help with problems.
They must also keep up to date with the coordination of integrated office systems.
Computers are increasingly associated with data information systems, printers and telecommunication systems which facilitate work outputs.
However, computers also made it more difficult to identify problems which develop in divisions.
The problems also cover a wider field than before when the activities of different divisions were dealt with separately and independently (Robbins & Decenzo, 1995:312).
In the workplace information systems are increasingly replacing direct supervision.
The logistics Admission and Release systems which are used in the Nigerian correctional services serve as examples.
These systems enable managers to obtain information about workers outputs, quality levels and abilities without having to carry out physical inspections and checking actions.
This has greatly decreased the direct monitoring and controlling of work by managers.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt about values within the context of an organization.
You have therefore learnt the structure of an 112  organization.
We can now say that you can explain what is meant by planning in an organization.
In addition, you can describe management leadership styles and explain remuneration systems.
5.0 SUMMARY 1.
What you have learnt in this study unit concerns values within the context of an organization.
2.
You have also learnt the structure of an organization.
3.
In addition, you learnt what planning is in an organizational set up.
4.
Also, you learnt management leadership styles.
5.
Finally, you learnt remuneration systems.
6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
(a) It is easy to change an organization s value system?
(b) Give reason(s) for your answer in (a) above.
(c ) State three specific advantage of joint formulation of objectives in an organization.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Bruyns, H. (1997) Management thought & Theories In: Bruyns, H. et.al.
(Eds) Correctional Management.
Hodder & Stoughton, London.
Robbins, S. & Decenzo, D. (1995), Fundamentals of Managemrnt: Essential Concepts and Applications.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice - Hall 113  MODULE III Unit 1: Leadership in Organization Unit 2: Leadership Styles Unit 3: Stress in Organization Unit 4: Managing Stress in Organization UNIT 1: LEADERSHIP IN ORGANIZATIONS 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Nature of Leadership 3.2 Functions of Leadership 3.3 Constraints on Leadership 3.4 Decision Making behaviour 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References for Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In this study unit the nature of leadership will be discussed.
The unit will also describe leadership function and the diverse constraints of leadership.
Let us look at what other content you should learn in this study unit as specified in the below study unit objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be be able to: 1.
Explain the nature of leadership 114  2.
List the functions of leadership 3.
Explain the constraints of leadership 4.
Describe the decision making behaviour 3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Nature of Leadership The concept of leadership in organizations has a variety of meanings.
One of the relevant meanings from the standpoint of managerial behaviour has been suggested by Katz and Kahn (1966: 302).
They defined leadership as the influential increment over and above mechanical compliance with the routine directives of the organization .
In other words, leadership occurs when one individual can induce others to do something of their own volition instead of doing something because it is required or because they fear the consequences of non-compliance.
It is this voluntary component of leadership that sets it apart from other influence processes such as authority and power.
3.2 Functions of Leadership It is important for you to note that in many way(s), it is the quality of managerial leadership that differentiates effective organizations from ineffective ones.
Leadership can serve several important functions that are necessary for organizational effectiveness.
To begin with, leadership fills the void left by the incompleteness and imperfection of organization design (Katz & Kaln, 1965) Because it is not possible to design the perfect organization and account for every member s activities at all times, something must issue that 115  human behaviour is coordinated and directed toward task accomplishment.
Now reflect on this quiz; Self - Assessment Exercise 1 Given what we have discussed so far, what is that something that must insure coordinated human behaviour?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
This something is leadership.
Second, leadership helps to maintain the stability of an organization in a turbulent environment by allowing for rapid adjustment and adoption to changing environment conditions.
Third, leadership can assist in the internal coordination of diverse organizational units, particularly during periods of growth and change.
He can act as buffer between conflicting parties.
Fourth, leadership plays a role in maintaining stable membership for an organization by facilitating personal satisfaction and personal goal attainment.
To further ensure clearer understanding of our discussion, let us cite example from the school system.
Halping & Croft (1963:1) identified our characteristics of teacher s behaviour which all- together emphasizes the importance of two basic leadership functions- task achievement and the fulfillment of the social needs of colleagues as essential to effectiveness.
The author identified 116  four characteristics of principal s behaviour and four characteristics of teacher s behaviour: 1.
Disengagement refers to the teachers tendency to be not with it .
This dimension describes a group which is going through the motions , a group that is not in gear with respect to the task at hand.
This subject focuses upon the teachers behaviour in a task oriented situation.
2.
Hindrance refers to the teachers feeling that the principal burdens them with routine duties, committee demands, and other requirements which the teachers construe as unnecessary busy work, which hinders rather than facilitates their work.
3.
Esprit refers to moral.
The teachers feel that their social needs are being satisfied, and that they are, at the same time enjoying a sense of accomplishment in their job.
4.
Intimacy refers to the teachers enjoyment of friendly social relations with each other.
This dimension describes a social needs satisfaction which is not necessarily associated with task accomplishment.
Principal s behaviour 5.
Aloofness refers to behaviour by the principal which is characterized as formal and impersonal.
He goes by the book and prefers to be guided by rules and policies rather than to deal with the teachers in an informal, face to face situation.
To maintain this style, he keeps himself at least, emotionally at a distance from his staff.
6.
Production emphasis refers to behaviour by the principal which is characterized by close supervision of the staff.
He 117  is highly directive and plays the role of a straw boss .
His communication goes in only one direction, and he is not sensitive to feedback from the staff.
7.
Thrust refers to behaviour by the principal which is characterized by his evident effort in trying to move the organization .
Thrust behaviour is marked not by close supervision, but by the principal s attempt to motivate the teachers through the example which he personally sets.
This behavioural thought is starkly task oriented, is nonetheless viewed favourably by the teachers.
8.
Consideration refers to behaviour by the principal which is characterized by an inclination to treat the teachers humanly , to try to do a little something extra for them in human terms.
According to Hunt & Larson (1974) and Stagdill (1974), different models of leadership have been suggested in the literature on organizations.
Generally, these models suggest that leadership effectiveness is a result of a combination of factors, including the characteristics of the individual (for example, leader personality, intelligence, and so on) and the characteristics of the situation (such as relative power distribution between superior and subordinates, nature of the task, time pressures).
A major thrust of many of the more recent contingency models is that the success of a particular leadership style (for example, automatic versus participative) depends in large part on the particular situation at the time.
It is important for you to note that when time is short and the outcome of the decision will have little 118  impact on subordinates, a more autocratic style may be more effective to get the job done quickly.
On the other hand, when group acceptance of a particular action is important, a more participative style of leadership may be more effective.
3.3 Constraints on Leadership An important aspect of understanding on how leadership works in organizations is recognizing occasion where it may not work or where it may have a diminished impact.
If leadership is viewed as a means of enhancing effectiveness in organizations, the potential constraints on such means must be clearly recognized.
Now try think out the answer to this question.
Self Assessment Exercise 2 List any two (2) constraints on your classroom teacher/Headmaster as a leader in your secondary school days.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
Several possible constraints on leadership effectiveness can be identified.
They include: 1.
The extent to which managerial decisions and behaviour are preprogrammed due to precedent, structure, 119  technological specificity, or the absence of familiarity with available alternative solution.
2.
The traits and skills (particularly leadership skills) of the manager.
Research has indicated, for example, that effective leader s tend to exhibit certain personal characteristics such as intelligence, aggressiveness, presence of good communication skills.
Moreover, good leaders typically demonstrate expertise in their own area of endeavour (such as a foreman who can perform all of the jobs of his or her subordinate).
It is to be noted that the lack of such skills may preclude to some extent effective leader behaviour.
3.
The ability of a leader to vary his/her behaviour to suit the particular situation.
More rigid patterns of behaviour may be in appropriate for many situations requiring certain style of leadership.
4.
The extent to which a leader controls rewards that are desired by subordinates (promotion raises pay, and so on).
5.
The characteristics of the situation (how much power a leader has, the importance of a given decision or action, the quality of interpersonal relations between leader and subordinates, and so forth).
6.
The openness of the organization to variations in leader behaviour (for example, a participative leadership style may be discouraged or prohibited in a military organization).
It is important for you to note that these constraints serve to set the stage in which influence attempts take place.
The greater the 120  skills and abilities of the leader, the easier it will be for him/her to deal with such constraints and use the available latitude to the best advantage in securing subordinate support for task accomplishment.
3.4 Decision Making Behaviour A common characteristic of effective leaders is the ability to make decisions that are appropriate, timely, and acceptable.
In fact, the inability or unwillingness to accept such responsibility can easily lead to a loss of allegiance or legalization by followers.
If we are to understand more fully the role of managerial leadership in organizational effectiveness, it is therefore necessary to examine the nature of decision making processes and the role of management in such processes.
Decision making in organizations is a process of selecting among available alternatives (Shull et.al., 1970).
According to Simon (1960), three stages in the decision making process can be identified: i) Intelligence Activities, which include problem recognition and search for the causes of the problem as well as possible solutions.
ii) Design activities, which formulate and access alternative courses of action in terms of positive and negative outcomes; and iii) Choice activities, or the decision itself.
The quality of the resulting decision is seen as being largely influenced by the thoroughness of the intelligence and design phases as well as 121  by the rationality and goals of the decision makers themselves.
By building upon this process, it is possible to examine some general guidelines for improving the manner in which decisions are made in organizations.
The improvement in the nature and quality of the resulting decisions should then contribute to effectiveness by improving the allocation and utilization of an organization s various resources for purposes of task accomplishment.
One such strategy for improving decision making effectiveness has been suggested by Thompson (1967).
Briefly, Thompson suggests that decisions in organizations are characterized by two major dimensions: 1) Beliefs concerning cause effect relationships; and 2) Preferences among possible outcomes.
Taking a contingency approach, it is argued that the selection of an appropriate strategy for a decision is a function of the nature of these two dimensions at the time of decisions.
A different decision strategy is suggested for managers for each of the four possible situations: 1.
A computational strategy is seen as being most appropriate where both beliefs and preferences are relatively certain.
For instance, if a company knew from past experience that increasing its advertising expenditures would improve sales (cause effect belief) and if there was general agreement among managers that sales increase is desirable (outcome preference), the decision would be obvious, assuming sufficient resources.
122  2.
A judgmental strategy is appropriate where preferences are certain but cause effect beliefs are not.
Let us cite an example to ensure you understand our discussion.
For example, if management wanted to improve sales but was uncertain whether this could best be accomplished through increased more difficult identify problems which develop in divisions.
The problems also cover a wider field than before when the activities of different divisions were dealt with separately and independently (Robbins and Decenzo, 1995:312).
In the workplace information systems are increasingly replacing direct supervision.
The Logistics, Admission and release systems which are used in the Nigerian correctional services serve as examples.
These systems enable managers to obtain information about workers outputs, quality levels and abilities without having to carry out physical inspections and checking actions.
This has greatly decreased the direct monitoring and controlling of work by managers.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt about the nature of leadership in organization.
Their functions and the various constraints on leadership.
Finally you learnt about decision making behaviour in organizations.
5.0 SUMMARY What you have learnt in this study unit concerns leadership in organizations.
Their functions were discussed and the constraint of 123  leadership explained.
The behaviour of taking decisions in organization was also learnt.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT Explain the functions of leadership in an organization.
6.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READINGS Bruyns, H. (1997) Managemernt Thought and Theories In: Bruyns, H.et.al (Eds) Correctional Management.
Hodder & Stoughton, London.
Robbins, S. & Decenzo, D. (1995) Fundamentals of Management: Essential Concepts and Applications.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ:Prentice Hall.
124  UNIT 2 LEADERSHIP STYLES 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Leadership Style 3.2 The Ideal Leadership Style 3.3 Hersey & Blanchard s Life Cycle Theory 3.4 Transformational and Transactional Leadership 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor - Marked Assignments.
7.0 References/Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In study unit 1, we described the nature of leadership.
The study unit also served to introduce you to other study units in this course.
You can now identify leadership functions.
You can also explain leadership constraints.
You are about to study a most stimulating study unit: Leadership style.
This study unit guides you through ideal leadership style.
Let us look at what other content you should learn in this study unit as specified in the study unit objectives.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be able to: 1.
Explain various leadership styles 2.
Describe the ideal leadership style 125  3.
Explain Hersery and Blanchard s life cycle theory.
4.
Distinguish between Transformational and Transactional leadership.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 Leadership Style Is a factor that determines the effectiveness of leadership.
It refers to the underlying need structure of the individual which motivates his behaviour in various leadership situations.
While leadership behaviour includes all the things that a leader could do in a work situation e.g his efforts in area of planning, structuring of tasks constrolling and his interpersonal relationships with his workers.
Leadership styles are: Dominational, Autocratic, Authoritarian or Dictarial Leadership: The mood of control is domineering.
The leadership alone determines policies, procedures with little or no group participation.
There is little or no effective communication flow between leader and his group.
He is task oriented, not ideographic.
He issues directives.
And according to Gibbs it emanates from fear and feeling of insecurity thus he uses it as a defensive weapon.
Such leaders often depend on punishment for non compliance with his directives e.g.
principal recommending staff for suspension, withholding annual leave etc.
3.2 The Ideal Leadership Style 126  Is there an ideal leadership style?
There are researchers who believe that there is such a style which is probably modeled on a participative management approach.
Opponents of this idea, as well as leadership experience, however, point out that in some situations an autocratic approach may be the best while in other situations a participative approach may be better.
Sometimes better results are achieved with a task oriented approach and sometimes a people oriented approach is better.
According to Mosley et al.
(1996:407) this proves that leadership is a complex phenomenon and that the appropriate leadership style depends on various interdependent variables.
Now reflect on this quiz: Self Assessment Exercise: 1 Is there any group situation where leadership might not be needed?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- Let us go on with our discussion.
It is important for you to note that there are group situations where leadership might be irrelevant.
For example, take a partnership to dentists where everyone carries out their specialist tasks without anyone of them requiring any guidance.
Note also that the same can probably be said of attempts to define the traits of the ideal 127  leader s traits, they often become idealistic and the result is an outline of a kind of superhuman.
Take charisma as an example of a characteristic of an ideal leader.
Here you would find two opposite poles, for example, Adolf Hitler at the one extreme and Mahatma Ghandhi and Nelson Mandela at the other, to mention but a few.
Charisma should therefore not be regarded as the only answer to current leadership needs because it also has a dark side.
Charismatic leaders often like to promise Utopia (a perfect society) to their followers and have the ability to influence them so strongly that they can be mesmerized to participate in unethical and illegal actions (DUBRIN, 1995:73-74).
What is important is that the success of leaders be measured according to certain norms.
Charlton (1994:10) recommends five interdependent core competencies.
These competencies have been identified through comprehensive local and international research and can be used as a basis to measure leadership effectiveness.
They are the following: i) The ability to attract the attention of people through an inspiring vision of the future.
ii) The constant communication of this vision in a creative and understandable way which will work as an incentive for people to walk the extra mile, and which brings about synergy and coordination of inputs.
iii) The ability to instill trust in the leaders themselves and in what they are trying to achieve, and also the willingness to trust others to do what is required.
128  iv) The leaders ability to manage themselves by diagnosing their own ineffective actions and accepting responsibility to learn constantly and to change for the better.
v) The ability to create an empowering environment (through responsibility, authority, and accountability) where people are willing (motivated) able (trained) and allowed (responsible and given authority) to learn and perform in terms of their potential.
Self Assessment Exercise 2.
Can non charismatic people be successful leaders?
What do you think?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
3.3 Hersey and Blanchard s Life Cycle Theory One of the leadership models which has attracted worldwide attention is Hensey and Blanchard s situational model.
This model has been used in the United States of America by prominent international companies and military services as a training aid.
Although the model is not above criticism.
Robbins (1988:380), for example, states that not enough evaluation has taken place it does 129  not provide a valuable and uncomplicated aid for the analysis of leadership demands and expectations in various situations and as a result adaptations can be made accordingly.
It is important for you to note that the model provides guidelines for flexible and adaptable leadership behaviour.
It emphasizes that leadership requires specific skills.
The required leadership style in a given situation will not be successful if the leader is not trained in the skills which that style requires.
They also take the view that adapting to the current situation is not the only solution.
Another option is to change the situation by developing the skills and self confidence of the subordinates (Fox et.
Al.
1991: 106).
It is to be noted that the emphasis of followers in leadership effectiveness reflects the reality that it is the followers who accept or reject a leader.
Regardless of what the leader is, his effectiveness and efficiency depend on the actions of his followers subordinates.
This underlines a dimension which is overlooked in many leadership theories (Robbins, 1988:380).
According to Dubrin (1995:133) the model s major deficiency lies in the fact that leadership situations cannot always be so rigidly defined as suggested by Hersey and Blanchard s four quadrants.
The theory is based on two broad categories of leadership behaviour: i) Task Behaviour.
130  Task behaviour is the way in which leaders will probably organize and define their subordinates roles.
This is the task which must be carried out.
ii) Relationship Behaviour This type of behaviour refers to how leaders probably maintain personal relations between themselves and their group members by means of communication, socio emotional support and facilitation of behaviour.
Provision is made for one moderating variable namely the maturity of followers which is described as the ability to set high but describable goals, the willingness to take responsibility as well as experience and /or education.
This maturity level is only measured in relationship to a specific task.
A correctional official may, for example, show a high maturity level in his custodial task but a totally low maturity level with regard to administrative tasks.
Given our discussion, it is the leader s responsibility to determine the level of his followers/subordinates maturity in each situation and adjust his leadership style accordingly.
Hensey and Blanchard s model thus recognizes the crucial role of the followers.
The following illustrates the relationship between the follower maturity and the recommended leadership style (Hensey & Blanchard, 1982: 152).
The leadership style is represented by the descriptive curve in the figure, as it moves through the four quadrants of leadership style (Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4).
Each style represents a different combination of task and relationship.
131  Situations are first analysed by determining the follower s/follower s task maturity level and then selecting the appropriate leadership style for the particular situation: The telling style The subordinates are not prepared to take responsibility for a task.
They are often not competent to carry it out (lack of knowledge and skills) and do not have the self confidence to tackle the task (MI).
In such a case the appropriate leadership style is a directive or telling style (SI) which is accompanied by strict supervision.
The selling style In some cases the followers/subordinates do not have the ability (knowledge) for a task, but are willing to accept the challenge (M2).
In such cases the selling style (S2) is appropriate.
Although the leader still provides the direction support is given in such a way that it strengthens the person s willingness and enthusiasm.
Rather than giving direct instructions, the leader will try to sell views to the subordinates/followers by means of two way communication.
At this maturity level the leader s decisions are accepted if the subordinates understand why these decisions have been taken and if the leader gives some support and direction.
Note that this style includes both high task and high relationship elements.
The participating style People at the next task maturity level have the ability to carry out their leaders instructions but are unwilling to accept the 132  responsibility for the task (M3).
This often arises from a lack of self confidence or a feeling of uncertainty.
Note that the best results are obtained with the open door, two way communication approach through which the leader supports the subordinates attempts without having to give too much direction (S3).
Leader and subordinates participate in the decision making process.
The leader s chief role is to facilitate and communicate.
This style thus includes high relationship and low task behaviour.
The delegating style People who are at the M4 task maturity level are those who have the ability to carry out a task, are willing and have the self confidence to do it.
For them the delegating style (S4), which has very little direction and support, is the appropriate style.
Although the leader might still be able to identify problems, the responsibility to solve the problem is left to the mature subordinate or follower.
In this case both low relationship and low task behaviour are indicated.
It is important for you to note that the model must be seen as an aid to determine the appropriate leadership style in a given situation and should not be rigidly applied without any thought.
Although the normal application lies in selecting a leadership style in keeping with the maturity level, in other words S2 for M2, S4 for M4, and so on, one cannot always fit people so neatly into a category.
In addition, situations might necessitate a deviation.
Let us cite an example to ensure a clearer understanding: for example, even 133  though a new supervisor s subordinates are at the M4 task maturity level, he/she might choose to apply the S3 style to get to know each other and to establish preferences and confidence.
Correct communication will be of the utmost importance in such a case.
Self Assessment Exercise 3 From our discussion so far, what should be the most important objective when applying the Hersey and Blanchard model?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion.
The most important objective when applying the Hersey and Blanchard model should be to enable the leader to help the subordinates/followers to grow in maturity and to help them develop as far as they can and wish to develop.
3.4 Transformational and Transactional Leadership In the late 90s, an approach was developed which differentiates transformational from transactional leadership.
Burns and Bass are identified as pioneers in this field by Mosley et.
al.
(1996:412).
According to the transformational leadership theorists, their theories represent a paradigm shift to a more visionary and empowering leadership style than in the past.
The following three factors are an integral part of transformational leaders: 134  i) Charisma ii) Individual consideration iii) Intellectual Stimulation Charismatic leaders are described as those who manage to achieve a feeling of pride, respect and esprit de corps (team spirit) amongst their followers.
They have a gift for focusing on what is really important.
Individualised consideration means that the leader pays personal attention to individuals and promotes their development with delegated assignments.
Intellectual stimulation is promoted through the leader s vision and new fresh ideas (Masley et.al.
1996:412).
It is important for you to note that there is a definite similarity between these characteristics of transformational leadership and the five core competencies that Charlton indicates are used to measures leadership success today.
According to the literature analysis of Loius Allen Associates Inc. (1996:27), a transformational leadership approach is found in dynamic situations.
It is characterized by inspiration, empowerment, team work, openness, freedom and group orientation.
Thus one can expect this type of approach where change is the order of the day.
It is important for you to note that not everybody can be a transformational leader.
As a result many find themselves in the category of transformational leaders.
These leaders identify desired performance standards, recognize what type of rewards employees wish to gain from their work, and then take steps to reward the 135  achievement of the desire standards accordingly (Mosley et.
al; 1996:413).
This does not mean that they cannot be successful leaders.
The circumstances in which they must act might well require a transactional approach.
According to the analysis of Louis Allen Associates Inc. (1996:27), one typically finds transactional leadership within a more stable situation with a larger degree of centralized authority, characterized by objectives, standards, evaluation, and correction of performance, policies and procedures.
It is essential for you to note that what is important is that both approaches are deemed necessary for modern organizations (Louis Allen Associates Inc. 1996:27).
This implies that an ideal balance between the two must be found for the circumstances at the time.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt the ideal leadership style.
The Hersey and Blanchard s life cycle theory was explained.
In addition, the differences between transformational and transactional leadership were explained with examples to enhance understanding and facilitate comprehension.
5.0 SUMMARY 1.
What you have learnt in this study unit concerns the ideal leadership style.
2.
You have also learnt the Hersey and Blanchard s life cycle theory.
3.
In addition, you have learnt the difference between transformational and transactional leadership.
136  4.
The study units that follow shall build upon your understanding of this study unit to ensure clarity, understanding and comprehension.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT Identify and briefly explain the competencies you can use to measure leadership effectively.
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS Charlton, G. (1994) Leadership Beyond 1994/ Human Resource Management: 10, (4).
May:7-10.
Dubrin, A. J.
(1995) Leadership: Research, Findings, Practice and Skills.
Boston, Mass: Houghton Mifflin.
Fox, W. Schwella, E. & Wissink, H. (1991) Public management Kenwyn: Juta.
Hersey, P. & Blanchard, K. (1982) Management of organizational behaviour: Utilizing human resources.
Engleword Cliffs, NJ: Practyice Hall Mosley, D. Pietri, P., & Megginson, L. (1996) Management: Leadership in action.
New Yorl: Harper Collins.
137  UNIT 3: STRESS IN ORGANIZATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 The Concept of stress 3.2 Types and Symptoms of stress 3.3 Sources of stress 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References/Further Reading 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In this study unit you will be learning about the meaning of stress, as a concept.
The various types and symptoms of stress will also be explained.
In addition, the diverse sources of stress will be described.
Finally the important issue of managing stress among members of an organization will be discussed.
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you shall be able to: (i) Explain that stress is a natural part of life (ii) Define the concept of stress (iii) Identify types and symptoms of stress (iv) Describe the various sources of stress in organization.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT 3.1 The Concept of Stress: Stress is an inevitable part of life.
All people, whether they are managers of children confronted by playground bullies, or 138  entrepreneurs trying to sell new devices do experience stress either periodically or continuously.
Stress cannot be avoided, it is therefore essential to manage stress effectively.
Stress is a very topical subject, which is constantly being written about, researched and speculated on.
Although there are many different definitions of stress, the following two definitions, seem to be the most comprehensive and descriptive.
According to Gericke (1997:7).
Stress is the pressure that an event places on individual.
Stress is the individual s response physical, mental and chemical to those events, both external and self generated, that frighten, endangers, excite or distress the individual.
Feelings of conflict, frustration, disillusionment, apathy indifference, dismay, and tension are familiar to large number of employees and managers as well as professionals in organizations.
Stress is also defined by a set of circumstances under which an individual cannot respond adequately or instrumentally to environmental stimuli, or can so respond only at the cost of excessive wear and tear on the person.
For example chronic fatigue, tension,worry, physical damage, nervous breakdown or loss of self esteem.
Stress is therefore a relational concept, since it involves factors in the environment which combine with factors in the individual.
Stress can also be defined as any condition that has an effect on the body (Mandlar, 1984).
Specifically, it is the pressure and strain that result from demands, or challenges that require some kind of readjustment by the individual.
For example, conflict, frustration deprivation, and anxiety can all produce stress.
So can a change in 139  jobs, including a promotion or an increase in workload, a marriage, a divorce, a birth in the family or a death.
Stress is indeed a fact of life, beginning at the moment of an entry into this world and recurring until we leave it.
Thus stress is inevitable within the school system or any organization for that matter.
Administrators cannot completely eliminate stress either for others or for themselves.
Furthermore a certain degree of stress seems to be a precondition for psychological growth, achievement, and the development of new skills, although stress always involves at least some temporary degree of discomfort.
It is frequently the occasion for the emergence of creative solution to personal or organizational problems.
On the other hand, prolong stress can be harmful.
The negative effects of prolong stress can and often do take their toll, Cohen (1980) in Alhassan (2000) writes that these effects include confusion, indecisions, apathy a decrease in effectiveness and the inability to relate to other people, as well as an increase in the likelihood of developing physical illness and psychological/physical withdrawal from the school system or organization.
3.2 Types and symptoms of stress: There are two different types of stress namely episodic stress and chronic stress.
Episodic stress: According to Fox and Comb (1994), Episodic stress is triggered by traumatic incidents.
These incidents occur infrequently and their duration is relatively short-lived.
For example if in an organization like the school, the security men suddenly blow their whistler, and by the time you rush out they 140  come apologizing that it was a mistake.
Most of the expenses of the school administrator at that period of time which includes increase heart beat and high blood pressure will be short lived as soon as it was realize, that blowing the whistle was a mistake.
Chronic Stress: This is constantly present in the work environment.
It can be compared with a chronic illness.
It is the product of a slow, continual process of erosion that occurs over several years.
In this type of stress the though of the responsibilities and the unrealistic expectations of what people think you can do stresses you up each day.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Do you sometimes experience episodic stress or are you a victim of chronic stress?
Give personal examples: ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussions.
The questions that you may now ask yourself are: what are the symptoms of stress and how can I identify them my self?
Many of your colleagues and subordinates also suffer from stress.
How will I be able to identify stress symptoms in your colleagues and subordinates.
Below are some symptoms to be considered: 141  How you feel Feeling anxious and tense aggressive, apathetic, (Psychological bored, tired, depressed, restless, impatient, frustrated symptoms) guilty, irritable, sense of inferiority, nervous and lacking interest in social activities.
How you think Difficulty in making decisions, less creative in solving problems, forgetful, hypersensitive to criticism, poor concentration, poor organization of work and task, blame yourself for everything.
What happens to Tension, headaches, muscle, stiffness and aches your health diarrhead, faintness and dizziness, frequent urinating, fatigue, migraines, neuroses, nightmares, insomnia, skin rash, ulcers, loss of sexual interest and sweating without exercising.
How you behave Have accidents, emotional immaturity, eat too much or too litt;e, drink and smoke excessively incoherent speech, impulsive behaviour, general disorientation, nervous laughter, restless, trembling, and passive indolence.
What happens to Pounding of the heart, high blood pressure, dryness your body of throat, and mouth, excessive perspiration, pupil (physiological dilation, hot and cold spells, numbness butterflies in symptoms) the stomach, large muscle, groups tense.
How stress affects Increased absenteeism, poorer communication and your work inter personal relations, less commitment, high accident rates, more antagonism, less creativity, less concern for colleagues, less job satisfaction and poorer productivity.
(Adapted from Gericke, 1997: 20).
142  3.3 Sources of Stress It is important to identify the different factors that cause stress.
There are two general factors that add stress to our lives, namely: external and internal sources.
Stress reactions result from the interaction between an individual s predisposition to stress and the force exerted by the environment.
The term environment includes all factors and forces external to the individual.
Other environmental forces contributing to stress include economic factors (e.g recession and inflation) cultural values, marital and family problems, movement of hierarchy, general over crowding, air, water, and pollution create stress for individuals.
It is important to note that stresses exerted by forces outside the job may have a spill over into job behaviour.
Some of the sources of managerial and professional stress include; 1.
Under utilization of Abilities; Feeling of not being challenged of ones intellectual abilities and formal education being wasted, and of being over qualifies for present job, responsibilities represent an omnipresent complaint of dissatisfaction by middle managers and professional people.
2.
Job Insecurity: Fears of being fired poses another source of managerial stress to managers, due to its resultant consequences for example having unqualified teachers in the school system could create the feelings of insecurity.
3.
Uncertain Professional Status: Stresses created by underutilization of abilities and job insecurity contributes to feeling of uncertain professional status.
4.
Insufficient Authority: Primers of Management content that authority should be commensurate with responsibilities.
Yet 143  this axiom is often violated in organizational life.
This discrepancy between power granted and power needed to accomplish a given task is a source of stress and frustration for many managers in professional organization.
In sufficient authority sometimes manifest itself in a manager not receiving the backing needed from management to carry out it directives.
5.
Exorbitant Work Demands: Executives, middle managers and professional employees, like principal, vice principal, Heads of Department and duty masters in the school system often find themselves faced with a punishing workload.
Tightly scheduled work days, heavy teaching load and simultaneous demands exert considerable stress on organizational members.
6.
Role Conflict and Ambiguity: One form of organizational stress is that of role conflict and ambiguity.
Stress is created under conditions of conflict and ambiguity because people are not sure of what to do or which way to turn.
7.
Pressure towards conformity: Individuals show wide variations in the willingness to conform to a norm established by the organization, for some individuals the pressure to conform represents a stress in their lives.
8.
Job Design and Technical Problems: Pressure placed upon individual discussed so far has dealt primarily with psychological and sociological factors and managerial practices.
There also exist within any organization a vast source of stress centering around problems of organizational structure and technology.
144  In studies of stress, in schools, teachers have identified many pressures.
As reported by Kyriacou and Sut Cliffe (1977) in Alhassan (2000), four major sources of stress to teachers are as follows: 1.
Pupil misbehaviour: noisy pupils, difficult classes, difficult behaviour problems.
2.
Poor working conditions: poor career structure, poor promotion opportunities, inadequate salary, shortage of equipment.
3.
Time pressure: not enough time to do the work and too much work to do.
4.
Poor school ethos: inadequate disciplinary policy at school, lack of consensus on minimum standards, and the behaviour of the head teacher.
A final source of stress as it relates to the school system is the behaviour of disruptive pupils.
The incidence of rowdyism, characterized by deliberate lateness to lesson, disturbance in lessons, verbal abuses and refusal to cooperate is on the increase in recent times, most likely reflecting the increasing wave of indiscipline in the larger society.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit, you have learnt about the concept of stress, you have also learnt that stress is inevitable, and therefore occurs in different forms.
In addition, you learnt that there are diverse symptoms of stress, which can assist any manager in the organization to easily identify among subordinates.
Finally, you 145  learnt that the sources of stress are generally external and internal as determined by the environment.
All these help the management in any organizational setting.
5.0 SUMMARY In this study unit the following issues have been discussed, (1) Stress is a common factor in every individual.
(2) Stress has various types and symptoms.
(3) Stress could be experienced due to external and internal sources from the environment.
6.0 TUTOR - MARKED ASSIGNMENT 1.
What is stress 2.
List at least ten different systems of stress 3.
List the sources of stress that you experience.
7.0 REFERENCES /FURTHER READING Alhassan A.
B.
(2000) Understanding educational psychology.
Zaria: Tamaza publishing Componay Ltd. Fox V. B.
& Stinchcomb J.
B.
(1994), Introduction to corrections 4 th edition London Prentice Hall International.
Gericke, M (1997) Coping with stress in professional Skills development, Florida: Technician SA.
146  UNIT 4: MANAGING STRESS IN ORGANIZATION 1.0 Introduction 2.0 Objectives 3.0 Main Content 3.1 Optimum Stress levels 3.2 Stress Coping techniques 3.3 Managing Stress in others 4.0 Conclusion 5.0 Summary 6.0 Tutor Marked Assignments.
7.0 References/ Further Readings 1.0 INTRODUCTI ON In unit 3, you learnt about the concept of stress, the types and symptoms of stress.
You also learnt the various sources of stress in individuals.
The unit you will expose you to the optimum stress levels and stress coping techniques that could be employed by management.
Finally you are about to learn how to manage stress in others (subordinates).
2.0 OBJECTIVES By the end of this study unit, you should be able to: (1) Describe the various optimum stress levels in individuals.
(2) Identify stress coping techniques (3) Explain ways of managing stress in others.
3.0 MAIN CONTENT It is quite evident that it is not stress per se that is problematic for us, but rather the amount of stress.
An appropriate amount of stress is actually beneficial and can contribute to a person s 147  effectiveness.
Raber and Dydc (1993:21) states in this regard that a certain amount of stress helps most of us to stay on our toes and motivates us to achieve a standard of excellence.
From the above it is evident that each individual should find the level of stress that is most effective for him to perform at his peak, since individuals vary in their tolerance of stress, i.e everyone has different levels of internal strength for coping with stress.
Optimal pressure levels lead to optimal performance and optimal health.
Your aim should be to keep the pressure level between the dotted lines, the areas between your dotted lines is your own personal peak performance zone, which is where you experience the right amount of stress which allows you to perform at your best.
Self Assessment Exercise 1 Are you familiar with the amount of stress that you need in order to perform at your peak?
Make some suggestions.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Let us continue our discussion, by identifying stress coping techniques.
The following techniques may help to turn stress into a more positive force in the life of an individual or organization.
3.2 Stress Coping techniques (1) Exercise: physical exercise, be it dancing, playing, sport, taking part in fitness programme or any strenuous activity 148  helps to disperse the stress response as well as to re-energise you to help you deal with problems.
For example, school manager engage pupils and students in sporting activities to assist them to be mentally alert.
Research has shown that the fitter you are, the less you are likely to develop physical or mental illnesses.
If you are fit, you have more energy and stamina to tackle problems.
You also have more resilience when things do not work out well.
(2) Relax: you can relax by listening to music, watching television, attending a sport match, reading a book, and playing with children.
(3) Use of constructive self talk: constructive self talk is simply what you can say to yourself when you are in a stressful situation.
It simply means that you should talk to yourself.
This self talk must be positive to help you cope better than you would otherwise instead of saying: I cannot do this because my abilities are limited .
Tell yourself, I will try and may be I will learn something in the process.
(4) Utilize your time better: determine your priorities.
Distinguish between what must be done and what you would like to do and then tackle one task at a time.
By planning your time effectively you will find that your stress levels will decrease and you will be amazed by all the extra time you now have to do all the things you never had time for.
(5) Be assertive: say no to things, people, organization or committees that demand too much of your time.
Remember that you are only one person with twenty four hours a day, at your disposal you can only do so much and no more.
149  (6) Develop an effective support system: having people to turn to, talk to and rely on have proved to be perhaps the most significant factors in helping people to minimize the occurrence and impact of stressors in their lives and on their health.
(7) Have clear objectives: according to Gerick (1997) many of us end up doing too much and too quickly.
The reason for this is that we do not sit down and think about what we really wish to achieve.
Train yourself to think in terms of objectives.
This applies not only to the working environment but to other activities in life.
A school manager should always have objectives that are set out to be achieved in the school system.
This is closely related to the idea of being clear about school values.
(8) Be systematic when making decisions and solving problems: learn to break down a problem into manageable components.
Gather enough information about any given problem and then put it into perspective.
Distant yourself from the sources and try to be objective and see the problem as others would see it.
(9) Adopt a positive attitude and have realistic expectations: ask yourself what you are going to do about the problem.
How can you resolve it?
What do you wish to achieve?
Remember that the first step towards reaching your goals is having a positive attitude.
Be confident and enthusiastic, think positively about your self and life, recognize your limitation and remember that change can be positive.
As already indicated a positive response to a stressful situation can make your life 150  interesting, challenging and exciting.
It can equally make your schedule interesting and challenging in an organization.
(10) Plan for the unexpected and act promptly: Sometimes the root of negative emotions like fear of failure, lack of confidence and frustration can be found in the fact that you or your subordinates do not plan your work effectively.
Therefore to reduce your stress levels, prepare yourself as much as possible for the unexpected.
If you receive a task to complete, include it immediately in your planning and do it as soon as possible.
Also encourage those working for you to implement this step.
Postponing a task will only lead to a build-up of stress.
(11) Avoid personalizing challenges: recognize the difference between an insult directed at you and one directed at the system you represent.
Don t get emotionally involved in out bursts.
(12) Be prepared and knowledgeable; stay abreast of new policies and procedures.
Ask if you don t know something.
Obtain more information on how to perform your duties more effectively.
(13)Communicate effectively: poor and ineffective communication can put a great deal of pressure on you as well as on the person with whom you are communicating.
Research has shown that one of the key sources of pressure is that individuals are not sure of what is expected from them in their jobs.
When communication is not clear it is ineffective.
151  SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCI SE 2 Now that you have learnt the technique of coping with stress, can you identify any two of these techniques that you are familiar with and which you have practised before?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- My dear students,lLet us continue our discussion.
3.3 Managing Stress in others The first step towards providing such assistance is to identify stress in others.
The list on stress symptoms may be useful.
The second step is to inform the persons about the different coping techniques and the process of stress management.
Here are a few tips for managers to assist in managing stress in others.
- Observe subordinates behaviour carefully.
- Be prepared to listen when some one requires your attention.
- Be available when people have to report to you.
- Outline objectives clearly.
- Provide timely feedback on achievement - Make sure that all policies, procedures and instruction are clear.
- Evaluate deadlines if they are reasonable - Deal immediately with conflicts before they escalate 152  - Conduct regular work reviews - Make sure that your subordinates are sufficiently trained.
- Let everyone be involved and participate in the decision making process, especially in matters concerning their work.
- Implement a career development programme for individuals.
- Have a well organized and functional programme for recognizing and dealing with specific stressors.
Finally it can be re-stated that stress is not necessarily a bad thing.
It is inevitable within the school system, or any organization for that matter.
Administrators or school managers cannot completely eliminate stress either for others or for themselves.
However prolonged stress can be harmful.
Among the effects of prolonged stress are confusion, indecision, apathy, and a decrease in effectiveness, frustration and anxiety can also be identified as psychological forms of stress.
Frustration applies to any obstruction between instrumental behaviour and its goal or to any interference with or disruption of on-going instrumental behaviour.
Anxiety is the sense of dread, foreboding and apprehension that grows at a persons inside and darkens his/her outlook on things in general (Alhassan 2000).
It is important to state that for classroom teachers, the first step in tackling stress is to acknowledge its existence (in teaching).
Three approaches to understanding stress could be identified: The first approach looks at the pressures exerted on teachers in schools, the second approach is concerned with teachers reaction to these pressures and the third approach attempts to understand 153  stress in terms of the interaction between teachers and the school organization, it has been observed that individuals differ in their preferred methods of coping with stress as well as in their endurance and tolerance of stress.
When teachers encounter heavy work pressures, they employ personal strategy, which includes work strategies, positive attitude and out of school activities; interpersonal strategy, which includes talking over stressful incidents with spouse or family; organizational strategy which comes from good relationships in school when teachers are able to discuss their problems, worries, and feelings with their colleagues and community strategy, which includes bell ringing, football, and drama.
Finally managers in general need to recognize that stress is a serious problem that not only interferes with the effectiveness of the institution, but is the main cause for reduced productivity and efficiency.
Managers should be able to cope effectively, not only with their own personal stressors, but also with colleagues and subordinates suffering from stress, and should attempt to reduce commonly experienced stressors in the work environment.
4.0 CONCLUSION In this study unit you have learnt about various optimum levels of stress.
You also learnt that there are several techniques used in coping with stress.
Finally, you learnt that the manager can actually manage stress in others, i.e teachers; subordinates etc by accepting that stress is not a bad thing and must occur to spur an individual to the peak of performance.
154  5.0 SUMMARY In this study unit, you have learnt the following: 1.
Optimum stress levels 2.
Stress coping techniques 3.
Managing stress individually and in others 6.0 TUTOR MARKE D ASSIGNMENT 1.
Describe what is meant by optimum stress level.
2.
List at least five stress coping techniques that you know.
3.
How can you help colleagues and subordinate to manage stress effectively?
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS Adams, J. D. (1980) Understanding and managing Stress: A workbooks in changing lifestyles.
San Diego Calif: University Associate.
Alhassan A.
B.
(2000) Understanding educational psychology, Zaria:, Nigeria Tamaza Publishing Coy.
Raber M. F. and Dyck, G. (1993) Managing stress for mental fitness.
Menlo Park, Calif: Crisp.
155  EDA 825 MAN AGERERIAL PSYCHOLOGY 2 CREDIT UNITS MARKING SCHEME MODULE 1 UNIT 1 (a) Concept of Organization: An organization could be seen as a collection of people united together to pursue a common aim through collective efforts.
Organizations take case of peoples objectives, resources and coordination of activities among others.
10 marks (b) Distinction between common and alternate view of organization: That organizations exist only because the people in it also exist.
Another views organization as been bend and faculty while its people are not.
5 marks (c ) Candidate should be able to describe the school as an organization; given its function, rules and regulations, activities carried out based on broad objectives and coordination to attain stated objectives.
15 marks Total 30 marks Unit 2 Candidate explains formal and informal organizations.
Formal organization viewed as establishments for purposes of achieving goals, possesses rules, and designed to shape behaviours.
Has clearly marked line of communication.
156  Informal organization is formed from the interpersonal relationships in an organization.
Their actions and inaction affects the formal settings.
10 marks.
Importance of formal and informal organization: Formal organizations have channel of communication.
Because of the hierarchical setting it reduce personality clashes.
It defines rules and regulation.
It is an instrument of check and balances.
Informal organization protect, its workers from arbitrary management.
Informal organization introduces innovations that could also be adopted later as part of formal organization etc.
(15 marks).
Two types: Organization for business concern and organization for mutual benefits.
(5 Marls) Total (30) marks Unit 3 (1) Candidate defines attitude: As a series of personal belief or ideas which causes an individual to feel and act in certain ways, an emotional content exhibited by individuals in any setting.
Attitude could be positive or negative evaluation of people, object, ideas or events.
10 marks (2) Explanation or the various social influences as a factor of attitude formation.
Such as, family, parents, peers, mass media, teachers and others.
Candidates should explain how such group influence the formation of attitude (20 marks).
157  Total 10 + 20 = 30 marks Unit 4 (1) What is planning: Planning is a systematic process which determines where an organization or division finds itself, where it is going and how to get there.
Planning involves determining what must be done and how it must be done.
Planning is an important function of an organization (2 marks) (ii) Four reasons why planning is necessary: - Planning shows directions: If everybody in an organization knows what to do, it helps.
- Planning promotes cooperations among people in the organization.
- Planning ensures effective utilization of available resources.
- Planning improves and facilitates the work of managers.
(8 marks) (iii) Candidate should be able to use the following steps, to explain planning in an organization.
- The formulation of goals and objectives - Gathering information - Analyzing information - Drawing up a plan - Reality Testing (20 marks) 2 + 8 + 20 = 30 marks 158  Unit 5 - Concept of organizational conflict: Conflict is a disagreement between two or more people or group.
Organizational conflict is always caused by difference in points of view.
Organizational conflict could also be based on incompatibility of goals arising from opposing behaviours.
( 10 marks) - Sources of organizational conlfict (a) Changes within organization, new policies and operational procedure.
(b) Conflicting goals and objectives (c) Limited resources (d) Nature of work activities (e) Individual attitudes, personalities and characteristics.
All the above are sources of conflict.
- Strategies to be employed as a school manager: (a) Clarification of goals and objectives (b) Resource distribution (c) Personnel Policies and procedures (d) Leadership and management (e) Organizational process (10 marks) Total = 10 + 10 + 10 = 30 marks MODULE II MARKING SCHEME Unit 1 Candidate should explain the following terms: Management: Management as a process, whereby people in leading positions use human and other resources as efficiently as possible 159  to provide certain products or services to meet organizational objectives.
(5 marks) Manager: Any person in a leadership position who takes the lead in the execution of a task or group of tasks in an organization.
A manager is somebody responsible for the performance of people in an organization.
(5 marks) Organizational culture: Human beings create culture so that it affects their work environment.
Constant adjustment implies constant creation of culture.
An organizational culture describes its personality.
It tells people about who and what the organization is.
Organizational culture comprised of those common values and norms, which organization staff strive towards and put into practice.
(15 marks) Organizational climate: Climate is the staff s reaction to culture.
Organizational climate reflects the staff s attitude, perception and moral.
The organizational climate can change from day to day.
(5 marks) Total 5 + 5 + 15 + 5 = 30 marks.
Unit 2 Candidate to list 3 strengths and 2 weaknesses of Maslow s theory.
(a) Man s needs are arranged in hierarchy of importance, ranging from the lowest need (physiological) to safety, love, social, esteem (ego) and self actualization.
(b) Man is continually wanting; consequently all needs are never fully satisfied.
Man is an insatiable being.
160  (c ) Once a need is fairly satisfied, it no longer motivates behaviour.
Man is always motivated by the next higher level of unsatisfied needs.
Weaknesses (a) Repeated failure to confirm the priority, ordering of needs hierarchy.
(b) The age hypothesis has not been supported by researcher.
(15 marks) McGregor s theories - Satisfaction of esteem and self actualization needs.
- Responsibility and creativity - Self direction and self control Weaknesses - It can be frustrating and time consuming - It is not most useful in emergency situations or shortage of time.
(15 marks) Total: 15 + 15 = 30 marks Unit 3 Distinguish between individual work behaviour and organizational behaviour: Candidates must explain that individual work behaviour entails the following: Direction of goals to be achieved, efforts needed to achieve goals, resistance in achieving goals and planning to achieve such.
161  While organizational behaviour embraces an understanding of: - The behaviour of people - The process of management - Organizational process and execution of work.
- Interaction with the external environment of which the organization is a part.
Unit 4 Change is the reaction to any event which affects the activities of an organization directly or indirectly.
Three categories of change: - Developmental change is directed at the optimization of systems, procedures and applications.
- Transitional change is directly at the replacement of obsolete systems with newer system and application of modern technology.
- Transformational change is directed at the change of peoples attitude towards the view of the organization s vision mission, culture and habit.
Unit 5 (a) It is not easy to change an organizational value system.
(5 marks) (b) values establish themselves over the years and become part of a way of living.
(5 marks) (c ) Advantages of joint formulation of objectives are: Deliberate integration with clients and other role players.
162  The team decides openly what it will do and what it will not do.
Team members are clear about their roles, responsibilities and objective are turned into actions which must be carried out.
(20 marks) 5+ 5 + 20 = 30 marks.
163  MODULE III MARKING SCHEME Unit 1 Functions of leadership - Leadership fills the void left by the incompleteness and imperfection of organization.
- Leadership helps to maintain stability in organizations.
- Leadership helps in the internal coordination of diverse organization units.
- Leadership plays a role in maintaining stable membership in organization.
30 marks Unit 2 Leadership effectiveness can be measured by the following competencies.
- The ability to attract the attention of people through an inspiring vision of the future.
(6 marks).
- Constant communication of this vision in a creative and understanding way to work as an incentive for people to work the extra mile.
(6 marks) - The ability to instill trust in the leaders themselves and in what they are trying to achieve, and the willingness to trust others do what is required.
(6 marks).
- Leaders ability to manage themselves by diagnosing their own ineffective acting and accepting responsibilities to learn and to change for the better.
(6 marks) - The ability to create an imposing environment through responsibility, authority and accountability.
Where people 164  are willing, motivated, trained and allowed to perform.
(6 marks).
Total: 30 marks Unit 3 Candidates are expected to explain what is stress: Stress is an inevitable part of life.
Stress is the pressure that an event places on an individual.
Stress is the individual s response physically, mentally, and chemically to those events both external and self generated that frightens, endangers excite or distress the individual.
(16 marks) - List ten different symptoms of stress: They include: feeling anxious, aggressive, tired, difficulty in making decisions, fatigue nervous, laughter, forgetfulness, hypersensitive to criticism, poor concentration and poor organization of work.
(10 Marks).
Five sources of stress (a) Under utilization of potentials.
That is feeling of not being challenged being wasted and being over qualified for present job.
(b) Job insecurity: Fears of being fired.
(c) Uncertain professional status.
(d) Insufficicent Authority (e) Role conflict and Ambiguity.
(10 Marks) 10 + 10 + 10 = 30 Marks 165  Unit 4 Candidates describe Optimum stress level: as An appropriate amount of stress is actually beneficial and can contribute to a person s effectiveness.
The different levels of internal strength helps us to cope with stress.
(5 marks) Stress coping techniques Exercise, relaxation, use of constructive self talk, having clear obvjectives and being assertive.
Managing stress in Colleagues - Observe subordinates behaviour - Be prepare to listen when your attention is needed.
- Provide timely feedback - Evaluate deadlines - Make sure your subordinates are trained.
166
